                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  MARRIAGE DYNAMICS, EARNINGS DYNAMICS, AND
                            LIFETIME FAMILY INCOME

                                        Joseph G. Altonji
                                         Disa M. Hynsjo
                                         Ivan Vidangos

                                      Working Paper 28400
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28400


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2021




Our research has been supported by the Cowles Foundation and the Economic Growth Center,
Yale University (Altonji). This work was also supported in part by the facilities and staff of the
Yale University Faculty of Arts and Sciences High Performance Computing Center, and by the
National Science Foundation under grant #CNS 08-21132 that partially funded acquisition of the
facilities. We thank Mariacristina De Nardi, Yujung Hwang, Costas Meghir, Luigi Pistaferri, Jean
Marc Robin, Seth Zimmerman, participants in seminars at CEPR/Stockholm University, Cornell,
Stanford, UCL, and participants in conferences organized by CREAM, the Econometric Society,
SED, and SoCCAM for helpful comments. The views expressed in the paper are our own and not
necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board, Yale University, NBER, IZA, or other members
of their staffs. We are responsible for the remaining shortcomings of the paper. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Joseph G. Altonji, Disa M. Hynsjo, and Ivan Vidangos. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Marriage Dynamics, Earnings Dynamics, and Lifetime Family Income
Joseph G. Altonji, Disa M. Hynsjo, and Ivan Vidangos
NBER Working Paper No. 28400
January 2021
JEL No. D1,D31,J01,J10,J12,J16,J31

                                         ABSTRACT

We examine what determines the family income that men and women experience over their adult
lives. To this end, we estimate a dynamic model of earnings, nonlabor income, fertility, marriage,
and divorce. We use the model to address a number of important questions in labor and family
economics, including the effects of education and unobserved permanent characteristics on
marital status and on spouse characteristics conditional on marriage. We estimate the dynamic
response of wage rates, work hours, earnings, marriage and spouse characteristics and family
income to various shocks. Marital status has a much larger effect on family income for women
than men, while labor market shocks to men are more important than shocks to women. Marital
sorting plays a major role in the return to education and permanent wages, especially for women.
We use the model to provide gender-specific estimates of the contribution of education,
permanent wages, labor market shocks, spouse characteristics, and marital histories to the
variance of family income at a given age and over a lifetime.

Joseph G. Altonji                               Ivan Vidangos
Department of Economics                         Federal Reserve Board
Yale University                                 Division of Research and Statistics
Box 208264                                      20th & C Street, NW
New Haven, CT 06520-8264                        Washington, D.C. 20551
and NBER                                        Ivan.Vidangos@frb.gov
joseph.altonji@yale.edu

Disa M. Hynsjo
Department of Economics
Yale University
New Haven, CT 06511
disa.hynsjo@yale.edu
1         Introduction
 Own earnings capacity has an obvious direct effect on the resources available to a person. But
resources are shared among family members, so the income of other members of a person's family
matters. Consequently, whether one marries and whom one marries are key sources of variation in
income of an individual over time. This is especially true when one takes account of scale economies
in household consumption. Indeed, institutions such as child support and alimony payments arise
in part as a mechanism to protect against the risks to an individual of losing a valuable economic
partner.
        There is a close connection between an individual's earnings capacity and the income they are
likely to be able to obtain access to through marriage. For example, in the data from the Panel Study
of Income Dynamics (PSID) used in this study, the regression coefficient relating years of education
of married husbands and wives is 0.63. The corresponding coefficient relating the husband's log
hourly wage rate to the wife's hourly wage rate in cases in which both partners work is 0.40 when
education is excluded and 0.30 when the education is held constant.1 Marriage rates and marital
sorting are important determinants of the distribution of household incomes in the cross section.
Indeed, a number of papers, such as Kremer (1997), Fernandez and Rogerson (2001), Fernandez,
Guner, and Knowles (2005), Elke, Mogstad, and Zafar (2020), and Chiappori et al (2020) study the
connection between trends in assortative mating and trends in inequality. Others investigate the
effect of education and earnings on the probability of marriage and on the human capital of one's
spouse.
        With positive assortative mating, permanent advantages such as education and innate ability
influence an individual's economic circumstances through marriage prospects as well as through
own earnings. Luck in finding a good job early in a career may not only raise future earnings,
but also enable an individual to attract a more highly skilled spouse. By the same token, a layoff
may reduce income through diminished marriage prospects and not just through its effects on own
earnings.
        In this paper, we study the dynamics and distribution of income using an econometric model of
earnings, marriage, and family income. We model marital transitions and the effects of individual
characteristics on the distribution of all of the characteristics of marriage partners that matter
for earnings.2 These include education, unobserved heterogeneity components that influence wages,
and employment status. Both permanent personal characteristics and wage and employment shocks
    1
      The education regression controls for year dummies and a cubic in age of both partners. The wage regressions
control for year dummies and a cubic in the potential experience of both partners. Dropping these controls makes
little difference.
    2
      Due to data limitations, we do not distinguish between couples who cohabit for more than one year and legal
marriages. Nor do we consider same-sex couples.



                                                        1
influence the probability of entering a marriage and the characteristics of one's spouse. The divorce
probability depends on both fixed and time-varying characteristics of both marriage partners. We
estimate our model using panel data from the PSID sample members for 1969-1996 on labor market
variables, education, marital status, and fertility. We also use corresponding data on spouses that
is available when they are married to or cohabiting with the PSID sample member.
   The model allows us to quantify how unobserved heterogeneity, education, wage, employment
and hours shocks, and marital shocks influence the joint distribution of marriage and marriage
partner characteristics, earnings, and unearned income over a lifetime. We use it to address three
sets of questions. The first set concerns the marriage matching process. We provide perhaps the
richest description to date of marital sorting on variables that drive earnings. In common with a
vast literature, we find strong sorting on education and age, but also are able to examine sorting
on unobserved factors that determine wages. For women, a one-standard-deviation increase in the
permanent component of the log wage raises the husband's permanent wage component by about
0.41. The value for men is 0.35 for marriages that start before age 30 and 0.28 for marriages
that start later. We also find fairly strong positive sorting on an autoregressive component of the
wage. For men, employment raises the probability of entering marriage and lowers the probability
of divorce. Wage increases work in the same directions but the effects are smaller. In contrast, for
women, employment and wages have little effect on marriage transitions.
   The second set of questions concerns the dynamics of earnings, family formation, and family
income. In our framework, "family" refers to the family an individual is in at a point in time. We
build a model of individual earnings dynamics that depends on gender and marital status. We also
estimate a process for unearned income. Combining the model of individual earnings and unearned
income with the model of marriage, we estimate how education, permanent wages, marriage shocks,
employment shocks, wage shocks, and births influence an individual's family income through effects
on own earnings, spouse's earnings, and marriage. By alternatively shutting down the effects of an
individual's characteristics, spouse's characteristics, and state dependence on marriage transitions
(the marriage channel) and on assortative mating (the sorting channel), we study the degree to
which the effects work through the marriage market.
   We find that for women divorce has a substantial positive effect on own earnings but leads to
a fall of 0.60 in the log of family income per adult equivalent (y aeit ), followed by a slow recovery.
The log of family income declines by 0.94 and recovers to -0.24 after 20 years. For men the effect
on y aeit is actually slightly positive and the decline in family income is much smaller. The gender
difference reflects the asymmetry between women and men in market work versus home production.
When the marriage channel is shut down, the long-run effect of an exogenous divorce on women's
family income is reduced substantially, from -0.23 to -0.09, because in-progress marriages become


                                                  2
less stable. Shutting down the sorting channel makes little difference. The effects of marriage go
in the opposite direction of the effects of divorce. A rough calculation indicates that accounting for
the value of housework closes the gender gap in the economic impact of marriage and divorce by
about 30%.
   Unemployment shocks to husbands have a much more negative effect on family income than
unemployment shocks to wives. The gender difference reflects the fact that men account for about
two thirds of family earnings, are more likely to be employed, and work longer hours. Wage shocks
also have larger effects on log earnings and on family income for married men than married women.
For married individuals, shutting down the marriage and sorting channels has little effect on how
family earnings and income respond to labor market shocks. The reason is that wage shocks and
unemployment shocks have only small effects on the future path of the marriage.
   For single men and women, the effects of unemployment shocks on labor market outcomes
and family income are similar and closer to the pattern for married men. Wage shocks have
proportionately larger effects for single men and women, and strong positive effects on family
income. For single males, eliminating the marriage channel reduces the negative impact of own
unemployment on family income from 0.11 to 0.08 four years after the shock. The marriage channel
matters because for single men an unemployment shock reduces the probability of getting married
by 0.06, and the effect persists for a few years. The marriage channel does not matter much for
single women because unemployment shocks have little effect on their marriage paths. Wage shocks
have little effect on the marriage paths of either group.
   Not surprisingly, we find large effects of education on the wage, earnings, and family income
over the lifecycle. For women, the college-to-high school gap in the log of family income is about
0.18 at age 25 and rises to 0.66 at age 55. For men, the education gap starts at about 0.20 and
rises to 0.62. What roles do marriage probabilities and assortative mating play in these effects?
For women, eliminating the effect of education on marriage reduces the education differential by an
amount that rises from zero to about 0.07 late in life. But eliminating both the marriage channel
and the sorting channel reduces the differential by an amount that rises from 0.06 at age 25 to
0.30 at age 55. Thus, positive assortative mating is central to the economic return to education for
women, as Goldin (1990) and others have found. It matters much less for men, whose own earnings
typically constitute a larger share of family income.
   The permanent component of the wage rate has a strong effect on family income and family
income per adult equivalent. A one-standard-deviation increase boosts the log of family income by
0.18 (on average over the lifetime) for women and 0.23 for men. For women, eliminating both the
sorting and the marriage channels reduces the effect to 0.12, primarily because of sorting. For men,
eliminating the marriage and sorting channels leads to a more modest reduction in the size of the


                                                  3
effect, also because of sorting. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to quantify the role
of marriage probabilities and marital sorting in determining the income effects of education and
permanent wages over the lifecycle.
       The third set of questions concerns the sources of inequality in lifetime family income. We
decompose the variance in the annual average, from age 25 to 55, of the log of family income and
of the log of family income per adult equivalent (y aei ) into various components. These include
education, fixed unobserved heterogeneity in wages, employment, and hours, employment shocks,
hours shocks, wage shocks, random variation in marriage partner characteristics, partner wage
shocks, and random variation in marital status over a lifetime. To the best of our knowledge, we
are the first to provide such a full decomposition.3 We also use counterfactual simulations to assess
the overall contribution of marital sorting to inequality.
       For women, education and the permanent component of wages account for 32.5% (2.6) and
14.2% (2.6) of the variation in y aei , respectively (standard errors shown in parentheses). In the
counterfactual world of random sorting among marriage partners, these contributions would be
only 12.9% (1.3) and 4.5% (1.1), respectively. The initial draw and shocks to the autoregressive
component of the wage account for an additional 7.9% (4.1), and in this case marital sorting plays
only a small role. Permanent heterogeneity affecting employment and work hours contributes only
6.1% (1.2) of the variance of y aei , even though it accounts for 17.8% (2.9) of the variation in the
individual's earnings lifetime earnings. The smaller value for y aei reflects that fact that both men
and women spend a large fraction of the time married, and married women typically contribute a
smaller share of family income. The results for log family income are similar to the results for y aei .
       For women, random variation in spouse's education and in the spouse's permanent wage com-
ponent are important for y aei , contributing 7.3% (0.9) and 7.8% (1.2) of the variance.
       Using simulated data from the model, we also measure the contribution of variation in marriage
patterns between age 25 and 55 conditional on own education, the permanent components of em-
ployment and hours, and the initial condition for an autoregressive wage component. Surprisingly,
for women, variation in marriage patterns accounts for only 0.66% (0.15) of the variance in y aei ,
although the value is much larger for the annual average of log family income (9.3%).
       Sorting on education, the permanent wage component, and the autoregressive wage component
increases the variance of y aei for women by 17.2% (1.5) relative to the case of random sorting.
       The variance decompositions for men differ in several important ways. First, education accounts
for much more of the variance of log earnings for men than for women (38.4% (3.2) versus 26.4%
(3.1)) but the gap is small for y aei (33.7% (2.5) versus 32.5% (2.6)). The relative importance of
   3
     We do not measure the contribution of employment and hours shocks affecting the spouse or the contribution of
fertility shocks. For this reason, and because of nonlinearities and interactions, the contributions do not sum to 100
percent.


                                                          4
male education is lower for family income variables because women's education has a bigger effect on
spouse's education, and the education of male spouses has a larger direct effect on family earnings.
       Second, the permanent component of the wage rate is also more important for earnings of
men than women (30.2% (3.8) versus 17.6% (4.8)), but the gender gap in its contribution to the
variance of y aei is roughly in line with the gap for earnings (23.3% (2.4) versus 14.2% (2.6)). The
importance of both education and the permanent wage component for y aei depends less on marital
sorting for men than for women.
       Third, random variation in spouse's education and spouse's permanent wage conditional on own
characteristics account for only 7.7% of the variance of family income per capita for men, one third
of the value for women. The difference reflects the fact that marriage is prevalent for both men and
women, and the fact that married men devote more time to market work.
       Fourth, marital sorting increases the variance of y aei for men by 14.0% (1.4) relative to the
case of random sorting.
       Finally, innovations in the autoregressive wage component and the autoregressive and stochastic
hours components contribute a smaller share of the variance in earnings for males than for females,
and account for only 3.7% (1.6) and 0.7% (0.07) of the variance in y aei .
       Our paper builds on several literatures. The first is the extensive literature on marriage, divorce,
and marital sorting. Browning, Chiappori, and Weiss (2014) survey an extensive literature on
marriage and divorce in an environment where search costs are relatively low, including the seminal
contributions of Becker (1973, 1974, 1981) and subsequent papers such as Becker, Landes and
Michael (1977), Weiss and Willis (1993), Choo and Siow (2006), Chiappori and Oreficce (2008),
and Chiappori, Iyigun and Weiss (2009). This literature explores the implications of comparative
advantage within the family and of competition in the marriage market for who gets married, and
who marries whom. Mortensen (1988), Burdett and Coles (1997, 1999), Shimer and Smith (2000),
Wong (2003), and Jacquemet and Robin (2012) are part of a literature that considers assortative
matching and marriage when search costs are substantial. Our contribution is to provide a rich
empirical description of sorting on all of the variables that matter (in our model) for future earnings
and nonlabor income. In particular, we provide estimates of the link between an individual's age,
education, permanent wage component, an autoregressive wage component, and labor force status,
and corresponding variables for the spouse.
       Our work also contributes to a large literature on work hours, wages, and earnings. Some studies
focus on the effects of wages, marriage, and children on labor supply. Others consider determinants
of wages.4 A large number of papers estimate univariate processes for earnings and/or family income,
   4
   Recent papers on the wage elasticity include Blau and Kahn (2007), Heim (2007), and Attanasio and Low (2020).
The vast literature on effects of children on employment, hours, and wages includes Angrist and Evans (1998), recent
papers by Kleven et al (2019), and Kuziemko et al (2018). Blau and Kahn (2017) survey the literature on gender


                                                         5
often with a focus on implications for inequality at various ages or over the lifecycle.5 A smaller
set of papers investigates multivariate processes for earnings, with equations for employment, hours
and wage rates and in some cases job mobility.6 Within this strand of the literature, our approach
is most closely related to that of Altonji, Smith, and Vidangos (2013). They focus exclusively
on the earnings process of male heads of household and consider job mobility. We abstract from
job mobility, but consider the earnings of women as well as men, study family income as well
as individual earnings, and incorporate marital transitions, marital sorting on all variables that
influence earnings or divorce probabilities, and fertility.
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the data.                      Section
3 presents the model, describes the estimation methodology, and discusses the model estimates.
Section 4 discusses the fit of the model. In section 5 we present impulse response functions which
trace the responses of key variables to exogenous shocks and consider the role of marital sorting
and marriage formation in those responses. Section 6 reports decompositions of the variance of
outcomes over the lifecycle into several sources. Section 7 concludes.


2     Data
2.1     The Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) Sample
We use the 1969­1997 waves of the PSID to assemble data on sample members and on their spouses.
Spouses entered the PSID by marrying into a PSID household and are not sample members. The
data refer to the calendar years 1969­1996.7 We restrict the analysis to the stratified random sample
(SRC) and do not use observations on sample members or spouses who are younger than 19 or older
than 69. Our analysis focuses on sample members who are aged 25 to 61, inclusive, as well as their
spouses. We start at age 25 because many sample members younger than 25 are neither heads nor
wives, and many key variables are not collected for non-head singles. The vast majority of these
differences in labor market outcomes and provide references to studies of the effects of marriage and children on
work and wages, as well as the effects of work force interruptions. A separate literature studies the consequeces of
unemployment shocks for future wages and employment (Jacobson, Lalonde, and and Sullivan (1993), Davis and von
Wachter (2011), Altonji, Smith, and Vidangos (2013), among others).
    5
      This literature includes Lillard and Willis (1978), Lillard and Weiss (1979), Hause (1980), MaCurdy (1982),
Abowd and Card (1989), Topel and Ward (1992), Gottschalk and Moffitt (1994), Moffitt and Gottschalk (1995,
2011), Baker (1997), Chamberlain and Hirano (1999), Geweke and Keane (2000), Haider (2001), Baker and Solon
(2003), Meghir and Pistaferri (2004), Guvenen (2009), Browning et al (2010), Hryshko (2012), DeBacker et al.
(2013), Karahan and Ozkan (2013), Blundell, Graber, and Mogstad (2016), Arellano, Blundell, and Bonhomme
(2017), Hoffmann (2019), and Guvenen et al (2019).
    6
      Multivariate models of earnings dynamics include Abowd and Card (1987, 1989); Altonji, Martins, and Siow
(2002); Low, Meghir and Pistaferri (2010); and Altonji, Smith and Vidangos (2013). Several recent papers do not
focus on earnings but provide structural models of wage rates, job mobility, and employment dynamics. These
including Barlevy (2008), Buchinsky et al (2010), and Bagger et al (2014) among others.
    7
      We start in 1969 because several measures are bracketed in the 1968 round. Extending the sample forward is
complicated by the fact that the survey moved to a biennial interview schedule after 1997.



                                                         6
individuals are children or stepchildren of the head or wife. Thus, our results apply to individuals
who are single heads of household or married at age 25.8 Because of sample size considerations, in
some cases we use data for ages 23-27 when estimating models of initial conditions at age 25. We
exclude observations where the sample member is Black,9 who are underrepresented in the SRC
sample. For the most part, we exclude observations if potential experience of the sample member
or the spouse is greater than 40 or older than 61 because we do not model retirement as a distinct
labor force state. We do not restrict the age of the spouse when estimating the marriage and age
matching equations. Observations for a given person-year are used if the person has valid data on
education. We includes the self-employed. The number of observations used in estimation varies
across equations, but 4,274 sample members play a role in our simulations.

2.2         Key Variables
We discuss the most important issues in constructing our key variables here, but discuss treatment
of outliers and censoring in Appendix A1. The subscript i denotes the PSID sample member and
the subscript t denotes calendar year, which we sometimes suppress. The subscript s indicates that
a variable refers to a spouse. Age is denoted by ait . Education (EDU Ci ) is years of education,
which we measure by its average when multiple reports are available. Potential experience P Eit is
ait - max(EDU Ci , 9) - 6. For monetary variables and work hours, lower case letters indicate logs
and upper case letters denote levels. If we allow for measurement error in a variable in a model, we
         
use a       superscript to distinguish the measured value from the true value.
       The (measured) log hourly wage wageit is constructed using two measures. The first is the
                                    
reported hourly wage rate (REP W AGEit ) at the time of the survey. It is only available for
those who are employed or on temporary layoff and was not collected for married women in some
of the early years of our sample.10            The other measure is annual earnings divided by annual
                      
hours, (EARNit /HOU RSit ). We set wage                  
                                       it to ln(REP W AGEit ) when the reported wage is avail-

able. We fill in data on missing wages using wage2it , which is the prediction from a regression
                                        
of ln(REP W AGEit ) on ln(EARNit /HOU RSit ), EDU Ci and other explanatory variables, fully
   8
     After children set up their own household, they are classified as heads or wives even if they move back in with
their parents. An alternative is to start at an earlier age and treat "single, have not left home" as a state variable,
and account for the fact that some labor market variables are not available for non-head single adults. Starting at
an earlier age and restricting the sample to heads and wives will lead to bias because the marriage rate is overstated
in this sample. Note that for married couples the PSID (which started in 1968) almost always classifies the male as
the "head" and the female as the "wife."
   9
     We do not restrict on the race of the sample member's spouse.
  10
     This measure is the log of the reported hourly wage at the survey date for persons paid by the hour and is based
on the salary per week, per month, or per year reported by salary workers. For household heads, it is unavailable
prior to 1970 and is limited to hourly workers prior to 1976. We account for the fact that it is capped at $9.98 per
hour prior to 1978 by replacing capped values for the years 1975-1977 with predicted values constructed by Altonji
and Williams (2005). For married women the wage is available in the 1976 survey and from 1979 on, but is missing
in 1977 and 1978. It is also missing for the self-employed in all years.


                                                          7
                                            
interacted with gender. If ln(EARNit /HOU RSit ) is also missing, we set wage          
                                                                             it to wage3it , which
                                                                        
is the predicted value from a gender-specific regression of ln(REP W AGEit ) on the explanatory
variables only.11
       Earnings is annual earnings in all jobs, censored at $1000. Earnings, wage rates and other
monetary variables are in 2009 dollars.
                                                                                        
       The hours measure HOU RSit is annual hours worked in all jobs. We also set HOU RSit to
max(200, reported hours) before taking the log. Thus, for people who report 0 hours, we use
ln(200).12 Employment, Eit , unemployment, Uit , and nonparticipation (or "out of the labor force"),
Nit are dummy variables for labor market status at the time of the survey. Distinguishing among
the three states is important given the age range, the time span of our sample, and the fact that
many married women choose not to work.
       The construction of marital status (M ARit ) and duration (M DU Rit ) is based on questions that
refer to the survey date as well as the 2015 PSID marital history file.13 Indicators for whether the
individual has a child aged 0 to 1, 1 to 2, 2 to 3, etc., up to age 18, are constructed from the
childbirth and adoption file. In most of our equations, we aggregate the age-specific indicators into
counts of children between 0 and 5 (CH 05it ), 6 and 12 (CH 612it ), and 13 and 18 (CH 1318it ). We
sometimes use CHit to refer to a vector of the three variables. In the marriage equation we use
CH V AR1t-1 , which is an index of young children in t - 1. It is the sum of an indicator for the
presence of a child less than 1 year old and one-half of the sum of indicators for children aged 1, 2,
3, and 4. The functional form fits transitions into marriage well.
       Real nonlabor income (N LYit ) is the maximum of real nonlabor income of the head and wife, and
                               
500. Real family earnings (EARNF ) is the sum of the sample member's earnings and the spouse's
                                                                 
earnings (if present). Real family income, Yit is the sum of EARNF and uncensored nonlabor
income of the head or the head and wife. It is censored at $2,000.
       The variables AEit and aeit are the level and log of the OECD's adult equivalence scale.14 The
variables Y AEit and its log, y aeit , and other variables with the AE or ae suffix are on an adult-
equivalent basis. AEit and aeit are is not used in the estimation of the model, except in the case
of the consumption measure. When simulating the model and assessing fit, we only consider the
head, spouse, and children of the PSID sample member who are under 18 when creating AEit , to
avoid having to model the presence of other adults and children of others. We discuss the issue in
                                       
  11
     The use of ln(EARNit    /HOU RSit  ) introduces correlation between the measurement error in wage    it and the
measurement errors in hoursit and earn
                              
                                           it , which we address when  we  estimate the  hours equation. We  exclude
wage observations based on wage   3it when  estimating  parameters of the wage  process and the match between spouse
wages.
  12
     We do so to avoid having to predict who will work positive annual hours in the simulation and to limit the
influence of very low values of hours.
  13
     Marriage duration at age 25 is censored at 11 (i.e., married at age 14).
  14
     The scale is ( 1 + 0.7(#adults - 1) + 0.5(# of children).


                                                         8
Section 3.7.
       We also study the behavior of transfer income and consumption. Transfer income (T RYit ) is
the maximum of 500 and the real value of government transfers (including social security income
and transfers from friends and relatives). Our log consumption per adult equivalent measure c aeit
is from Attanasio and Pistaferri (2014).15
       Appendix Table A1 reports summary statistics by gender for the key variables in the model for
observations on individuals between age 25 and 61 inclusive. The effective samples for estimation
vary due to missing data and additional sample selection rules.


3         A Model of Earnings, Marriage, and Family Income
3.1         Overview of the Model and Estimation Methods
Our econometric model has six parts. The first specifies the joint distribution of employment status,
marital status, and number of children at age 25 conditional on education and gender.
       The second is the earnings model. It includes equations for wage rates, labor market status
(employed, unemployed, nonparticipation), work hours, and earnings. These processes depend on
both marital status and the presence of children. Both the wage rate and the hours model include
unobserved permanent heterogeneity components. Labor market status depends on lagged status
and an unobserved heterogeneity component.
       The third part of the model concerns marital status. The transition from single to married
depends on an individual's age, gender, education, employment, wage, and the presence of young
children. The divorce probability depends on the age and education of both spouses, the presence
and age distribution of children, the wage rates and employment status of both spouses, measures
of the degree to which spouses are mismatched on wages, education and age, the duration of the
marriage, and an unobserved fixed marriage-specific heterogeneity component.
       The fourth part addresses marital sorting. It includes equations relating the distribution of
spouse characteristics such as age, education, and unobserved wage components to characteristics
of the individual. We include equations for all variables that matter for earnings and unearned
income and for the stability of the marriage.
       The fifth part concerns fertility after age 25. Probit models for the arrival of a new child depend
on education, existing children and a cubic in age, and are estimated separately by gender and
marital status. Children affect wages, employment, hours (given employment), and marriage, but
  15
    They construct it using a regression model relating the log of a comprehensive measure of consumption available
in the PSID since 1999 to the more limited information available during our sample. We only make limited use of it
because the income-related measures used to construct it are not sufficient to fully capture the dynamic relationship
between consumption, marital status, and the permanent and transitory factors that drive earnings and nonlabor
income. In the consumption case aeit depends on all children and other adults in the household.


                                                         9
only marriage affects fertility.
       The sixth part of the model consists of equations for unearned income and an accounting identity
relating family income to the individual's earnings, spouse's earnings for those who are married,
and nonlabor income.
       The sample period 1969-1996 saw significant changes to women's labor market interactions,
particularly in terms of the relationship between marriage and work. Fully modeling these changes
is outside the scope of this paper. However, we include flexible time trends in all our equations.
These pick up both secular changes and linear cohort effects.
       A few additional words about notation may be helpful. The  parameters refer to intercepts and
slope coefficients. For each intercept and slope parameter the superscripts identify the dependent
variable. In many cases, we simply report estimates of the slope coefficients and do not provide
notation for them. The superscript s on a model parameter indicates that the dependent variable
refers to the spouse of the PSID sample member. Similarly, the subscript s on a variable indicates
that the variable refers to the spouse of sample member i.
       The set of explanatory variables depends on the equations. We use Xit as the generic name for a
set of the variables that includes education, a quadratic or cubic polynomial in potential experience,
a quadratic or cubic polynomial in calendar time, and in some cases interactions between education
and the level and square of potential experience. Superscripts on X denote the dependent variable.
                                          w
For example, in the wage equation we use Xit .
       The fixed person-specific unobserved wage heterogeneity component is µi for the sample member
and µsi for the spouse. The fixed employment status and hours heterogeneity terms are i and i .
The marriage continuation probability depends on the marriage-specific term j (i,t) , where j (i, t) is
                                              h
the marriage i is in at time t. We use it and it to denote autoregressive processes in the wage and
in hours, respectively;  and h to denote the corresponding autoregression coefficients; and uit and

uh                                                   k                                            2
 it to denote the i.i.d innovations. The innovations it are i.i.d. random variables and are N (0, k )

(except in the labor market status model), where k corresponds to the dependent variable affected
                                      
directly by k
            it . As mentioned above, a superscript indicates that a variable is measured with error.

The measurement errors in wages, hours, and earnings are mew      h          e
                                                           it , meit , and meit , respectively. They
                      2
are distributed N (0, mk ), k = w, h, e.16
       Below we do not write out the specification of equations when it is obvious from the results in
the tables or the table notes.
  16
    Measurement errors in spouse variables have the same variances as the measurement errors in the sample mem-
ber's variables. The measurement errors are assumed to be i.i.d. across i and t, mutually independent, and inde-
pendent from all other error components in the model. From the accounting identity, the measurement error in
                    
log family income yit is a function of the measurement errors in its components. We ignore measurement error in
unearned income.




                                                      10
3.1.1      Estimation Strategy

All told, the model contains 42 equations and 457 parameters to be estimated.17 Given the size
and complexity, we estimate the equations of the model separately using a variety of estimation
techniques. For some equations, we use OLS, probit, or multinomial logit and treat all variables as
exogenous or predetermined. For others, we use IV to address endogeneity arising from unobserved
heterogeneity or measurement error. In some cases, such as the wage, the model is estimated using
a multistep procedure. In the case of labor market status and marriage, we use simulations from
the model as the basis for informal corrections for initial conditions bias. It is most economical to
discuss estimation in the context of specific equations. We relegate some of the details to Appendix
A2.
       We set the values of the variances of the measurement error components to values very loosely
suggested by various studies of measurement error in the PSID and other panel data sets, as well
as by patterns in the data. See Appendix A2.5.
       The standard errors of model parameter estimates are based on the asymptotic formula and are
clustered by sample member, although we use the bootstrap for a few parameters for which the
asymptotic formula is impractical.

3.2       Employment, Marital Status, and Children at Age 25
Education, gender, and birth cohort are exogenous in the model. We assume that the joint distri-
bution of employment status (3 states), marital status, marital duration (0 if single), and number
of children depends on education, gender, and birth cohort categories. For each education-gender-
cohort combination, we estimate the conditional probability of each combination of labor market
status, marital status, marital duration, and number of children using data on sample members
between the ages of 23 and 27. In constructing the conditional probabilities we aggregate education
into a low group (EDU Ci  12) and a high group (EDU Ci > 12), so we have a total of four
education/gender categories. The birth cohorts are 1931-1941, 1942-50, 1951-60, and 1961-71. For
each value of number of children at age 25, we estimate the joint probability of each of the possible
combinations of ages of the children. Appendix Table A2a and A2b report the fraction of men
and women in each cohort who fall into aggregated cells defined by education, employment status,
marriage, and presence of children.
  17
    This count excludes the education and gender-specific initial probabilities of employment, marital status, and
number of children, which are discussed in the next section. It also excludes equations for lags of employment status
of a female spouse at the start of a marriage. And it excludes the 374 parameters that appear in the transfers and
consumption models. These do not play a role in the analysis of earnings and family income.




                                                         11
3.3       Model of Earnings, Unearned Income, and Family Income
The earnings model consists of (1) the initial condition for employment status mentioned in the
previous section, (2) equations for employment status, (3) equations governing the initial value and
the evolution of hourly wage rates and (4) an equation for work hours conditional on labor force
status. We abstract from modelling job mobility and the presence of job-specific wage and hours
components despite their empirical importance (e.g., Abowd, Kramarz, and Margolis (1999), Card,
Heining, and Kline (2013), Altonji, Smith, and Vidangos (2013), and many others).18

3.3.1      Log Hourly Wages

We estimate separate models for men and women. The log wage rate wageit and the wage measure
wageit are determined by the following system of equations:


(1)               wageit = Eit · wagelat
                                     it

(2)              wagelat
                     it
                            w w
                         = Xit          w
                               X + CHit CH             w
                                           + LF Si,t-1 LF            w
                                                          S + M arit mar + µi + it
                          
(3)                  it = 0    w
                            +  i,t                             
                                   -1 + E Ei,t-1 + U Ui,t-1 + uit if ait > 25

                     it = i25 if ait = 25
                                 2
                      µi = N (0, µ ); u          2
                                       it  N (0, u )

                  wage                w      w         2
                      it = wageit + meit ; meit  N (0, mew )


Equation (1) says that an employed (i.e. Eit = 1) individual's wageit equals the "latent wage"
wagelat                          lat
    it . While not employed, wageit captures the process for wage offers. At a given point in time

the individual might not have such an offer. The formulation parsimoniously captures the idea that
worker skills and worker-specific demand factors evolve during a nonemployment spell.
       Equation (2) states that wagelat                                 w w         w           w
                                    it depends on the regression index Xit X + CHit CH + M arit mar ,
       w                                                   2       3
where Xit contains a cubic time trend, EDU Ci , P Eit , P Eit , P Eit , and the interaction between
                             2
EDU Ci and both P Eit and P Eit . As mentioned above, we drop CHit from the model for men
because it is not statistically or economically significant. The wage also depends on permanent
unobserved "ability," µi , and the stochastic wage component, it . For women but not men, it
depends on the labor force status vector LF Si,t-1 , which consists of Ei,t-1 , Ei,t-2 , Ei,t-3 , Ui,t-1 , and
Ui,t-2 .19 We use the deviations of M arit and LF Si,t-1 from their means for i as instruments for
  18
     To be able to simulate the paths of marital status and family income, we need to model the distribution of all
spouse characteristics that enter the earnings process. Consequently, to introduce job mobility in an interesting
way, we would have to model the distribution of job tenure and the job-specific wage and hours components of new
spouses.
  19
     To simulate wages for female sample members, we need to be able to simulate the lags of employment and
unemployment for women at age 25. We draw the lags of employment based on separate probit regression for Eit-1 ,
Eit-2 , and Eit-3 on Eit , Uit , M arit , CHit and a quadratic time trend. They are estimated using women between
ages 23 and 27. We use similar procedures to model lagged employment status for female spouses when the sample
member is 25 and for new spouses at later ages. We set initial values of lags of unemployment to 0, since it is rare.


                                                         12
M arit and LF Si,t-1 to address correlation between M arit and LF Si,t-1 and µi .
                                                                                    w
    Equation (3) states that the unobserved stochastic wage component it depends on i,t -1 , the lag

of employment Ei,t-1 and unemployment Ui,t-1 , and the mean-zero wage shock uit . The dependence

of it on its past reflects persistence in the market value of the general skills of i and the fact that
employers base wage offers on past wages. It also picks up persistence arising from job-specific wage
components that change slowly within an employer-employee match. The coefficients on Ei,t-1
and Ui,t-1 capture variation in experience and in depreciation of general experience conditional on
P Eit .20 For women, who often have long spells of nonparticipation, we exclude Ei,t-1 and Ui,t-1
from (3) because otherwise the model implies too large a penalty from nonparticipation. Instead,
we include LF Si,t-1 in (2).
    Table 1a columns 1 and 2 report 2SLS estimates of selected parameters of (2) for men and
women, respectively. Interaction terms are normalized so that the main effect of education is for a
person with P Eit = 16. The marital premium is only 0.012 (0.012) for men and is -0.042 (0.015) for
women. (For men the OLS estimate of the premium is 0.084 (0.016).) Also consistent with existing
evidence, the coefficients on the P Eit and the interactions between EDU Ci and P Eit imply steeper
wage profiles for men than women (not reported). Wages are substantially lower for women with
children. For women the coefficients on the three lags of employment sum to 0.172, while the lags
of unemployment enter negatively.
    Table 1b reports the parameters for the it process.21 For men the effects of Ei,t-1 and unem-
                                                                                        
ployment Ui,t-1 in (3) are defined relative to nonparticipation. The negative constant ^0 , the small
positive coefficient on Ut-1 and the larger positive coefficient on Et-1 enters positively imply that
unemployment, and especially nonparticipation, reduce wages. The value of ^ is 0.832 (.029) for
men and 0.911 (0.043) for women. The standard deviations of the shocks ^u are 0.130 (0.008) for
men and 0.145 (0.011) for women. The estimate of µ is 0.277 (0.012) for men which is more than
the value of 2.4 years of education when P Eit is 16. The value is 0.243 (0.027) for women. Thus
permanent heterogeneity is quite important.
    We separately estimate 25 , the standard deviation of  at age 25. The estimates are 0.148
(0.023) for men and 0.130 (0.047) for women.
  20
     We estimate (3) after replacing it and i,t-1 with the 2SLS residual e    ^w
                                                                               it from (2) and its lag. That residual is
the sum of it plus µi and the measurement error me      it . Consequently, we  use  the second and third lags of the first
difference of the wage residuals and the deviations of Ei,t-1 and Ui,t-1 from the mean for i as instrumental variables.
  21
     The regression coefficients and variance parameters of (3) are estimated using a combination of 2SLS (to account
for endogeneity of Ei,t-1 and Ui,t-1 , labor market status in the equation for men, measurement error, and the
presence of µi ) and the methods of moments. See Appendix A2.




                                                           13
3.3.2      Labor Market Status (Eit , Uit , Nit )

We model Eit , Uit , Nit using a dynamic multinomial logit model with normally distributed random
effects. Nit (nonparticipation) is the reference category. When interpreting results for Eit and
hoursit , note that the employment status indicators refer to the survey date. As a result, we miss
short unemployment spells that fall between surveys. However, earnings depend on employment
through annual work hours, and the transitory error component h
                                                              it in the hours error term should

capture the effect on hours from unemployment and nonparticipation spells independent of duration.
       We include Ei,t-1 and Ui,t-1 in the model as well as a normally distributed random effect i . The
random effect has a coefficient of 1 in the latent indices for E and U relative to N . In most cases
we do not observe initial conditions. This is likely to lead to an overstatement of state dependence
                         2
and an understatement of   . Simulations revealed that the model understates dependence in
employment at longer lags. We performed an informal bias correction by experimenting with large
          2
values of   , up to double the unrestricted MLE estimate. This improved the fit at long lags
considerably, although we still understate persistence in employment for men.22
       The multinomial logit coefficients are presented in Appendix Table B1, but they are hard to
interpret. Appendix Figure A1 graphs the age profiles of the predicted employment and unemploy-
ment rates by age, gender, and marital status, not holding other variables fixed. Appendix Table
A3 reports marginal effects of a few key variables on the employment and the unemployment prob-
abilities. The effects are evaluated at the gender-specific mean of the three employment states. In
addition, for women, the effects of education and marriage are for a person in 1982 who is age 34
with 12 years of education, when potential experience is 16.
       For men, marriage increases employment by 0.040 (0.008). The coefficients on the child variables
CHit are small and statistically insignificant. A year of education increases employment by 0.009
(0.002). There is strong state dependence and substantial unobserved heterogeneity.
       For women, children under 5 have a large negative effect of -0.208 (0.026) on Et , which is
consistent with a large literature on the labor supply of married women. The marginal effects of
Ut-1 and Et-1 are 0.136 (0.039) and 0.520 (0.027).23
       Standard labor supply models imply that employment at t should depend on the current wage
opportunity. We experimented with the inclusion of own wage in the models. The estimates are
  22
      We settled on setting the variance of the unobserved component to 2 times the unrestricted variances estimates of
1.32 for men and 1.29 for women. Employment persistence increases when the variance of the unobserved component
is constrained to even higher values. However, it would be unreasonable to attribute all of the persistence of
employment to the unobserved component, as in reality there are components of employment persistence that we
have not modeled.
   23
      In preliminary work we included husband's employment and unemployment (Est and Ust ) in the model for
married women and found evidence of a small added worker effect. We cannot simulate a model in which employment
and marriage outcomes are simultaneously determined, and so we stick with the specification without spouse's
employment.


                                                          14
small for men and for both single and married women, and ultimately we excluded them in the
interest of parsimony. As we discuss in the next section, hoursit conditional on employment status
at the survey date depend positively on the current wage for all three groups.

3.3.3   Log Annual Hours

The model for hours             h        lat
                   it includes Xit , wageit , Uit , and Eit . For both men and women we pool singles

and married but include M arit . For women we include CHit , we allow the effects of most variables
to depend on marital status, and we add the spouse variables wagelat
                                                                 st , Ust , and Est . We instrument

the wage measures and variables involving marital status using deviations from individual means
as the instruments.
   The hoursit error term is
                                             h
                                         i + it + h      h
                                                  it + meit

   where
                                         h
                                         it = h  h        h
                                               h i,t-1 + uit .

                                                                                      h
It contains the unobserved permanent hours component i , the autoregressive component it with
innovation uh                  h                                h                   h      h
            it , the iid error it , and the measurement error meit . The components it and it

pick up transitory variation in straight time hours worked, overtime, multiple job holding, and
nonemployment conditional on employment status at the survey date. These may represent both
serially correlated and i.i.d. shifts in worker preferences and job-specific hours constraints.
                                                                                             
   In the estimating equation we replace wagelat        lat
                                             it and wagesit with the measures wageit and wagesit .

We estimate by 2SLS with the wage and marital status treated as endogenous. We estimate  ,
h
h
  , and h using a method of moments procedure. See Appendix A2.3.
   Appendix Table A4a reports the slope coefficients and A4b reports the error-component pa-
rameters. For men the wage elasticity is 0.063 (0.014). Not surprisingly, annual hours worked are
strongly related to whether the individual was employed or unemployed at the survey date. The
strong positive coefficient on unemployment reflects the difference between the labor supply behav-
ior of those who are looking for work and those who are out of the labor force (nonparticipants).
Conditional on employment status, married men work 2% (0.014) more hours than unmarried men.
(The estimate is 9.6% (0.014) when M arit is treated as exogenous.)
   For women the wage elasticity is 0.304 (0.027). The elasticity of wife's hours with respect to
the husband's wage is -0.293 (0.048) (not reported). There is some evidence that married women
respond to spouse's unemployment by working more hours (not reported). Children, especially
young children, have a substantial negative effect on hours worked for both single and married
women, even conditional on employment status. The effect of older children is more negative for



                                                  15
single women.24
       The estimates of  are 0.199 (0.013) for men and 0.364 (0.037) for women, indicating substantial
permanent heterogeneity in hours conditional on employment status. This is consistent with the
results of other studies, such as Altonji, Smith, and Vidangos (2013) and Altonji and Dunn (1996).
The values of h are 0.589 (0.091) for men and 0.775 (0.060) for women, and the standard deviations
                 h                                                                             h
of the shocks to it are substantial. The variance decompositions below indicate that for women it
and the iid component h
                      it together account for the lion's share of the variance of hours at a given

age and play a significant role over a lifetime.

3.3.4      Log Annual Earnings

We started with the model

                                                 e
(4)                                     earnit = w wagelat  e
                                                       it + h hoursit ,


which states that log earnings earnit is (roughly) the sum of wagelat                               e
                                                                  it and hoursit . The coefficients w
    e
and h might differ from 1 for reasons that include censoring, overtime, multiple job holding, bonuses
and commissions, job mobility, and the fact that for some salaried workers the wage reflects a set
work schedule but annual hours worked may vary. These factors would also lead to an additional
error component for earnings. In preliminary work we included an autoregressive error term, as
                                                           e     e
Altonji, Smith, and Vidangos (2013) do. In the end, we set w and h to 1. We also decided to
exclude the additional error term even though it has a substantial variance. Excluding the error
term has little bearing on the impulse response functions that we discuss below. But it does lead
us to substantially underestimate the standard deviation of earnings and of family income, and
to overpredict earnit for people with low employment rates. (See Appendix section A4.1.1 for
additional discussion.) Accordingly, the variance decompositions that we report also exclude the
additional unobserved component of earnings.

3.3.5      Nonlabor Income

Log nonlabor (or unearned) income, nlyit , is observed only at the household level, and the effects
of determinants such as earnings and education are likely to depend on gender. Consequently we
specify separate models for married individuals, single men, and single women at age 25. We also
use gender-specific models for each marriage transition status--single to single, single to married,
married to married, and married to single. There are a total of 10 equations.25 The estimates are
  24
     Due to space considerations we pay little attention to time trends (which capture both time and cohort effects).
Not surprisingly, for hours and employment they are much larger for married women.
  25
     In the nlyit equations, for those who are married at age 25 and for continuing marriages, we include the husband's
and wife's wage and hours. We address a strong nonlinearity in the link between nlyit and nlyi,t-1 by including a
fourth-order polynomial in nlyi,t-1 in the models for persons who remain single or who remain married. We use a


                                                          16
reported in Appendix Tables A5a and A5b. We will not discuss them in detail, but it is interesting
to note that hours                                                                                    
                  it has a strong negative relationship with nlyit in all of the equations, while wageit

typically has a positive relationship. These relationships are the net effect of hours and wages on
government and private transfers and on income from past asset accumulation. Children reduce
nlyit slightly for married couples, conditional on the other variables, but increase it for single women
and for women following a divorce.

3.3.6    Family Income

The level of family income is determined by the identity

(5)                                   Yit = expearnit + expearnsit + expnlyit .

This assumes that other household members, such as adult children, do not contribute to income
                                                                                                    
available to the sample member. Measured family income Yit is expearnit + expearnsit + expnlyit .

3.4     Marriage
We use a straightforward modeling strategy that serves our purpose of analyzing the role of marriage
in family income dynamics. We estimate the probability of entering a marriage conditional on the
observed characteristics of i. We estimate the joint distribution of spouse characteristics conditional
on i s attributes for marriages that form. The divorce probability is a function of the characteristics
of both partners, marriage duration, and an unobserved marriage match component.26 , 27

3.4.1    Single to Married

As we have already mentioned, the probability of marriage and the duration of marriage at age 25
depends on education, gender, and birth cohort, and is jointly determined with number of children
and labor force status. From age 25 forward, the transitions from single to married are determined
by i s education, wage, employment status, a quadratic in age, the index CH V AR1i,t-1 measuring
the presence of young children, and a cubic time trend. Coefficients are gender-specific with the
simpler specification for the equations for men and for women who marry or divorce, because the sample sizes are
relatively small, ranging between 596 and 764. We ignore measurement error in nlyi,t-1 when estimating the model.
  26
     Browning, Chiappori, and Weiss (2014) survey the literature on marriage matching, marriage formation, and
divorce. There is a substantial descriptive literature in sociology and economics analyzing the effects of personal
characteristics on the probability of marriage and the effects of the characteristics of couples on the probability of
divorce. Examples of studies that have examined the correlation in spouse characteristics include Spuhler (1982),
and Keller, Thiessen, and Young (1996). In preliminary work, we formulated a marriage model based loosely on the
two-sided search-theoretic marriage market models considered by McNamara and Collins (1990), Burdett and Coles
(1999), Wong (2003), Gouss´   e et al (2017), and others. Wong (2003) provides estimates of how specific traits are
valued in the marriage market.
  27
     Note that the model parameters implicitly depend on the supply of men and women in the marriage market, the
distribution of preferences over the characteristics of partners, and the value of being married relative to single life.
They also depend on divorce laws, tax policy, labor market discrimination, and preferences for children.


                                                           17
exception of the time trend and CH V AR1i,t-1 . We report probit coefficients in Appendix Table
B2 and average marginal effects for a subset of variables in Table 2.
       Single men who are employed are 0.046 (0.020) more likely to enter marriage, presumably because
they are more desirable spouses. The wage has a small positive effect. Education has a small
negative partial effect on transitions into marriage at age 34 (see note at the bottom of Table 2),
although this effect is partially offset by the positive effect of education on wages and employment.
Model simulations indicate that overall, education has a small positive effect on the male probability
of being married, except at early ages (not shown). For women, the wage, employment, and
education effects are all essentially zero. The results are consistent with evidence from many studies
that in the marriage market labor market potential is more valued in men than in women. In future
work, we plan to examine differences across cohorts in the effects of these variables. Chiappori,
Salanie, and Weiss (2017) find that the effect of education on marriage has grown in strength for
women relative to men in recent decades.
       The marginal effect of CH V AR1i,t-1 is about 0.09 for both men and women, so young children
have a powerful positive effect on transitions into marriage.28

3.4.2      Married to Married

For individuals who are married at t - 1, the continuation of the marriage into period t is determined
by


              MM   MM         MM                MM               MM              MM
  M ARit = I [0  + f  F emi + af
                                 p(af i,t-1 ) + am
                                                   p(ami,t-1 ) + EDf
                                                                     EDf i,t-1 + EDm EDmi,t-1
    MM               MM              MM
  + Ef
       EM Pf i,t-1 + Em
                        EM Pmi,t-1 + wf
                                        wagelat       MM     lat      MM
                                            f i,t-1 + wm wagemi,t-1 + CH CH V AR1i,t-1
                MM
              + wdif |(wagelat          lat
                           mi,t-1 - wagemi,t-1 ) - 
                                                             MM
                                                   ¯wmf )| + agedif |(ami,t-1 - af i,t-1 ) - ¯amf |
 MM                                    MM         0.5    MM                MM
+EDdif |(EDmi,t-1 -EDf i,t-1 )-¯EDmf |+1M D M DU Ri,t-1 +2M D M DU Ri,t-1 +t  p(t)+j (i,t) +M
                                                                                            it
                                                                                               M
                                                                                                 > 0].

       In the above equation I [.] is the indicator function, p(.) is a cubic polynomial, the marriage
shocks M
       it
          M
             N (0, 1) are i.i.d., and M DU Ri,t-1 is "marriage duration," defined as the number
of years that the couple was married as of t - 1. The subscripts m and f indicate whether the
variable refers to the man or woman. (The sample member i could be either gender.) The effects
of individual characteristics on the marriage depend on gender. One would expect differences of
economic roles in marriage to differ by gender or the variables affect outside options differently for
men and women.
  28
    We experimented with adding CH 612it and CH 1318it to the marriage transition equations. In the Single-to-
Married model, CH 612it enters with a small positive coefficient but is not statistically significant. CH 1318it enters
with a modest positive coefficient and a t-value of about 2. Perhaps surprisingly, both variables have small and
statistically insignificant coefficients in the Married-to-Married model. The fit of the simulation model is similar
with these variables included, so we left them out.


                                                          18
       The stability of the marriage also depends upon the mismatch between wage rates, ages, and
education levels of the man and woman. The mismatch measures are absolute differences centered
around the PSID means ¯wmf , ¯amf , and ¯EDmf of the arithmetic differences of the wage, age, and
education.
       We include the marriage-specific heterogeneity term j (i,t) , where j indexes the marriage that
i is in at year t. Short of moving to joint estimation of the wage and marriage models, we were
unable to find a way to allow the values of µi of the husband and wife to directly affect the marriage
continuation probability. They enter indirectly through wage rates. Finally, marriages are subject
to the i.i.d. shocks M
                     it
                        M
                          .
       We report probit estimates of the marriage continuation model in Appendix Table B3 and report
marginal effects of selected variables in Table 3. We ignore the fact that some of the marriage spells
in the sample are left-censored, which creates an initial conditions problem in the presence of
duration dependence. Despite this, the marriage model fits fairly well, as we document below.
       The coefficients on the wage rates are small and not significant, but husband's and wife's educa-
tion both increase the continuation probability. Husband's employment has a substantial positive
effect, while wife's employment has a smaller negative effect. All three of the mismatch variables
have the expected negative sign, and the education and age mismatch variables are statistically sig-
nificant. Not surprisingly, the lagged index for young children, CH V AR1i,t-1 , has a large positive
effect on the continuation probability. The estimate of  is 0.243 (0.049), which implies that a
one-standard-deviation improvement in marriage match quality has the same effect on the marriage
continuation probability as a 4 year increase in the education of both the husband and the wife.

3.5        Spouse Characteristics at the Start of a Marriage
To be able to simulate lives, we have to model the distributions of all spouse characteristics that
influence future values of own and spouse earnings, unearned income, and/or the divorce probability.
Here we briefly discuss the models of spouse's education and wages, which are key. We discuss the
models of the spouse's initial labor market status and age in Appendix A3.

3.5.1      Spouse's Education

The education EDU Csi of the person that sample member i marries in t is given by:29


                            EDs
(6)                 EDsit = 0   +  EDs XiEDs + ED
                                               EDs
                                                   EDi + ED
                                                         it
                                                            s
                                                              ; ED
                                                                it
                                                                   s        2
                                                                      N (0, EDs
                                                                                ).

The vector XiEDs includes a function of age, indicators for the presence of children, and a quadratic
in calendar time. The specification depends on whether the marriage is in progress at age 25, as one
  29
       We use the term ED rather than EDU C in the equations to preserve space.


                                                        19
can see from Table 4. The effect of EDU Ci on EDU Csi at age 25 is 0.718 (0.028) for women and
0.585 (0.023) for men.30 The values are 0.590 (0.035) and 0.486 (0.030), respectively, for marriages
that are observed to start after age 25. The stronger partial effect of own education on spousal
education for women than men could reflect gender asymmetry in preferences and gender differences
in the education distribution, but it is also the case that most studies of educational sorting do not
condition on children. Below we report that the effect of own wage rate on the spouse's wage rate
is also stronger for women than for men.
       For marriages that begin after age 25, having young children prior to the marriage lowers the
expected education of a new spouse (holding EDU Ci and ait constant) by about 0.4 years for
children under 5 and about 0.2 years for children aged 6 to 12. For men, the partial effect of ait on
spouse's education is essentially 0 at age 26, but is -0.075 at age 40. For women, the corresponding
values are 0.086 at age 26 and -0.056 at age 40 (not reported).

3.5.2      Spouse's Permanent Wage Component (µsi ) and Transitory Component (si )

The evolution of the spouse's wages is governed by the same equations as sample member wages.
Because separate equations determine spouse's education, age, and number of children, our main
challenge is modeling the link between i s characteristics and the distribution of µsi and st . Doing
so is complicated by the fact that sit , it , µsi , and µi are all unobservable. Notation is tricky
here, because all parameters are gender-specific, and because we restrict variances for female (male)
spouses to be the same as the variances for female (male) sample members. The subscript s indicates
that a variable or parameter refers to the spouse. The subscripts f or m indicate the gender of the
individual or the spouse.
       The model for µsf i of the female spouse is

                                      µs
                              µsf i = mµ µmi + µ
                                               ~sf i
                        V ar(µsf i ) = V ar (µf i )
                                                                       µs 2
                                         ~sf i  N (0, (V ar(µsf i ) - (mµ
                                         µ                                ) V ar(µf i )).

The value of sf it0 for a marriage that starts in t0 is related to mit according to


                                           s
                                  sf it0 = m mi,t0 -1 + ~ sf it0
                                                            s 2
                                sf it0 ) = V ar(sf it0 ) - (m
                           V ar(~                             ) V ar(mi,t0 -1 )
                                               ~ sf it0  N (0, V ar(~
                                                                    sf it0 )).
  30
    To increase precision, we estimate these models including sample members between ages 23 and 27. Using instead
ages 24 to 26 makes little difference.



                                                       20
After a marriage starts, sf it evolves according to equation (3) (shown earlier) evaluated using the
                                                                                µs
parameter values for females. When we simulate the model, we draw µsf i from N (mµ µi , V ar(~
                                                                                             µsf i )).
                    s
We draw sit from N (m mi,t0 -1 , V ar(~
                                      sf it0 )).
                                           µs     s
       We use the method of moments to fit mµ and m to the covariances of the wage residuals
of the sample member and the spouse at various leads and lags during the marriage. The model
and estimation procedure for female sample members and male spouses is the same. We allow all
parameters to depend on whether ait  29. The details are in Appendix A2.4.
                                                                                       µs     s
       The estimates are reported in Appendix Table A6. After age 30, the estimates of mµ and m
                                                                         µs      s
are 0.284 (0.006) and 0.638 (0.025) respectively, while the estimates of f µ and f  are 0.379 (0.006)
                                                                            µs     s
and 0.412 (0.024). For marriages that begin before age 30, the estimates of mµ and m are 0.349
                                         µs                   s         31
and 0.878 respectively. The estimates of f µ and f  are 0.412 and 1.139.   Thus, sorting is fairly
strong on both the permanent component and the autoregressive component of wages. Note that
the overall correlation between the wages of marriage partners will also depend on the spouse's
correlations in potential experience and education.

3.6       Fertility
Births are determined by a probit model. We estimate separate models by gender and marital
status. The explanatory variables are CH 05i,t-1 , CH 612i,t-1 , CH 1318i,t-1 , EDU Ci , and cubics in
ait and t. We restrict the sample to ait <= 50.32 The probit estimates and selected marginal effects
are in Appendix Tables B4 and A7, respectively, but we do not discuss them given space constraints.
Keep in mind that the joint distribution of number of children, employment status, marital status,
and marital duration at age 25 are conditional on gender, education, and birth cohort.

3.7       Adult Equivalents
The model only includes the sample member and spouse (if present) as adults, and children of the
sample member who are under 18 when contructing the equivalence scale:

                     AEit = (1 + 0.7M ARit ) + 0.5(CH 05it + CH 612it + CH 1318it ).

This avoids having to model the presence and income of other adults, who would enter the formula
with the weight 0.7. It would be fully appropriate only in the unlikely event that the income and
consumption of the other adults is such that they do not affect the resources available to the sample
member. We are also implictly assuming that both the sample member and the other biological
  31
    Standard errors are omitted since these estimates are constrained. See details in A2.4
  32
    For married couples, it would have been better to include the education and age of both spouses, but include
cases for which the wife's age is less than or equal to 50. In practice, we doubt it would make much difference. When
we simulate the model, we set the birth indicator to 0 if the wife's age exceeds 50 or if the individual is older than
50 in the case of singles.


                                                         21
parent fully support their children. For the baby boom cohort, this a reasonable approximation
for females, but in most cases children do not live with single fathers. The assumption has the
effect of reducing differences between men and women in the effect of entering marriage or of a
divorce on y aeit and earnF aeit (log family earnings per adult equivalent). We also consider the
alternative assumption that men live with their children only when married.33 Using the alternative
assumption about aeit only affects results for y aeit and earnF aeit for males.                  Not surprisingly,
it substantially reduces the material gains from marriage for men. It increases the importance of
marital histories in variance decompositions by a small amount. The other results reported in the
paper are not sensitive to use of the alternative measure.
       We leave a full accounting of other children and other adults in the household to future research.34


4        Model Fit
To assess fit we use the estimated model to simulate 500 lives for each member of our PSID esti-
mation sample. For each simulated individual, the education, gender, and birth cohort match the
values of a corresponding PSID sample member. We only include values for simulated cases that
correspond to the ages when the PSID sample member contributed to our sample. Due to space
considerations, here we provide only a brief summary of the findings, focusing on shortcomings
of the model. A detailed discussion is provided in Appendix A4, and the associated results are
presented in Appendix Tables A8-A10 and Figures A1-A13.
       Overall, the fit of the model is mixed. This is not surprising, for a few reasons. First, the
size of the model dictates that we estimate it equation by equation--rather than by making model-
simulated data match the PSID. Second, our decision not to include the discrepancy between earnit

and wage          
        it + hoursit in our model of earnings will necessarily affect the fit of earnings and family

income. A third factor is our decision to use a log specification for hours with a floor of 200 hours.
       Employment, Hours, and Wage Rates. For men and women separately the model achieves
a good fit with the PSID data for the overall mean, standard deviation, and age profiles of labor
force status, hourly wages, and hours worked. The standard deviation of hours worked for women
is understated by 0.2, and the simulated employment probability for women after age 40 is a bit
lower than the PSID rate.
       For single and married men considered separately, the fit is good for the labor market variables.
For married women, the model fits the means well, but the standard deviations of wages and hours
are over- and under-stated, respectively, in the simulated data. For single women, the overall fit
  33
    The alternative formula is AEit = (1+0.7M ARit )+0.5(CH 05it +CH 612it +CH 1318it )(1-SIN GLEit M ALEi ).
  34
    A relatively simple way to account for other adults would be to use the PSID to estimate the conditional
distribution of the number of other adults and other adult income conditional on characteristics of i. The conditional
distribution functions could be used to simulate AEit along with other variables in the full model.


                                                         22
is good for the wage and labor market status, but hours worked are underpredicted by 0.12 on
average, with underprediction rising after age 40.
       Earnings. As previously discussed, we model log earnings as the sum of wageit and hoursit
plus measurement error, while the PSID earnings measure is based on a direct question and is not
equal to the sum of the wage and hours measures. Because we do not model the residual component
of earnings, it is not surprising that the standard deviation of simulated earnings is below the PSID
for each gender/marital status group. The simulated data for earnings match the age profile of
earnings for both married and single men. But for married women, the model overstates earnings
despite a good fit for the wage and hours. This is because in the PSID the mean of earnit is lower

than the sum of the means of wage            
                                 it and hoursit , especially for groups with lower employment rates

and hours levels given employment (i.e. married women and individuals nearing retirement).
       As we discuss in Appendix A4.1 we can improve the fit for earnings by modifying the earnings
model to include an equation for the earnings residual or by accounting for its mean value, but
decided not to do so. Missing the mean of earnings is unlikely to have much effect on the estimates
of the impulse response of labor market variables and family income to various shocks (with the
exception of the effect of marriage and divorce shocks for women). Nor does it seem likely to matter
much for the variance decompositions of lifetime income, though we cannot know for sure.35
       Family Income. The fit of family income for both married men and single men is fairly good,
although we understate family income for married men after age 40, and for married women (by
about 0.12) after age 50. We understate family income of single women by 0.17, with the largest
discrepancy after age 40. The pattern reflects, but is bigger than, the prediction error for earnings.
The standard deviations of family income are understated, which reflects the fact that we understate
the standard deviation of earnings.
       Spouse Variables. We fit the means and standard deviations of spouses' education and age
well. The fit of spouses' labor market outcomes are similar to the fit for sample members. Similar
to the case of married female sample members, the model overstates earnings of female spouses by
an amount approximately equal to the earnings residual.
       Regression relationships between husband and wife's education are similar in simulated data
and actual data. This is also true for husband and wife's age at the start of the marriage. For men,
regressions of wage           
                   sit on wageit in the simulated data and the PSID match closely. For women, the

slope is understated by a modest amount (0.37 versus 0.43).
       Dynamic Fit of the Model. We evaluate the dynamic fit by running separate bivariate
regressions of wage                                           
                   it , hoursit , Eit , earnit , nlyit , and yit on their values at t - k , for k = 1, 3, 6, 8.

For wages, the simulated and PSID values of r
                                            ^k , the autoregression coefficient, are fairly close for
  35
       The fit for marriage rates and transitions is good, as is the fit for the presence of children by age group.



                                                             23
both men and women.
    For hoursit , the model substantially understates persistence for both men and women, primarily

because we understate persistence of the residual from the hours model (including measurement
error) by a substantial amount.
    We understate persistence in Eit at lags longer than 1 for men. For women, the model slightly
overstates persistence.
    The model understates persistence of earnit for both men and women by between 0.13 and 0.16

at the various lags. It also understates r
                                         ^1 for women by about 0.15 at the first lag and 0.10 at the
8th lag. We also understate persistence in nonlabor income.
    Given the pattern for earnings and nonlabor income, it is not surprising that the model also
                            
understates persistence in yit . For men, the value of r
                                                       ^1 is 0.669 for the model and 0.814 for the
data. The corresponding values for r
                                   ^8 are 0.416 and 0.643. The results for women are similar.
    The coefficients of the regression of wage           
                                              sit on wagei,t-k match closely for males. The coefficient

is about 0.32 when k = 1 and 0.28 when k = 8. For women the model understates the link between
wage            
    sit and wagei,t-k by about 0.11 at all lags (not reported).

    Event Studies of Marital Transitions. We also compare the average paths in the PSID
of work hours, earnings, and family income in the years around a change in marital status to the
corresponding average paths in the simulated data. We do so controlling for event fixed effects.
Overall, the difference in the averages of the response over the first few years before and the first
few years after the marriage begins correspond reasonably well.       The total effect of marriage on
earnings appears to be understated. However, both in the case of earnings and hours we overstate
how immediate the impact of marriage is. This is not surprising, because the model does not
include a distributive lag or partial adjustment mechanism for hours and for fertility. The pattern
is similar, but in the opposite direction, for divorce. For family income, the marriage and divorce
events studies in the simulated and PSID data match fairly closely for both men and women.
    While we present impulse responses at annual frequencies below, we have more confidence in
the average response over the first few years rather than the immediate response.


5     The Response of Marriage, Earnings, and Income to Shocks
We are (finally) ready to turn to the main results of the paper. In this section we present impulse
response functions (IRFs) which trace the responses of key variables to exogenous shocks. Section
6 then reports decompositions of the variance of various outcomes over the lifecycle into several
sources. For concreteness and to limit the influence of out-of-sample predictions, we focus the
analysis on the baby boom cohort--those born between 1944 and 1964 (inclusive).



                                                  24
5.1       Approach to Estimating Impulse Response Functions
The IRFs presented in this section refer to "shocks" imposed on the model at age ait = 34. We
first obtain "baseline" paths for each variable by simulating a large number of individuals starting
at age 25 according to the estimated parameters. We next perform a counterfactual simulation by
simulating the lives of the same individuals through age 33. Then, at age 34, we impose a "shock"
on all individuals of a particular group, usually defined by gender or by marital status and gender.36
For example, we impose that all married men or married women become unemployed, or all singles
get married, and so on. After the shock, we continue the counterfactual simulation in accordance
with the model from age 35 through age 55.
       We also investigate the extent to which wage shocks, unemployment shocks, and other shocks af-
fect outcomes by altering marriage transition probabilities (the "marriage channel") and by altering
whom one marries (the "sorting channel"). First, we use the data simulated from the baseline model
to estimate an alternative gender-specific version of the model equations for marriage transitions
and for marital sorting. In the alternative version, the dependent variable in question depends only
on third- or fourth-order polynomials in age and in calendar time. Replacing the marriage transition
equations and/or the marital sorting equations with the age polynomials amounts to shutting down
the marriage and/or sorting channels through which personal characteristics affect outcomes.37 We
construct impulse responses in the same manner as we did previously, but using the alternative
versions of marriage and sorting equations to define both the base case and the counterfactual. For
any given shock, we present three additional versions of the impulse responses. In the first, only the
marriage channel is shut down. In the second, only the sorting channel is shut down. In the third,
both the marriage channel and sorting channels are shut down. The gap between these curves and
the curves based on the actual model is the estimate of the contribution of the marriage and/or
sorting channel to the overall response. We use an analogous simulation strategy to measure the
contribution of marriage and sorting channels to the effects of education and the permanent wage
component µ.

5.2       The Effects of Divorce and Marriage
5.2.1      The Effect of Divorce

Figure 1 panels A and B show the mean response to an exogenous divorce shock imposed on
married women at age 34. The mean paths of various outcome variables (such as log hours and log
  36
     In all simulations, we take the joint distribution of gender, education, and age as given, and equal to that in our
baseline PSID sample for the baby boom cohort.
  37
     When we shut down the marriage channel, we draw labor market status, marital status, marital duration, and
number of children at age 25 using sample estimates of the probability of each combination of labor market status,
marital status, marital duration, and number of children at age 25 conditional on only gender and cohort, rather
than on education, gender, and cohort.


                                                          25
family income) for the counterfactual simulation are expressed as differences from the mean paths
in the baseline simulation (i.e. in the absence of the specified shock at age 34). The thicker lines
refer to point estimates and the corresponding thinner lines to 90% confidence bands. The bands
are based on 500 nonparametric bootstrap replications of the entire model estimation procedure.
Point estimates and confidence bands corresponding to a given variable use the same color and line
pattern.
   In Figure 1 panel A the solid (orange) line indicates that after a divorce the employment prob-
ability increases by 0.05 and continues to rise to a maximum of 0.07 three years after the shock.
It remains about 0.03 above the baseline through the end of the working life. The dynamics of
the response (relative to the baseline simulation) are due to state dependence in the employment
state as well as effects operating through wages, re-marriage, and fertility. Some of the women
who experience the divorce shock at age 34 re-marry later. And some of the married women in the
baseline simulation divorce in a later period.
   The short-dashed (burgundy) line in Figure 1 panel A shows that for women log hours (hoursit )
increase by 0.21 following divorce and then slowly decline. The rise is due to increased employment
and increased hours conditional on employment. The long-run increase in hoursit is about 0.06.
   The long-dashed (green) line shows that the log wage (wageit ) rises by roughly 0.04 on average
following a divorce. The increase might reflect switches to higher-paying jobs that were less desirable
for women while married (for example, because of longer hours or less flexible work schedules). The
rise in hoursit and wageit leads log earnings (earnit ) to increase by about 0.25 following a divorce.
It is still about 0.08 higher than in the baseline at age 55.
   Figure 1 panel B shows the paths of various income measures for women following the divorce.
The increase in earn displayed in Figure 1 panel A is accompanied by decline of 1.41 in log family
earnings (earnF ), which corresponds to a 78% decline in the level. This mostly reflects the loss
of the husband's earnings following the divorce. Log nonlabor (or unearned) income nly rises by
0.73 right after the divorce and then declines steadily to the baseline value by age 48 and to about
-0.10 by age 55. The initial increase may reflect an increase in government transfers, alimony and
child support, and other private transfers. The negative long-run effect might be the consequence
of lower wealth accumulation and the loss of social security and pension income from a spouse.
However, keep in mind that the mean level of N LY in the base case is only 13% of the value of
EARNF prior to the divorce, so the effect on N LY is less important than the effect on EARNF .
(As a reminder, upper-case variables are in levels and lower-case variables are in logs.)
   All told, family income (the short-dashed line in panel B) drops by about 94 log points at age
34, or about 78%. It subsequently experiences a slow and only partial recovery. In the long run the
divorce shock reduces family income by 0.23 log points (or 26%) relative to baseline value. Family


                                                  26
income per adult equivalent (Y AE , the dash-dotted, red line) declines by about 60 log points, or
51%, and remains below the pre-divorce value.
   The specific magnitudes and especially the specific timing of the responses should be taken with
a grain of salt. As we discussed in Appendix section A4.3, the dynamic specification of the model
is simplified in a number of dimensions. Furthermore, for females we only observe 851 divorces in
the estimation sample, a fact that is reflected in the confidence interval estimates. But it is clear
that for women divorce has a large negative and persistent effect on Y AE .
   The corresponding divorce IRFs for men are in Figure 1, panels C and D. Comparing Figure
1 panels C and A reveals that the effect of divorce on employment, hours, and wages for men are
much smaller than the effects for women and are negative rather than positive. For men, the small
declines in work hours and the wage rate lead earnings to fall by 6% initially. Earnings remain
about 4% below the baseline in the long run.
   Figure 1 panel D shows that the modest drop in men's earnings following a divorce is accompa-
nied by a substantial drop in log family earnings (earnF ) and log family income (y ). Prior to the
divorce these included the earnings of a female spouse. All told, y drops initially by about 0.36 for
men compared to 0.94 for females, and most of this initial decline dissipates gradually over time.
   For men, y ae actually rises by a small amount, in contrast to the large drop for women.
Furthermore, when aeit is constructed assuming that single men do not to live with their children,
then y ae rises by about 0.5 following a divorce and is still about 0.2 higher 5 years later (not
shown).

5.2.2     The Contribution of the Marriage and Sorting Channels to the Effect of Divorce

 Figure 2 panel A reproduces the mean response of log family income (y ) to a divorce shock
imposed on married women at age 34. We exclude confidence interval estimates to reduce clutter.
The solid (black) line, denoted "All Channels", is the same as the response function previously
presented in Figure 1 panel B. The long-run effect of the divorce shock is about -0.09 when the
marriage channel is shut down (short-dashed red line), compared to -0.23 in the "all channels"
case. Note that shutting down the marriage channel eliminates the effects of all variables on the
survival of the marriage, including the duration term and the marriage heterogeneity component
j (i,t) . Marriages in progress at age 34 will be selected on both of these variables. Eliminating their
effects on marriage and divorce probabilities reduce the costs to females of an exogenous divorce
shock because in-progress marriages become less stable.
   The long-dashed (orange) line shows that the sorting channel makes little difference. The effect
of turning off both the sorting and marriage channels is essentially the same as turning off only the
marriage channel.


                                                  27
   Figure 2 panel B shows that the results for married men are qualitatively very similar but
quantitatively smaller. This reflects the fact that divorce affects family earnings less for men.

5.2.3   The Effect of Entry into Marriage

Figure 3 panels A and B show the mean response to an exogenous "marriage" shock imposed on all
women who are single at age 34. Panels C and D show the corresponding results for single men. To
a first approximation, for women the effect of entry into marriage is the mirror image of the effect
of divorce. The marriage effects for men are also similar to the effects of divorce, but opposite in
sign. For men, employment, wages, hours, and earnings rise. Log family income rises by about 0.45
initially and returns to about 0.06 above the base case. To some degree, the extent of the symmetry
is an artifact of the model, because we do not distinguish between divorced and never-married
individuals in the wage, employment, and hours equations.

5.2.4   Accounting for Housework

In summary, marriage and divorce have strong effects on earn, y , and y ae, especially for women.
However, these events also alter the time endowment of the family, and the vast labor supply
literature indicates that the decline in work hours and wages for women following marriage and the
arrival of children is in large part a shift toward home production. Understanding the interplay
between family income and marriage is important but not sufficient to understand the role of
marriage in material well-being.
   In Appendix Tables A11a-A11c, we take an initial look at the degree to which accounting for
home production reduces gender differences in the estimated economic impact of marriage and
divorce. To do so, we use PSID data on annual hours spent on housework by the sample member
and the spouse if present (HWit ). We valued housework of both men and women at the 25th
percentile of the female real wage distribution in the estimation sample. We regressed ln((Yit +
HWit · wage 25)/AEit ) on M ARit and controls for education, CH 05it , CH 612it , CH 1318it , wageit ,

and quadratics in P Eit and t for observations around a transition into marriage. For women, the
coefficient on M ARit is 0.513 (0.027). The coefficient relating y aeit to M ARit is 0.590 (0.031).
Thus considering household work reduces the positive economic impact of marriage on women. For
men, the corresponding coefficients are 0.051 (0.025) and -0.059 (0.026). Thus, considering home
production reduces the gap between men and women in the effect of marriage on economic resources
per adult equivalent from 0.649 to 0.452. This is a substantial reduction, but a large gap remains.
The reduction reflects the fact that corresponding regressions in the table with ln(HWit /AEit ) as
the dependent variable show that M ARit has a much larger positive effect for men than women:




                                                 28
women devote more time to housework regardless of marriage.38

5.3       Unemployment Shocks
Figure 4 panels A and B display the response of labor market outcomes for married women to an
unemployment shock at age 34. The probability of being employed (the solid orange line) falls by
about 0.68 relative to baseline.39 It rebounds quickly and is only 0.18 lower than in the baseline
at age 35. Log hours drop by about 0.31 initially. A year later, they are only 0.13 below the
baseline. The log wage drops by .08 in the following year and recovers slowly. Earnings follow hours
downward, mostly recover, and then track the path of wages. Panel B of figure 4 shows that the
decline in earn leads to a much smaller decline in earnF (-.08). This reflects the relatively small
share of the female spouse in total family earnings, on average. The unemployment shock also
leads to a small increase in nly . Because the percentage increase is small and nonlabor (unearned)
income is small relative to earnings, the initial drop in y is close to the drop in earnF . One year
after the unemployment shock, y is only about .05 below the baseline, and it recovers slowly after
that. Panels C and D of figure 4 show the corresponding responses for married men. The mean
drop in employment and hours is larger than for married women. This is mostly because a larger
share of males are working at age 34 in the baseline. As is the case for women, the employment
probability recovers quickly, and at age 35 it is only about 0.18 below the baseline. However, for
men as well as women, the wage rate also falls following the shock and recovers only gradually; as
a result earnings (earn) recover more slowly than hours. Finally, the drop in earn leads to a drop
in y of 0.39 and in y ae also of 0.39, which is much larger than for females.
       Appendix Figure A14 shows the effects of unemployment shocks on the labor market and income
outcomes for single women and single men. The results for these two groups are broadly similar.
They are also similar to the results for married men, except for the fact that single men and women
experience a larger percentage decline in family earnings and income. This is of course because they
do not have a spouse's earnings as a cushion.
       For both married and single women and men, shutting down the marriage and sorting channels
mostly does not make much of a difference in the response of family income to an unemployment
shock (Appendix Figure A15). The exception is that for single men eliminating the marriage channel
  38
     Valuing housework at the 40th percentile of the female wage distribution reduces the gender gap further, but
only modestly (not reported). The same analysis using observations before and after a divorce shows that the gender
gap in the coefficients M ARit is 0.872 for y aeit and 0.631 for ln((Yit + HWit · wage 25)/AEit ). (See Appendix Table
A11b). Results are broadly similar when we use all observations (Appendix Table A11c). Constructing AEit under
the alternative assumption that single men do not live with their children increases gender differences in the effects
of marriage and increases the effect of account for home production by a similar proportion (not shown).
  39
     The drop is smaller than 1 because 67.6% of married women are not employed in the baseline simulation at
age 34 and because 10% of the women leave employment age 35 in the baseline simulation. That is, differences in
employment probabilities at baseline explain part of the differences in the effects of the shock. An alternative would
have been to restrict the shock to those who are employed.


                                                         29
reduces the negative impact of unemployment from -0.13 to -0.10 four years after the shock.

5.4    Wage Shocks
Figure 5 panels A and B show the mean responses to a positive, one-standard-deviation innovation
in the persistent wage component, it . The shock is 0.145 at age 34 for married women. It leads
to a 4% increase in work hours, reflecting the positive labor supply elasticity. As a result, earn
increases by 0.185. After the shock period, the hourly wage and thus hours and earnings return
slowly towards the baseline. Figure 5 panel B shows that the increase in earnings results in a smaller
increase in y and y ae.
   Figure 5 panels C and D show the corresponding responses for married men, for whom a one-
standard-deviation wage shock is 0.130. In panel C, the main difference compared to married women
is that men's work hours do not respond to the wage shock, reflecting their near-zero labor supply
elasticity. As a result, the increase in earnings is in line with the wage rate. Also, the shock decays
more quickly for men. In panel D, the increase in earn leads to a much larger increase in earnF
and y than in the case of women because the male spouse typically contributes a larger share of
family earnings.
   Appendix Figure A16 shows the responses of unmarried men and women to a wage shock. The
labor supply response of unmarried women is between that of married women and men. Wage
shocks have a proportionately larger effect on family income for unmarried men and women than
for their married counterparts, reflecting the absence of a spouse's earnings.
   Shutting down marriage and sorting channels makes little difference for married men and women
(panels B and A of Appendix Figure A17). For single men (panel D), eliminating both channels
reduces the effect of a wage shock on family income from about 0.06 to 0.04 six years after the
shock. It leads to a similar reduction for single women (panel C).

5.5    Effect of a Birth on Labor Market Outcomes and Income
Figure 6 panel A displays the labor market responses of married women to the birth of a child at age
34. Employment falls noticeably for a few years following childbirth and then slowly recovers. The
response profile reflects dynamics in the labor force status model as well the fact that the effects of
children decline as they age. Work hours fall by about 25 log points over the first 5 years following
the birth and by about 11 log points over the next 7 years. The wage also gradually falls. The wage
decline is due to both the direct effect of children and feedback from past employment status to
wages. The declines in the wage and hours lead earn to fall by 0.25 initially and by 0.30 in the first 5
years following childbirth. Figure 6 panel B shows that despite this large decline in female earnings,
earnF falls by only about 0.06 because it includes the earnings of the male spouse. Similarly, y


                                                  30
declines by only 0.05 for the first 5 years after the birth. The additional child mechanically leads
to a substantial drop in y ae however.
   Figures 7 panels A and B show the labor market and income responses for unmarried women.
In interpreting these responses, keep in mind that births have a strong positive effect on transitions
into marriage, as we document in the next section. The drop of 0.255 in earn is only a little larger
than in the case of married women. It is associated with an initial 0.139 decline in y , but also with
a noticeable increase in nly , likely reflecting government transfers (Figure 7 panel B). However,
earnF returns to close to the baseline after 3 years despite the large drop in earn.
   Panels C and D of figures 6 and 7 show the effects of children on married and unmarried men.
The response of employment, hours, hourly wages, and earnings is small for both groups. This
is because children have trivial effects on male employment, because we excluded children from
the hours and wage functions in light of finding no evidence that they play a significant role, and
because marital status changes induced by children have only modest labor market effects for men.
For married men, y ae falls by about 0.22 log points, mostly due to the mechanical effect of the
child on AE .
   Panels A and B of Figure 8 explore the role of the marriage and sorting channels in the response
of y to a birth at age 34. Panel A shows that shutting down the marriage channel increases the
negative effect of a childbirth on family income for married women. Without the marriage channel,
the birth does not reduce divorce, which reduces earnings from a spouse. The sorting channel makes
little difference. Panel B shows that the role of the marriage and sorting channels are qualitatively
similar for married men, but are smaller in magnitude.
   In the absence of an effect of children on marriage, the drop in y for unmarried women would
be much larger and more persistent (Appendix Figure A18 panel A). For single men, eliminating
the marriage channel changes the response of y from 0.04 after 4 years to about -0.03 (Figure A18
panel B). Eliminating sorting increases the response by about 0.02.

5.6    Effects of Labor Market and Fertility Shocks on the Marriage Prob-
       ability
Figure 9 panels A-D show the mean response of M ARit to various shocks at age 34 for married and
unmarried men and women. The solid line is for married men, the long-dashed line is for single
men, the short-dashed line is for married women, and the dash-dotted line is for single women.
   An unemployment shock (panel A) has little effect on the path of the probability of being married
for females, whether initially married or unmarried. For single men the unemployment shock has a
large negative effect on the probability of being married--about 0.06. We have already noted that
unemployment shocks have a substantial negative effect on earnings. Presumably the negative effect


                                                 31
on marriage is because an unemployed man is a less attractive partner. Furthermore, the effect is
fairly persistent. For married men the marriage probability falls by 0.02 following the unemployment
shock. This is two-thirds of the simulated divorce probability for marriages in progress at age 34.
      Panels B and C show the response of marital status to a positive, one-standard-deviation wage
shock. The shock has a small positive effect on the marriage probability for unmarried men (the
long-dashed line in panel B) and no discernible effect on the marriage path for the other three
groups.
      Finally, panel D shows the mean response of marital status to the birth of a child at age 34.
Taken at face value, the figure indicates a large increase in the probability of being married for both
unmarried men and women. A substantial part of this effect is probably attributable to couples
who were already in a relationship and for whom the birth of a child led to a decision to marry.40
Another part may reflect couples who simultaneously decided to have a child and get married, in
which case the birth is a choice and not a shock. There is also a smaller but notable increase in
the probability of being married for both married men and women, suggesting that a birth makes
separations less likely. But it may also reflect bias from unobserved heterogeneity. The bias would
arise if couples who are unobservably more likely to have children also have high values of the
marriage specific heterogeneity error component, which lowers the divorce probability.

5.7       Effects of Spousal Wage and Unemployment Shocks
So far, we have examined the responses of individuals' outcomes to their own shocks. Figure 10
panels A-D show how married individuals respond to shocks that affect their spouses. Panel A shows
that the employment and the wage rate of a married woman respond very little to her husband's
unemployment shock. However, her work hours and earnings increase by about 4%. Panel B shows
that married women reduce work hours (and therefore earnings) by about 3% following a positive
one-standard-deviation shock to her husband's wage. In contrast, married men do not respond to
unemployment or wage shocks experienced by their spouses (panels C and D).

5.8       Effects of Education and the Permanent Wage Component on the
          Wage, Earnings, Hours, and Income Over the Life cycle
Figure 11 panel A presents the difference between the mean paths of the wage rate, work hours,
earnings, and family income for women with 16 years of education and women with only 12 years
of education. The education gap in the wage rate increases from about 0.33 at age 25 to 0.40 at
age 29 to about 0.49 late in life (long-dashed green line). More educated women also work more
hours (short-dashed burgundy line). The education gap in hours drops from 0.48 to about 0.09
 40
      Keep in mind that marriage includes couples who have been cohabiting for at least a year.


                                                         32
from ages 25 to late 30s and early 40s, likely reflecting the fact that more educated women have
children later in life. The gap then rises to about 0.34 by age 55. The education differential in earn
(dash-dotted blue line) is large, reflecting both the wage and hours. The gap is about 0.81 early
in life, declines along with the hours differential during the child-rearing years, and then returns to
about 0.84 by age 55. The education differential in y is also large throughout the lifecycle (solid
red line). It starts at 0.18 and peaks at about 0.66 (or 93%) at age 55. The education differential
in y ae (not shown) is even larger, with a more pronounced dip associated with children between
age 36 and age 46.
       Figure 11 panel B is the corresponding figure for men. Here, too, the education differences in
wage, earn, and y are large. The education gap in earn (dash-dotted blue line) rises steadily from
0.21 in the mid-20s to about 0.88 at age 55. The gap in y (solid red line) also starts at about 0.2 and
rises to more than 0.6. There are some interesting gender differences in the temporal patterns of
these differentials that are probably due to gender differences in the effect of marriage and children
on hours and wage rates. For men, the education differential in wages and hours increases almost
monotonically over the lifecycle. The education differential in hours is only about 0.05 for men in
their mid-20s, but it rises to about 0.4 by age 55.
       Figure 12 panels A and B consider the permanent wage component µ and report the effect of a
one-standard-deviation increase in µ from its mean of 0 on the average paths of wage, hours, earn,
and y . The standard deviations of µ are 0.243 for women and 0.277 for men. Panel A shows that
the mean of wage for high-µ women is about 0.24 above the value for average-µ women throughout
the lifecycle. Hours, which respond only weakly to the wage rate, are about 4.7% higher for high-µ
women throughout. As a result, earn is about 0.29 higher for high-µ women throughout. Total
family income is about 0.18 higher for high-µ women.
       The patterns for men in Figure 12 panel B are broadly similar to those for women, but µ is
a little more important. High-µ men earn about 0.30 more than average-µ men throughout the
lifecycle, and their total family income is about 0.23 higher on average but the differential declines
slightly with age.41

5.8.1      The Role of the Marriage and Sorting Channels in the Response of Family
           Income to Education and µ

Figure 13 panel A shows that eliminating the marriage channel reduces the female college-to-high
school differential in the path of log family income (y ) by an amount that starts at 0.0 and rises
slowly with age to about 0.09 (the difference between the solid black line and the short-dashed red
  41
    Keep in mind that the log wage equations and the assortative mating model exclude interactions between ait
and µi .




                                                     33
line).42 Eliminating both the sorting and the marriage channels reduces the education differential
by an amount that increases from about 0.06 at age 25 to about 0.30 in the early 50s. The 0.30
reduction is very large relative to the base of about 0.66. Thus positive assortative mating plays a
critical role in the economic return to education for women­especially later in life.
      For men, eliminating the marriage channel reduces the college-to-high school differential in y
by an amount that starts at 0 and rises to about 0.04 (panel B). Closing both the marriage and
sorting channels reduces the education differential in y by an amount that rises from 0.06 at age
25 to about 0.16 at age 55, when the differential in the base case is 0.62. Thus, assortative mating
by education matters considerably more for women, largely because married women contribute a
smaller share of family income.
      For women, eliminating both the sorting and marriage channels reduces the effect of a one-
standard-deviation increase in µ from about 0.176 to about 0.124 (Figure 13 panel C). The lion's
share of the reduction is due to eliminating sorting. For men, eliminating the 2 channels reduces
the effect of µ by about 0.014 early in life and about 0.04 in the early 50s (Figure 13 panel D). Most
of the reduction is from eliminating sorting, as was the case for women, but the reduction is much
smaller.
      To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to quantify the role of marital sorting and
the probability of marriage and divorce in determining the income effects of education and the
permanent wage component over the lifecycle.


6       Variance Decompositions of Labor Market Outcomes and
        Income over a Lifetime
This section uses the model to decompose the variance (across individuals) of various outcomes into
the contributions of several sources of variation. The outcomes considered are hourly wages, work
hours, (individual) earnings, family earnings, nonlabor (or unearned) income, family income, and
family income per adult equivalent. The sources of variation are: (1) education; (2) the permanent
wage component µi ; (3) the permanent employment component i and hours component i ; (4) the
i.i.d. shocks to employment status plus variation in initial employment conditional on education,
                                                             w                
marital status, and number of children; (5) the initial draw i 25 and shocks uit to the autoregressive
               w                         h                    h     h
wage component it ; (6) the initial draw i 25 and the shocks uit to it plus the i.i.d. hours shocks

h
it ; (7) the initial draw and shocks to the autoregressive component of unearned income; (8) the

random component ED
                 it
                    s
                                                                          ~s
                      of the spouse's education; (9) the random component µ i of µsi ; (10) si

and si ; and (11) the random component ~ sit0 of the initial condition sit0 and shocks usit . Finally,
 42
      Appendix Figure A19 panels A and B present results for earnF .



                                                        34
we measure (12) the contribution of random variation in marriage histories conditional on the vector
              w
[µi , i , i , it (ai25 ) , EDU Ci ]. The importance of the spouse's components depends of course on the

amount of time an individual spends married.
       We do not consider the contributions of post-marriage shocks to the spouse's employment status
and hours. Nor do we consider the effect of random variation in the number of children­which we
suspect is quantitatively significant. For example, an unplanned pregnancy influences the path of
marital status and has mechanical effects on AEit . The effects of the various factors we do consider
that operate through number of children are accounted for.

6.1       Variance Decomposition Methods
We perform the variance decompositions as follows. We use our model to simulate a large number
of individuals from age 25 to age 55. We use the simulated data to compute each individual's
annual average, from age 25 to 55, of the specified outcome (e.g. log earnings or log family income),
and then compute the variance­across individuals­of those "lifetime outcomes." Next we repeat
the model simulation, but this time we set the variance of the particular random component in
the model (e.g. the innovation to the autoregressive wage component) to 0.43 We use the drop in
the variance of the specified outcome relative to the base case as the estimated contribution of the
particular source of variation.
       We use a different procedure to measure the contribution of marriage uncertainty, to sidestep
complications posed by the fact that marital status switches the equations governing many variables
in the model. An individual's marital history between ages 25 and 55 is uniquely summarized by
the variable M DU Ri25 and the vector of values (0s or 1s) that Mit takes at each age between
25 and 55. For each simulated life, we construct the categorical variable M HISTi that contains
this information. Lifetime family income and the other variables in our model are functions of
education, the initial draws of employment, marital status, children, the permanent heterogeneity
components, the various shocks to the sample members, the shocks to the spouse (if the sample
member is married at the time), and the error terms in the marriage transition model. If all
of the effects were additive and linear, we could first regress lifetime income on the simulated
values of all variables except marriage history and then measure the marginal contribution to
explained variance (corrected for degrees of freedom) by adding fixed effects for each unique value
of M HISTi . However, the number of variables in the simulation model is large and the model is
highly nonlinear. Rather than using machine learning methods, we opted for the simpler approach
  43
    In the case of education, we set EDU Ci to its birth-cohort-specific mean by gender, and condition only on
cohort and gender when drawing the initial values of employment, marriage, and number of children at age 25. For
labor force status, we turn off employment status shocks by setting Eit , Uit , and Nit to their predicted probabilities
conditional on the variables in the employment status model, including  , but with the shocks set to 0.



                                                          35
of using a 3rd-order polynomial with pairwise interactions up to the second order of variables in
the vector [µi , i , i , it(ai25 ) , EDU Ci ]. We decided to exclude the vector of wage, labor force status,
and hours shocks, as these variables are hard to summarize in a simple way, and the IRFs in section
5 indicate that wage shocks and employment shocks have only a moderate influence on marriage
transitions. Some of the unexplained variance in the regression model will be due to these shocks
as well as interactions between the marital history and the various shocks. However, at least part
of the contribution of these interactions will be captured by the change in variance when we shut
down the effects of EDU Ci , µi , etc.44
       We focus on the lifetime average of the logs of the variables. If utility from consumption is
time-separable and the period-specific utility function depends on the log of consumption, then in
the case of income the average of the logs might provide a better guide to the determinants of
lifetime utility than the average of the levels, especially if individuals do not smooth consumption
much.45
       Tables 5a and 5b report the percentage of the variance explained by each factor for women and
men, respectively. We have excluded the contributions of fertility shocks, the spouse's labor market
shocks u       h     h
        sit , usit , sit , and the i.i.d. employment shocks from the decomposition. Furthermore, the

model is nonlinear, which means that interactions among the factors can amplify the contribution of
some factor and lead the marginal contribution of some sources to be negative. Column 16 reports
the sum of percentages explained by the factors we consider. The difference between this value and
100 is the fraction explained by a residual category that captures the combined contributions of the
factors that we omit and the nonlinear interactions.
       Columns 14 and 15 report the mean and standard deviation across individuals of the lifetime
sum of each row variable, expressed on an annual basis. For example, in the case of log earnings
(row 1), these columns report the mean and standard deviation (across i) of earni , where earni =
  55
  t=25   earnit /31. The magnitudes of the annualized lifetime sums are easier to think about, but
this choice has no effect on the decompositions. In the text that follows, variables with only an i
subscript refer to the annualized sums. Bootstrap standard errors of the variance contributions are
in parentheses.
  44
     One way to account for these shocks would be to extend the analysis of the contribution of random variation
of marriage histories by defining histories not just in terms of marital status pattern but also in terms of value of
the vector of employment shocks, hours shocks, and wage shocks that affect the spouse after a marriage is formed.
One would have to aggregate in some way to keep the unique set of histories manageable. We leave this to future
research.
  45
     Decompositions of the variances of the log of the lifetime sums of the levels of the variables are similar to
those for the average of the annual values of the logs (not reported). Decompositions of sum of the levels of
earnings, family earnings, family income, and family income per adult equivalent indicate that own education is
more important for men, and that random variation in spouse characteristics is even more important for women than
the log decompositions show. They also show a less important role for variation in marriage history (not reported).




                                                         36
6.2     Results for the Variance Decompositions
6.2.1   Lifetime Variance Decompositions for Women

We begin with the results for women in Table 5a. The first row reports the decomposition of
var(earni ). Education (column 1) is a key factor, accounting for 26.4% (3.1) of the variance. This
contribution operates primarily through wages rather than hours: education accounts for 32.6%
(4.1) of var(wagei ), but only 8.8% (2.2) of var(houri ).
   The fourth row shows that among women EDU Ci contributes 30.5% (3.1) of var(earnF i ). This
is even larger than the share for individual earnings. The analysis in Section 5.8.1 indicates that
marital sorting is the reason. On the other hand, education accounts for only 2.5% (1.1) of the
variance in nonlabor (or unearned) income (row 5). All told, education accounts for 28.4% (2.8) of
var(yi ) and 32.5% (2.6) of var(y aei ).
   We next turn to the three permanent unobserved heterogeneity components (µi , i , i ). The
wage component µi accounts for 17.6% (4.7) of var(earni ) for females. It contributes 37.0% (9.6)
to var(wagei ), but only 0.38% (0.73) to var(hoursi ). The employment and hours components i
and i together account for 17.8% (2.9) of the variance of earni , reflecting a contribution of 40.6%
(7.0) to var(hoursi ).
   All told, µi explains 12.8% (2.3) of var(yi ) and 14.2% (2.6) of var(y aei ).The corresponding
values for the joint contribution of i and i are 6.2% (1.2) and 6.1% (1.2). The three permanent
factors plus education account for 47.4% of var(yi ) and 52.8% of var(y aei ) among females.
   The transitory error components of the multinomial model of Eit , Uit and Nit (column 4) explain
little of the variance of yi or y aei . The initial draw and innovations in the autoregressive hours
          h
component it and the iid error h
                               it (column 6) are more important: they contribute 4.6% (1.4)

of var(earnF i ) and 0.7% (1.1) of var(y aei ). These contributions reflect the fact that for women
hours shocks drive 19.4% (8.3) of the variance in lifetime hours. The reason for the relatively small
contribution of hours shocks to var(y aei ) is that marriage rates are high, women are employed less
than men, and there is no marital sorting on hours (conditional on other variables).
   We next turn to the initial draw and innovations in the autoregressive wage component it
(column 5). These account for 27.4% (12.6) of the variance in wagei , 14.5% (7.9) of the variance
in earni , and 7.9% (4.1) of the variance in y aei . The importance of it for family income is due in
part to the fact that it contributes to the variance of spousal earnings over the woman's lifetime,
mostly through assortative mating.
   Shocks to unearned income (column 7) account for 58.4% (4.2) of var(nly aei ). However, their
contribution to var(y aei ) is -11.1% (1.0) even though the shocks are independent of the other
driving variables in the model. We do not have a good handle as to why the contribution is as
negative as it is.

                                                  37
       Columns 8-10 consider variation in the spouse's permanent variables EDU Csi , µsi , si , and si
conditional on the sample member's characteristics. These are contributions of random matching.
In the case of education this is ED
                                 it
                                    s
                                      . Variation in ED
                                                     it
                                                        s
                                                          is important for women, accounting for
7.3% (0.9) of var(y aei ) (column 8). The other key component is µ
                                                                 ~s , the random component of µs
(column 9). It accounts for 7.8% (1.2) of var(y aei ). Variation in ~si and ~si together contribute
only 3.0% (0.8), which is less than we would have expected given that i and i account for 11.4 (2.2)
of var(y aei ) for men (Table 5b). The contribution of random matching on sit0 plus subsequent
shocks to sit (column 11) contribute 1.5% (0.73) to var(y aei ).
       Finally, we turn to the marginal contribution of variation in marriage histories conditional on
the permanent characteristics [µi , i , i , it(ai25 ) , EDU Ci ] of women (column 12). The contribution
is 4.6% (0.7) of the variation in earni , 9.2% (1.1) of variation in yi , but only 0.66% (0.15) of the
variation in y aei . Even though these contributions are net of the variation in marriage patterns
driven by the permanent characteristics, we had expected variation in marriage histories to matter
more for earni and y aei for women. There is substantial variation in the amount of time that
women are married between ages 25 and 50. In the simulated data, the 10th, 50th and 90th
percentiles of years married at age 50 are 12, 27 and 33. Using marital histories in the PSID for
the 109 women in our sample from the 1944-1964 birth cohorts who are observed at or after age
50, the corresponding values are 10, 28, and 33. (Because our sample ends in 1996, all were born
in 1944-1946.)
       The small contribution of marriage history to var(y aei ) is not because we are only reporting
the marginal contribution of marital history conditional on the permanent characteristics of i. We
established this by estimating the variance of the marriage history fixed effects, correcting for
sampling error in the fixed effects. This includes the marginal contribution to the variance plus
a contribution that is shared with the permanent characteristics. The sampling-error-corrected
variance of the marriage-history fixed effects is 0.70% of the variance of y aei , which is only slightly
larger than the marginal contribution. The sampling-error-corrected standard deviation of the
marital-history fixed effects for y aei is 0.041, which is 8.2% of the standard deviation of y aei
for women (0.50).46 On the other hand, the contribution of marital history to the variance of yi
is fairly large. The sampling-error-corrected standard deviation of the marriage history effects is
0.162 (0.01) while the standard deviation of yi is 0.54.
  46
    We computed the variance of the marriage-history fixed effects in the simulated data (weighted by frequency of
each marital history), subtracted off an estimate of the sample variance of the fixed effects and took the square root.
We dropped fixed effects associated with marriage histories that occurred fewer than 20 times in the simulation.




                                                          38
6.2.2      Lifetime Variance Decompositions for Men

Table 5b shows a similar decomposition of lifetime variances for men. The main differences, relative
to females, are as follows. First, education (column 1) contributes much more to var(earni ) for men
than for women (38.4% (3.2) versus 26.4% (3.1)), but the gap is smaller for var (yi ) (35.9% (2.7) vs
28.4% (2.8) and much smaller for var(y aei ) (33.6% (2.5) vs 32.5% (2.6)). The relative importance
of female education is higher for family income variables despite the fact that the female share of
earnings is relatively low for married couples because the education of women has a bigger effect on
spouse's education, and the education of male spouses has a larger direct effect on family earnings.
       Second, the wage component µi , like education, plays a much larger role for males (column 2). It
accounts for 30.2% (3.8) of var(earni ) and 23.3% (2.4) of var(y aei ). The value for y aei compares
to 14.2% (2.6) for women. Furthermore, random variation in EDU Cs and µ
                                                                      ~s contributes only 2.9%
(0.6) and 2.2% (0.8) of the variance in y aei (columns 8 and 9), which is about a third of the values
for women.
       Third, the innovations to the autoregressive wage component (column 5) and the autoregressive
and iid hours components (column 6) are less important for men than for women. Together, they
account for 7.1% of var(earni ) for men, compared with 19.3% for women. The discrepancy in the
contribution to var(yi ) and var(y aei ) is smaller, reflecting the fact that men contribute a larger
share of earnings in most marriages for the cohort we consider.
       Fourth, for men random variation in marital histories conditional on [µi , i , i , it(ai25 ) , EDU Ci ]
contributes only 0.4% (0.1) of var(earni ) and 2.0% (0.4) to the variance in yi (column 12). These
values are well below the values for women. However, marital history contributes 3.5% (0.6) to
var(y aei ) which is more than 5 times the percentage for women. This is probably because the
presence of children varies more strongly with marital status for men than for women.47 The
sampling-error-corrected standard deviation of the marital-history fixed effect for y aei is 0.091
(0.01), while the standard deviation of y aei is 0.472. (The contribution of marital history to
var(y aei ) rises to 4.5% when we construct aei assuming that single men do not live with their
children.)

6.2.3      The Effect of Marital Sorting on Lifetime Inequality

We have already reported estimates of the contribution of random variation in spouse's character-
istics conditional on the sample member's characteristics to lifetime inequality. As we mentioned in
the introduction, a number of papers address a related question: how much higher or lower would
inequality be if choice of marriage partners was completely random? Most of these papers focus on
  47
    If we add controls for the lifetime sums of the child indicators to the regressions used to measure the variance
conribution of random variation in marriage, the contribution to y aei falls to 0.05% for men and actually increases
to 2.4% for women (not reported).


                                                        39
inequality at a point in time using cross-sectional datasets such as the Current Population Survey
or the American Community Survey in the U.S. case.
      Our model enables us to compare the lifetime variances under observed patterns of sorting with
the case of fully random sorting on EDU Csi , µsi , and the draw of sit at the start of the marriage.
To do so, we conduct a counterfactual simulation in which we draw EDU Csi , µsi , and sit at
random from the corresponding marginal distributions of these variables. We keep the marriage
transition equations the same, so there is still some selection into marriage for sample members.
The contribution of sorting is the difference between the lifetime variance with sorting (the baseline
case) and the variance with random matching divided by the variance without sorting.
      Appendix Table A12 columns 1-4 report the results for women. Column 1 reports the contribu-
tion of sorting on education in percentages. The values are 11.1% (1.4) for earnF i , 11.6% (1.3) for
yi , and 12.9% (1.3) for y aei . The corresponding values for the contribution of sorting on µ (column
2) are 3.0% (0.9), 3.6% (1.0), and 4.5% (1.1). The contribution of sorting on  (column 3) is small.
Column 4 reports that altogether, sorting on education, µ, and  accounts for 13.7% (1.5), 15.1%
(1.5), and 17.2% (1.5) of the variances of earnF i , yi , and y aei . Thus, we find that marital sorting
substantially increases the variance of lifetime outcomes for women­especially sorting on education.
      Sorting matters somewhat less for men, as shown in columns 5-8 of the same table. The combined
contribution of sorting on EDU Ci , µi , and it (column 8) is 13.2 (1.6)% for earnF i , 14.0% (1.5)
for yi , and 14.0% (1.4) for y aei . Sorting on education matters much less for men, but this is
partially offset by the other factors. The smaller role of sorting for men reflects the disproportionate
contribution of married men to family earnings, and the fact that partner characteristics have little
direct influence on male earnings.
      The bottom rows of the table report the contribution of sorting to the lifetime variance of the
individual's earnings, wage rates, and work hours. Interestingly, for women sorting on education
reduces the variance of earni and hoursi by substantial amounts: -6.0% (1.1) and -5.6% (1.2).
These negative contributions reduce the overall contribution of sorting to family earnings and family
income. Presumably, this reflects the influence of the husband's education and wage on female labor
supply, because sorting contributes only -0.5% (0.5) to the variance of wage rates. For men, sorting
has almost no effect on the variance of earnings, wages, or hours.

6.2.4      Variance Decompositions at Specific Ages

Appendix Tables A13a and A13b report decompositions of the (cross-sectional) variance at various
specific ages for women and men, respectively.48 To save space, we discuss only a few of the
results, beginning with marriage history. For women, marriage history (column 12) is important
 48
      Standard errors based on 500 bootstrap replications are in parentheses.



                                                          40
at early ages, but its importance declines dramatically for older ages.49 It explains 12.9% (1.35)
of var(earnit ) at age 26, 6.0% (0.8) at age 35, and only 0.1% (0.1) at age 55.50 The disparity
across ages is smaller if one controls for children (not shown). The contribution of marital history
to var(yit ) is 34.8% (1.9) at 26, 10.1% (1.0) at 35, and only 0.9% (0.3) at age 55. The small
contribution at age 55 seems surprising. At this age the difference between married and unmarried
women in the mean of yit is 1.13 in the simulated data. The corresponding variance contributions
for y aeit are about one-fifth as large and also decline sharply with age.
       For men (Table A13b), marital history contributes 1.4% (0.4) of var(earnit ) at age 26, 0.7%
(0.2) at age 35, and 0.05% (0.02) at age 55. The low values reflect the low sensitivity of male labor
supply and wages to marriage and children. The corresponding values for var(yit ) are 11.0% (1.0),
3.2% (0.5), and 0.13% (0.1). The values for var(y aeit ) are 8.6% (0.9), 6.4% (0.7), and 0.03% (0.02).
They are 11.1% (1.0), 7.6% (0.8), and 0.03% (0.02) when we use the alternative definition of aeit
(not shown).
       Not surprisingly, transitory employment shocks, and especially hours shocks, are important for
earnings and family income at a given age. For example, for 35-year-old women, hours shocks (col-
umn 6) contribute 31.7% (2.2) of var(earnit ), 11.7% (1.1) of var (yit ), and 10.5% (1.0) of var(y aeit ).
The corresponding values for men are 30.7% (1.8), 20.5% (1.2), and 17.3% (0.9).
       For women the contribution of EDU Ci (column 1) to var(earnit ) is 11.4% (1.6) at age 26, 9.4%
(1.4) at age 35, and 18.6% (2.9) at age 55. The education share of the wage variance also follows
a shallow U-shaped pattern. For men, the education share of var(earnit ) rises from 8.5% (1.2) at
age 26 to 25.2% (3.3) at age 55. It is driven by a similar rise for the wage and a smaller increase
for hours. The education share of var(yit ) and var(y aeit ) rises substantially with age for both men
and women.
       The contribution of µi (column 2) to var(earnit ) is between 8% and 9% at all ages for women,
and it is between 5.9% and 6.8% for var(y aeit ). For men, µ contributes 22.8% (2.1) of var(earnit )
at age 26 and 10.1% (1.6) at age 55. The values for var(y aeit ) are 15.5% (1.4) and 9.0% (1.2).
       For women the contribution of it (column 5) to var(earnit ) rises from 5.0% (1.8) at age 26 to
16.4% (4.3) at age 35 and 19.2% (6.7) at age 55. Its contributions to var(yit ) and var(y aeit ) are
slightly less than 5% at age 26, and roughly double that value at age 55. For men, the values for
var(yit ) are 7.8% (1.8) at age 26, 10.1% (1.9) at age 35, and 4.8% (1.3) at age 55­which are below
the female values at older ages. This reflects the fact that for men the importance of it in earnings
falls relative to education and the permanent employment and hours components i and i . The
  49
     In the age-specific variance decompositions the marital history variable takes on a unique value for each combi-
nation of the age-specific marital status indicators between 25 and the specified age. As noted earlier, marriages at
age 25 of different durations are treated as different marriage states.
  50
     We report results for age 26 rather than 25 because we think the model understates the contribution of it at
age 25. It implies a large increase var(it ) between age 25 and 26, when the first shock to it hits.


                                                         41
contribution of i and i (column 3) to var(yit ) rises from 6.3% (1.3) at age 26 to 20.7% (3.4) at
age 55, when more men are near the employment margin. The corresponding values for women are
2.9% (0.7) and only 4.9% (0.9).


7     Conclusion
We provide a model of family income over the lifecycle and use it to shed light on the mechanisms
through which permanent differences across people and various shocks determine variation in family
income. Doing so is not easy, because family income profiles depend on a complex set of factors.
Individual earnings alone depend upon education and other permanent skill and labor supply pref-
erence determinants. Earnings are also driven by job-search-related shocks to wages, changes in
worker-specific productivity stemming from health events as well as firm and occupation level shifts
in product demand, layoffs, and factors that shift work preferences over time. Furthermore, individ-
ual earnings are only part of family income. One must also consider fertility, marriage and divorce,
marital sorting, shocks affecting the earnings of a spouse, and determination of nonlabor income.
    In constructing the model, we have drawn on many papers that have considered pieces of the
lifetime family income puzzle, and many of our estimates are consistent with the literature. However,
both the specification and estimation of the model leave room for improvement. The fit is less than
ideal, and it would be difficult to fully evaluate the extent to which shortcomings of the model
influence our main empirical findings. Nevertheless, we think that it is an important first step
toward an integrated empirical model of earnings, marriage, and family income.
    The model parameters, the impulse response functions, and the variance decompositions of
the earnings components and income provide useful information about many aspects of the family
income process. There are far too many results to discuss even in the text, let alone summarize in
the conclusion. Instead, we emphasize four key findings.
    First, divorce has a more positive effect on own earnings and a much more negative effect on
family income (and family income per adult equivalent) for women than for men. The effects of
marriage are similar to the effects of divorce, but opposite in sign.
    Second, positive wage shocks have a much larger positive effect on the path of family income for
married men than for married women. Similarly, unemployment shocks have much larger negative
effects for married men than for married women. The effects of labor market shocks on single men
and single women are more similar.
    Third, marital sorting, and random variation in spouse characteristics, are more important for
women than for men in shaping lifetime family income­at least for the 1944-1964 birth cohort
that we focus on. For women, a much larger share of the effect of education and the permanent
component of wages on average family income is due to effects on the human capital of spouses.

                                                  42
This is reflected in the fact that own education and the permanent wage component account for
28.4% and 12.8% of the variation in lifetime family income for women, but 35.9% and 25.9% for
men. The gender difference is smaller for family income per adult equivalent but still large for the
wage component. Furthermore, spouse characteristics matter more for women. Random variation
in the spouse's education and permanent wage component account for three times as much variation
in lifetime income per adult equivalent for women than for men. Shutting down the effect of these
variables on marriage probabilities, and especially on marital sorting, reduces the value of own
education and permanent income much more for women than for men.
       Fourth, random variation in marital histories conditional on education and other permanent
determinants of own earnings accounts for 9.2% of the variance in lifetime family income for women
and 2.0% for men. In the case of lifetime family income per adult equivalent, the variance contri-
bution is small regardless of gender.
       There is a large research agenda. First, the rich administrative data over a long time span that
is available in Denmark, Sweden, or Norway would permit one to follow both marriage partners
before a marriage forms and after it breaks up, assuming that long-term partners who are not legally
married can be identified.
       Second, change over time should be examined. Many of the gender asymmetries that we find
reflect the fact that for the cohorts we study, married men have higher employment rates, work
hours, and wage rates, are responsible for about two-thirds of family earnings, and respond little
to the presence of children. By implication, this asymmetry should be less pronounced for more
recent cohorts, for whom the female share of earnings for married couples is higher, marriage and
fertility rates are lower, and the use of daycare is higher. We do include flexible gender-specific
and in some cases marriage-status-specific secular trends and birth-cohort trends in our models.
But other model parameters have probably changed over time, including the effects of children and
wage on female labor supply, and the regression coefficients governing sorting.51 We are in the early
stages of a companion paper that will examine differences across cohorts.52
       Third, it would also be interesting to extend that analysis to include Black men and women,
given large racial differences in earnings and in marriage patterns.53
       Fourth, lifetime family income is not utility, even after an adjustment for adult equivalents.
Employment transitions and hours of work reflect consumer choice based on wages and the marginal
utility of income, not just labor market constraints and shocks to health or the needs of children
  51
     See, for example, Blau and Kahn (2007) and Heim (2007) on female labor supply, and Eika et al (2019) and
Chiappori et al (2020) on marital sorting on education.
  52
     The fact that the PSID shifted to a biennial interview schedule after 1997 poses a challenge for cohort comparisons.
  53
     One could combine the representative PSID SRC sample used in this paper with the PSID SEO sample, which
oversamples households headed by Black men, although coming up with appropriate weights is an issue. Matched
IRS and Census records used by Chetty et al (2018) are another option if access could be obtained.



                                                           43
and relatives that restrict time that can be devoted to market work. Marriage, and to a substantial
degree fertility, are also choices. We have not emphasized results based on consumption because the
imputed consumption measure that we use is poorly suited to our purposes. But one could improve
on this and perhaps use a cardinal utility function defined over children, leisure, and consumption
to study the behavior of utility. A fully specified behavioral model based on optimizing behavior
would be a natural but daunting step beyond the present paper.
      Fifth, one would like to know more about how much of the income variation we study reflects
uncertainty. This is important for assessing the role for self insurance through savings and for social
insurance.54
      Finally, much more could be learned about the effects of taxes and social insurance on the
distribution of lifetime resources. One could add equations for taxes and transfers with parameters
that depend on tax and transfer policy and examine how variation in policy over time or across
states influences inequality.




 54
      See Blundell et al (2008) and Blundell et al (2015).


                                                             44
   References
Abowd, J. and D. Card (1987): "Intertemporal labor supply and long-term employment contracts,"
American Economic Review, 77(1), 50­68.
   Abowd, J. and D. Card (1989): "On the covariance structure of hours and earnings changes,"
Econometrica, 57(2), 411­445.
   Abowd, J., F. Kramarz. and D. Margolis (1999): "High Wage Workers and High Wage Firms,"
Econometrica, 67(2), 251­333.
   Altonji, J. G., T. Dunn (1996): "The Effects of Family Characteristics on the Return to Edu-
cation," Review of Economics and Statistics, 78(4), 692­704.
   Altonji, J. G., A. Smith, and I. Vidangos (2013): "Modeling Earnings Dynamics," Econometrica,
81, 1395­1454.
   Altonji, J. G., A.P. Martins and A. Siow (2002): "Dynamic Factor Models of Wages, Hours, and
Earnings," Research in Economics, 56(1), 3­59.
   Altonji, J. G. and N. Williams (2005): "Do Wages Rise With Job Seniority? A Reassess-
ment,"Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 58(3), 370­397.
   Angrist, J. and W. Evans (1998): "Children and Their Parents' Labor Supply: Evidence from
Exogenous Variation in Family Size,"American Economic Review, 88(3), 450­477.
   Arellano, M., R. Blundell, and S. Bonhomme (2017): "Earnings and Consumption Dynamics:
A Nonlinear Panel Data Framework," Econometrica, 85(3), 693­734.
   Attanasio, O and L. Pistaferri (2017): "Consumption Inequality over the Last Half Century:
Some Evidence Using the New PSID Consumption Measure," American Economic Review, 104(5),
122­126.
   Bagger, J., F. Fontaine, F. Postel-Vinay, and J.M. Robin (2014): "Tenure, Experience, Human
Capital and Wages: A Tractable Equilibrium Search Model of Wage Dynamics," The American
Economic Review, 104(6), 1551­1596.
   Baker, M. and G. Solon (2003): "Earnings Dynamics and Inequality Among Canadian Men,
1976-1992: Evidence from Longitudinal Income Tax Records," Journal of Labor Economics, 21,
289­321.
   Baker, M. (1997): "Growth-rate heterogeneity and the covariance structure of life cycle earn-
ings," Journal of Labour Economics, 15(2), 338­375.
   Barlevy, G. (2008): "Identification of Search Models Using Record Statistics," Review of Eco-
nomic Studies, 75(1), 29­64.
   Blau, F. D., and L. M. Kahn (2017): "The Gender Wage Gap: Extent, Trends, and Explana-
tions," Journal of Economic Literature, 55(3), 789­865.



                                                 45
   Blau, F. D., and L. M. Kahn (2007): "Changes in the labor supply behavior of married women:
1980­2000," Journal of Labor Economics, 25(3), 393-438.
   Becker, G. (1973): "A Theory of Marriage: Part I,"Journal of Political Economy 81, 813­46.
   Becker, G. (1974): "A Theory of Marriage: Part 2,"Journal of Political Economy, 82, 11­26.
   Becker, G. (1981): "Altruism in the Family and Selfishness in the Market Place," Economica,
48(189), 1­15.
   Becker, G., E. Landes, and R. Michael (1977): "An Economic Analysis of Marital Instabil-
ity,"Journal of Political Economy, 85, 1141­1188.
   Blundell, R., M. Graber, and M. Mogstad (2015): "Labor income dynamics and the insurance
from taxes, transfers, and the family,"Journal of Public Economics, 127, 58­73.
   Blundell, R., L. Pistaferri, and I. Preston (2008): "Consumption inequality and partial insur-
ance,"American Economic Review, 98(5), 1887­1921.
   Browning, M., M. Ejrnaes, and J. Alvarez (2010): "Modelling Income Processes with Lots of
Heterogeneity," Review of Economic Studies, 77(4), 1353­1381.
   Browning, M., P.-A. Chiappori, and Y. Weiss (2014): "Economics of the Family,"Cambridge
University Press, 2014.
   Buchinsky, M., D. Foug`
                         ere, F. Kramarz, and R. Tchernis (2010): "Interfirm Mobility, Wages,
and the Returns to Seniority and Experience in the U.S.," Review of Economic Studies, 77(3),
972­1001.
   Burdett, K., and M. Coles (1997): "Marriage and Class," Quarterly Journal of Economics,
112(1), 141­168.
   Burdett, K., and M. Coles (1999): "Long-Term Partnership Formation: Marriage and Employ-
ment," Economics Journal, 109: F307­F334.
   Card, D., J. Heining, and P. Kline (2013): "Workplace Heterogeneity and the Rise of West
German Wage Inequality," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(3), 967­1015.
   Chamberlain, G. and K. Hirano (1999): "Predictive Distributions Based on Longitudinal Earn-
                      ´
ings Data," Annales d'Economie et de Statistiques, 55/56, 211­242.
   Chetty, R., J. N. Friedman, N. Hendren, M. R. Jones, and S. R. Porter (2018): "The opportunity
atlas: Mapping the childhood roots of social mobility,"Working Paper 25147. National Bureau of
Economic Research.
   Chiappori, P.-A., M. Iyigun, and Y. Weiss (2009). "Investment in Schooling and the Marriage
Market," American Economic Review, 99(5), 1689­1713.
   Chiappori, P.-A., and S. Oreffice (2008): "Birth Control and Female Empowerment: An Equi-
librium Analysis," Journal of Political Economy, 116(1), 113­140.
   Chiappori, P.-A., M. Costa Dias and C. Meghir (2020): "Changes in Assorted Matching: Theory


                                               46
and Evidence for the US," IFS Working Paper W20/10.
   Choo, E. and A. Siow (2006): "Who Marries Whom and Why," Journal of Political Economy,
114(1), 175­201.
   Davis, S. and T. von Wachter (2011): "Recessions and the Costs of Job Loss," Brookings Papers
on Economic Activity, Fall, 1­72.
   DeBacker, J., B. Heim, V. Panousi, S. Ramnath, and I. Vidangos (2013): "Rising Inequality:
Transitory or Persistent? New Evidence from a Panel of U.S. Tax Returns,"Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, Spring, 67­122.
   Eika, L., M. Mogstad and B. Zafar (2019): "Educational Assortative Mating and Household
Income Inequality,"Journal of Political Economy, 127(6), 2795­2835
   Fern´
       andez, R. , N. Guner, and J. Knowles (2005): "Love and Money: A Theoretical and Em-
pirical Analysis of Household Sorting and Inequality," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(1),
273­344.
   Fern´
       andez, R. and R. Rogerson (2001): "Sorting and Long-Run Inequality,"Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 116(4), 1305­1341.
   Geweke J. and M. Keane (2000): "An Empirical Analysis of Earnings Dynamics Among Men in
the PSID: 1968-1989," Journal of Econometrics, 96(2), 293­356.
   Goldin, C. (1990): "Understanding the Gender Gap: An Economic History of American Women,"
New York: Oxford University Press.
   Gottschalk, P. and R. Moffit (1994): "The Growth of Earnings Instability in the US Labor
Market,"Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 25(2), 217­272.
   Gouss´
        e, M., N. Jacquemet, and J.-M. Robin (2017): "Marriage, Labor Supply, and Home Pro-
duction," Econometrica, 85(6), 1873­1919.
   Guvenen, F., F. Karahan, S. Ozkan, and J. Song (2019): "What Do Data on Millions of U.S.
Workers Reveal about Life-Cycle Earnings Dynamics?" Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff
Reports, no. 710.
   Guvenen, F. (2009): "An Empirical Investigation of Labor Income Processes," Review of Eco-
nomic Dynamics, 12, 58­79.
   Haider, S.J. (2001): "Earnings Instability and Earnings Inequality of Males in the United States:
1967-1991," Journal of Labor Economics, 19(4), 799­836.
   Hause, J. (1980): "The fine structure of earnings and the on-the-job training hypothesis," Econo-
metrica, 48 (4), 1013­1029.
   Heim, B. T. (2007): "The incredible shrinking elasticities married female labor supply, 1978­
2002,"Journal of Human Resources, 42(4), 881­918.
   Hoffmann, F. (2019): "HIP, RIP, and the robustness of empirical earnings processes," Quanti-


                                                47
tative Economics, 10(3), 1279­1315.
   Hryshko, D. (2012): "Labor income profiles are not heterogeneous: Evidence from income growth
rates," Quantitative Economics, 3(2), 177­209.
   Jacobson, L., R. LaLonde and D. Sullivan (1993): "Earnings Losses of Displaced Workers,"
American Economic Review, 83(4), 685­709.
   Jacquemet N., and J.-M. Robin (2012): "Assortative Matching and Search with Labor Supply
and Home Production," CeMMAP WP 07-13.
   Johnson, W. R., and J. Skinner (1986): "Labor Supply and Marital Separation,"American
Economic Review, 76(3), 455­69.
   Karahan, F. and S. Ozkan (2013): "On the Persistence of Income Shocks over the Life Cycle:
Evidence, Theory and Implications," Review of Economic Dynamics, 16, 452­476.
   Keller M., D. Thiessen and R. Young (1996): "Mate Assortment in Dating and Married Cou-
ples," Personality and Individual Differences, 21(2), 217­221.
   Kleven, H., C. Landais, J. Posch, A. Steinhauer, and J. Zweim¨
                                                                uller (2019): "Child Penalties
Across Countries: Evidence and Explanations," AEA Papers and Proceedings, 109, 122­126.
   Kremer, M. (1997): "How Much Does Sorting Increase Inequality?" Quarterly Journal of Eco-
nomics, 112(1), 115­139.
   Kuziemko, I., J. Pan, J. Shen, and E. Washington (2018): "The Mommy Effect: Do Women
Anticipate the Employment Effect of Motherhood?" NBER Working Paper No. 24270.
   Low, H., Meghir, C., and Pistaferri, L. (2010): "Wage Risk and Employment Risk over the Life
Cycle,"American Economic Review, 100(4), 1432­67.
   Lillard, L. and Y. Weiss, Y (1979): "Components of Variation in Panel earnings data: American
scientists 1960-1970," Econometrica, 47(2), 437­454.
   Lillard, L. and R. Willis (1978): "Dynamic aspects of earning mobility," Econometrica, 46(5),
985­1012.
   MaCurdy, T.E. (1982): "The Use of Time Series Processes to Model the Error Structure of
Earnings in a Longitudinal Data Analysis," Journal of Econometrics, 18, 83­114.
   McNamara J.M. and E.J. Collins (1990): "The Job Search Problem as an Employer-Candidate
Game,"Journal of Applied Probability, 28, 815­827.
   Meghir, C. and Pistaferri, L. (2004): "Income variance dynamics and heterogeneity,"Econometrica,
72(1), 1­32.
   Moffitt, R. and P. Gottschalk (1995): "Trends in the Covariance Structure of Earnings in the
U.S.: 1969­1987," Unpublished manuscript.
   Moffitt, R. and P. Gottschalk (2011): "Trends in the Transitory Variance of Male Earnings in
the U.S., 1970-2004, " Working Paper No. 16833. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic


                                                 48
Research.
   Mortensen, Dale T. (1988): "Matching: Finding a Partner for Life or Otherwise,"American
Journal of Sociology, 94, S215­S240.
   Saluter, Arlene F. (1996): "Marital Status and Living Arrangements: March 1994," Current
Population Reports, Population Characteristics, P20­484.
   Shimer, R., and L. Smith (2000): "Assortative Matching and Search," Econometrica, 68(2),
343­369.
   Spuhler, J.N. (1982): "Assortative Matching With Respect to Physical Characteristics,"Biodemography
and Social Biology, 29(1-2), 53­66.
   Topel, R. and M. Ward (1992): "Job mobility and the careers of young men," Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 107(2), 439­479.
   U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census (1975): "Marital Status and Living Ar-
rangement: March 1975,"Series P-20 No. 287.
   Weiss, Y. and R. Willis (1993): "Transfers Among Divorced Couples: Evidence and Interpreta-
tion," Journal of Labor Economics, 11(4), 629­679.
   Wong, L. Y. (2003): "Structural Estimation of Marriage Models," Journal of Labor Economics,
21(3), 699­727.




                                              49
Appendix A1               Censoring and Treatment of Outliers
                                                                                            
As discussed in Section 2.2, we use both reported hourly wage at the survey date ((REP W AGEit )
                                                           
and annual earnings divided by annual hours (EARNit /HOU RSit ) to construct the wage measure
used for estimation. Both the reported hourly wages and earnings/hours for every year are censored
from below at the minimum federal wage in 1991, $4.25, corrected for inflation. We set values of the
reported wage and earnings/hours above $150 in 2009 dollars to missing. We also censored both
the reported wage and earnings/hours to increase by no more than 500% or decrease by more than
80% year to year.
   Annual hours are censored from above at 4000 and from below at 200. Real annual earnings are
set to $1000 if they are below $1000. We do not allow growth of more than 500% or decreases of
more than 80%. Real unearned income is the difference between family income and earnings, using
real family income censored at the 1st and 99th percentile. The resulting unearned income variable
is then reset to $500 if it is below $500. After constructing nonlabor income, we censor real family
income from below at $2000.
   We treat outliers for sample members and spouses symmetrically.


Appendix A2               Additional Details Concerning Estimation
A2.1      The sample used to estimate the distribution of employment,
          marriage and number of children at age 25
We use only one observation per person. For the 1942-50, 1951-60, and 1961-71 cohorts, we use the
observation at age 25 in 81% of the cases. We use age 23 (24) for persons who are last observed at age
23 (24) and use the age 26 (27) observation for persons first observed at age 26 (27). In estimating
the age distribution of children we prioritize the observation at age 25 in a similar fashion. We use
data through 1997 rather than 1996 when estimating the distribution of employment, marriage, and
children at age 25. The sample used for the 61-71 cohort includes a small number of individuals
born between 1972 and 1974, inclusive. Because the PSID starts in 1968, employment at age 25
is not observed for the 31-41 cohort. We extrapolate from the 42-50 cohort. The PSID reports
information on age of first marriage and age of each child. Assuming that education is constant, the
data allows us to construct a dataset including information on marital status, marriage duration,
number of children, and education at age 25, for individuals in the early cohorts. We use this dataset
to impute employment status that is predicted using the same variables, but with individuals from
later cohorts.




                                                 50
A2.2        Estimating the variances of the wage error components
                    w     w
For men we estimate X and mar by applying 2SLS to the equation

              wage      w w         w             w             w                 w
                  it = Xit X + CHit CH + LF Sit-1 LF S + M arit mar + µi + it + meit .


We use the deviations of M arit from individual means as an instrumental variable. The vector of
lagged employment and unemployment variables LF Sit-1 is excluded.
      Define ew                w
              it = µi + it + meit . Using (3) for men,




(7)               ew                           w                            m     m
                   it - E Ei,t-1 - U Ui,t-1 =  [eit-1 ] + (1 -  )µi + uit + it -  t-1 .


      We estimate the parameters of the above equation by 2SLS after replacing ew       w
                                                                                it and eit with the

residuals from the equation for wageit . The instruments are the deviations of Eit-1 and Ui,t-1 from

individual means and (ew       w            w       w                                     w
                       it-1 - eit-2 ) and (eit-2 - eit-3 ). Define the quasi difference qeit as




(8)               qew     w                             w                   
                    it  (eit - E Ei,t-1 - U Ui,t-1 ) -  (eit-1 - E Ei,t-2 - U Ui,t-2 )

(9)                      = [(1 -  )µi + u       w      w
                                         it + meit - meit-1 ],


where the second equation follows from (3).
      Because uit and mew                                    w w                  2
                        it are serially uncorrelated, Cov (qeit , eit-k ) = (1 - )µw for any k = 2, 3, ....

We average over values for k = 2 to 6, so the moment condition is

                                                        6
                                     2           1
                                     µ w =                   cov (qew
                                                                    it , eit-k ).
                                             5(1 - )   k=2
               2
To obtain     ^µ w,   we evaluate the above moment condition after first replacing ew
                                                                                    it with the 2SLS

          ^w
residuals e                   w
                                      ^w
           it and replacing qeit with eit - 
                                             
                                            ^E Ei,t-1 +  
                                                        ^U Ui,t-1 -   ^w
                                                                    ^ e it-1 .
                 2
      To obtain ^u  we use the 2SLS residuals from estimate of



                            
                      e
                      ^it = 0 +  e        
                                 ^i,t-1 + E          
                                            Ei,t-1 + U Ui,t-1 + (1 -  )µi + u       w
                                                                             it + meit


and use sample analogs to evaluate the moment condition

                          2                              w            2 2   2
                          u w = var ((1 -  )µi + uit + meit ) - (1 -  ) µ - mew ,



        2                                                                      w
setting me w to the outside estimate 0.027. In the case of wages we think of meit as capturing


both measurement error and an iid component of actual wages that would have little affect on the
variance of lifetime resources and thus can be safely ignored in our analysis of lifetime resources.
       2                                              2   2
We set   25
                   eit ) between age 23 and 27 minus 
            to var(^                                 ^µ +^me w .



                                                       51
   The procedure is the same for women, except that the model of wageit includes lags of Eit and
              
Uit and E and U are excluded. The instruments are deviations from individual means of M arit
and the lags of Eit and Uit . Note that all wage model parameters are gender specific, with the
             2
exception of me w.




A2.3      Estimation of the Hours Model
                                                                                      
We instrument for the wage using a wage measure that is constructed using ln(REP W AGEit ) if
available or wage                            
                 3it if not. Neither use wage2it , which involves earnings divided by hours. This

avoids bias from measurement error in hours. We allow for the possibility that M arit , children,
and interaction terms are related to i by using the deviations from the individual means of the
corresponding variables as instruments.
   We estimate  , h , and h using a method of moments procedure. It involving the autocovari-
                                                                                            h
ances of the hours residuals at lags 0 to 7. It accounts for the assumed value of 0.122 for me (see
A2.5). We assume that i has a truncated normal distribution with a minimum and maximum of
-1.64x and 1.64x , where x is chosen so that the variance of the truncated normal matches
                                  2
the method of moments estimate of   . We use the truncated normal to reduce the influence of
extremely large values of the permanent heterogeneity term in model simulations.

A2.4      Estimation of Sorting Parameters for Wage Error Components
Consider the case of male sample members. Let

                       wres              w w           w                 w
                           it  wageit - Xit X - M arit mar + µi + it + meit


   Let

                              
                wress
                    it  wages     ws w          w       s        s        s      w
                            it - Xit X - M arit mar - [Ei,t-1 , Ei,t-2 , Ei,t-3 ]E
                                 s         s      w    s   s      ws
                              -[Ui,t -1 , Ui,t-2 ]E + µi + it + meit


where the parameters in the above equation are from the female wage regression.

                                s
   Given the process for it and it and using more explicit notation to identify the gender of the
sample member and the spouse, we have
                                                  s                 s
(10)     cov (wres                                     µ                     j +1  k-1
                  i,t0 (i)+j -1 , wressi,t0 (i)+k ) = (mµ )V ar (µmi ) + m (m )  (f ) V ar(mit0 -1 )),

where t0(i) is the year that i married and j = 0, ..J and k = 1...K and j and k are marriage
                                                                 µ       s     s
duration in year t0(i) + j or t0(i) + k , respectively. We allow mµ , m , and V ar(mit0 -1 )) to
depend on whether the marriage starts before i is 29 or younger or older than 29. For the earlier

                                                      52
marriages, we estimate V ara(t0 ) (mit0 -1 )) by estimating V ar(wresit ) for men between age 23 and

27 and subtracting V ar(µmi ) and V ar(mew                     
                                         it ). We obtain m and f from the estimation of the wage

equation. We replace cov (wres                    
                              i,t0 (i)+j -1 , wressi,t0 (i)+k ) in (10) with sample estimates for the pre age
                          µ     s          s
30 marriages and estimate mµ and m by weighted nonlinear least squares. We set J and K to
15, and weight the covariances by the number of observations used to estimate them. We use the
same procedure for the later marriages. In the bootstrap procedure, we estimate V ar(mit0 -1 ) for
each bootstrap sample.
   The procedure for female sample members (and male spouses) is the same, except that the
equations for wres           s
                  it and wresit are switched.

   When estimating the parameters according to the above using an unconstrained estimation, we
run in to the problem that the estimates for marriages that start prior to age 30 exceed the values
that would be permitted by the relationship between the initial variance and the parameter values
(see Section 3.5.2). Due to this, we constrain the estimates such that their values imply a strictly
positive variance of ~ sit0 .

A2.5       Choice of Measurement Error Variance Values
       w
We set me to 0.1643 for both men and women, or a variance of 0.027. Assuming measurement
error is classical, this implies that measure error accounts for about 11.7% of the variance of wageit

for men and 12.3% for women. The assumed value is larger than the value used by Altonji et al
(2013) in their study of male household heads, but they rely entirely on the reported wage rate. See
their discussion. Furthermore, we interpret mew
                                              it as combining both measurement error and an iid

wage shock that is inconsequential for the analysis of lifetime earnings, so assuming a higher value
   w
of me seems appropriate.
   We simulate measured log earnings earnit by adding normally distributed measurement error
                   e
to earnit . We set me to 0.245 or a variance of mee
                                                  it to 0.06. For men, the assumption implies

that measurement error is 12.4% of the variance in earnit among those above the earnings floor of

$1,000. For women the measurement error share is 6.8%, which reflects the much larger variance of
earn                                                                          
    it for women. This assumption only matters for the analysis of fit of earnit and measured log
               
family income yit and does not affect other parameter estimates. Nor does it matter for the impulse
response functions or the variance decompositions reported below.
                   h
   Finally, we set me to 0.122. For men, this implies that measurement error accounts for 11.8
                                           
percent of the variance of hourit when hourit exceeds the floor of ln(200). For women the value
                                             h
is 5%.    Reducing (increasing) the value of me would increase (reduce) the contribution of iid
hours shocks to the variance of earnings and hours in a given year but would have little effect on
decompositions of lifetime hours, earnings, family earnings, or family income. The changes would


                                                     53
not affect the impulse response functions that we report.


Appendix A3                    Additional Model Parameters
A3.1        Spouse's Age and Potential Experience
Column 1 of Appendix Table A14 presents a regression model of spouse's age for male sample
members for marriages in progress at age 25. The coefficient on ait is 0.809 (.027). The results
for spouse's age for female sample members are in column 3. The coefficient on ait is 0.973 (.028).
Education has a modest negative coefficient, and children do not matter for the husband's age.
Columns 2 and 4 are for marriages that start after age 25. They are based on the 775 male and 678
female sample members who enter new marriages. We use a cubic in age. The coefficients of the
polynomial are hard to interpret directly, but they imply a strong sorting on age.55 For male sample
members the coefficient on EDi is 0.22 (0.10) indicating that better educated men marry slightly
older women conditional on own age. Children also matter in the case of male sample members,
with effects that depend the child's age. Not surprisingly, there is substantial unexplained variation
in spouse's age. The estimate of as is much larger for marriages that start after 25 (5.78 versus
3.43 years in the case of female sample members), and it is larger for females than males.
    In the simulation model the constant, slope parameters, and error variances from the regression
models in the table are used to draw values of asit at the start of the marriage.

A3.2       Spouse's Labor Market Status
Appendix Table B5 reports probit coefficient estimates of a binary probit model of spouse's em-
ployment at the start of the marriage for female sample members. Table B6 reports estimates of a
multinomial probit model of Usit0 , Esit0 , and Nsit0 for male sample members, with Nsit0 as the omit-
ted category. Separate models are estimated for marriages in progress at age 25 and marriages that
begin after age 25. Appendix Tables B7 and B8 reports estimates of marginal effects for selected
variables. Keep in mind that these models do not condition on spouse's variables that determine
employment. They simply represent the equilibrium relationship between the characteristics of i
and the labor market status of the spouse on entering the marriage.
    The sample member's characteristics do not have much predictive power, with the exception
of CH 05it0 -1 and EM Pit0 -1 in the case of male sample members. For this group, young children
reduces spouse's employment at the start of the marriage by -.066 (0.032).
  55
     The age polynomial implies that, holding other variables constant, the expected value of the increase in husband's
age for women who marry at 50 rather than 27 is 22.1 years. The corresponding value for the increase in wife's age
for men who marry at 50 rather than 27 is 15.4 years.




                                                          54
Appendix A4                    Model Fit
To assess fit we use the estimated model to simulate the lives of 2,137,000 individuals­500 cases
for each member of our PSID sample. For each simulated individual, the gender, education, and
birth cohort match the values of a corresponding PSID sample member who contributed to the
estimation sample. Furthermore, we only include values for a simulated case corresponding to the
ages when the PSID sample member contributed to our sample. For example, for a female PSID
sample member with 12 years of education born in 1950 and in the PSID from age 28 to 36, we
keep simulated data for age 28-36 only. The idea is to match the demographic composition of the
simulated cases and the PSID cases as closely as possible.
       We use ages 25 to 55, inclusive, in assessing model fit even though we use data up to age 61
when estimating the model because 25-55 is the age range we use in our study of the effects of
shocks and the sources of income variance in Sections (5) and (6).56
       As we shall see, the fit of the model is mixed. In some respects, this is not a surprise. For the
most part, we estimate the model of earnings, marriage, and family income equation by equation;
not to make sure that simulated data from the model match the PSID.57 Our estimation strategy is
mandated by the size and complexity of the model. The complexity is needed to achieve our goal of
quantifying the roles of labor market behavior and marriage formation and sorting in determining
the earnings and family income of men and women over the lifecycle. However, a bigger problem for
the fit of earnings and family income stems not from the equation by equation estimation strategy
but rather is baked in through our decision not to include the discrepancy between earnit and the

sum of wage            
           it and hoursit in our model of earnings. A second factor is our decision to use a log

specification for hours with a floor of 200 hours.
       Section A4.1 considers the fit of the means, standard deviations, and age profiles of key variables
and examines the fit of the marital sorting equations. Section A4.2 studies the dynamic fit. Section
A4.3 uses an event study methodology to assess the fit of the paths of key variables around marital
transitions. Fully replicating the dynamics present in the data has posed a challenge in several cases
  56
      We chose the age range 25-55 for three reasons. First, this reduces the problem posed by the fact that we are
simulating out of sample for the younger cohorts we include. Second, stopping at 55 reduces concerns about early
retirement, which we do not address in the model (other than through the age cubic). Finally, sample sizes are
small for ages above the mid 50s because we only use sample members born after 1935.
   57
      For example, the key equations for the simulation model of marriage are estimated using data on the probability
of marriage at age 25 and transitions into and out of marriage in the sample period, but not on data on the probability
that people who enter the sample after age 25 are married. Furthermore, because our PSID sample starts in 1969,
we do not have information on most variables for individuals born in 1935 until they are at least 34 years old. We
go outside of sample when evaluating the time trend variables for such individuals prior to age 34. Thus there is
no guarantee that simulated data will match the actual data, especially given that the only exogenous variables are
gender, birth cohort, and age (or equivalently, calendar time). As it turns out, we fit the marriage process fairly well
despite these potential concerns. But we do less well for hours and especially earnings. Note that the years in which
a given PSID sample member contributes to the estimation sample varies across dependent variables due to missing
data on variables that appear in the model, including lagged values.


                                                          55
which we will discuss.

A4.1        Means, Standard Deviations, and Age Profiles of Key Variables
Appendix tables A8a, A8b, and A8c present means and standard deviations of key variables for the
PSID data and simulated data, by gender and by gender and marital status. Appendix figures A1
through A9 compare the age profiles of the means of the PSID and simulated data. Lines with circle
markers indicate PSID men. Triangle markers indicate PSID women. The shaded areas indicate
90% confidence intervals around the PSID values for males, and the dotted lines indicate the same
for PSID values for females. Simulated values are indicated with a solid line for men and dashed line
for women. We begin with a discussion of the labor market outcomes and then consider marriage,
fertility, and spouse characteristics. We note at the outset that the model closely matches the PSID
means and standard deviations of education and age for both married and single men and women.58

A4.1.1       Labor Market Outcomes

For men and women separately, Appendix Table A8a and panels A and D of Appendix figures A1,
A2, and A3, show that the model in general achieves a good fit with the PSID data for the overall
mean, standard deviation, and age profiles of labor force status, hourly wages, and hours worked.
One exception is that we overstate the standard deviation of hourly wages for women by about
0.07 (Table A8a). Simulated employment and nonparticipation probabilities for women after age
40 are lower and higher, respectively, than PSID rates (Figure A1 and A2). We match the rates of
transition from E to U and from U to E fairly well subject to sample variability (not reported).
       Tables A8b and A8c and panels B, C and E, F of Figures A1-A3 parse the data by gender and
marital status. For both single and married men, we fit the overall mean and standard deviations
and the age profiles well for each of the labor market variables mentioned. The fit of the means
is also very good for married women, although the standard deviations of wages and hours are
respectively over- and under- stated in the simulated data. For single women, the overall simulated
mean and standard deviations of hourly wage and each of the employment statuses are very similar
to the PSID data, but hours worked are underpredicted by 0.12. After about age 40 the simulated
path of single women's outcomes diverge from the data (Panels C and F of figures A1-A3). In all
cases, the divergence is in the direction of married women's behavior.59
  58
     By design average education and average age in the PSID and simulated data are the same for all men and for all
women. However, marital status evolves endogenously over each individual's simulated life implying that the match
of these variables when parsing the data by single and married depends on how accurately our model replicates
marriage patterns by age and education.
  59
     We fit the overall mean for women despite the lack of fit for single women after age 40 because single women
over age 40 are a small fraction of the sample. We do not distinguish between never married and divorced women
in the employment, wage, and hours models. The fit for hours after age 40 is similar for divorced and never married
women, but the understatement of wages is larger for never married women. However, they are less than 30% of


                                                        56
    As discussed in section 3.3.4, we model log earnings as the sum of wageit and hoursit plus
classical measurement error. In the PSID this relationship essentially holds on average for men,
and the good fit for wages and hours over the lifecycle implies a good fit for the age profile of
earnings for both married and single men. However, the simulated standard deviation is below the
PSID by 0.29 for single men, and 0.17 for married men (Appendix Table A8b). For single women,
the fit of earnings also follows the fit of wages and hours; it is good until around age 40, after which
we underpredict earnings.
    For married women on the other hand, the mean of reported earnings is 0.26 below the sum
of wages and hours in the PSID data (Table A8c). The long dashed and short dashed lines in
panels B and C in Appendix Figure A4 display the age profile of the PSID earnings residual for
men and women, respectively, by marital status.60 The earnings residual is large and negative
for married women at all ages, and it becomes more negative for older individuals in the other
groups. The PSID mean of earnings tends to be below the sum of wages and hours for groups with
lower employment rates and hours levels given employment­that is, married women and individuals
nearing retirement. As panel B of Figure A4 shows, for married women of a given age, our model
produces earnings that are essentially equal to the earnings that would obtain in the data if the
PSID earnings residual was removed from measured earnings. This is because it fits both wages
and hours.
    We experimented with modifying the earnings model to include the earnings residual. We
obtained a better fit of the mean and standard deviation of earnings when we modeled the earnings
residual using a gender/marital status-specific autoregressive model. In the end, we decided against
the inclusion of this component because it is hard to interpret, it appeared to have an unduly large
influence on the variance decompositions of earnings, and because the gender/marital status-specific
intercepts introduce a large mechanical effect of marriage on earnings for women in the impulse
response functions discussed below. We also considered simply treating the marital status/gender
specific mean of the PSID earnings residual as an additive constant in the earnings model. This also
allowed us to fit mean earnings very well for each group. But it also introduces a large mechanical
effect of marriage on earnings for women in the impulse response functions below. For this reason we
simply model the log of earnings as the sum of log wages and log hours. Missing the mean of earnings
is not likely to have much effect on the estimates of the impulse response of labor market variables
and family income to various shocks, with the exception of the effect of marriage and divorce shocks
for women. Nor does is it seem likely to matter much for the variance decompositions, but we cannot
single women above age 45.
   60
      That is, the earnings residual is computed using the PSID data only and is defined as log(earnings) - log(wage)
- log(hours).




                                                         57
know for sure.61

A4.1.2       Marriage and Fertility

Table A8a and panels A, B, C, and D of Appendix Figure A5 show that we fit the rate of marriage,
marriage duration, probability of marriage continuation, and probability of marriage entry fairly
closely.62
       Tables A8b and A8c and Appendix Figure A6 show that apart from overstating the number of
old children slightly for all groups and understating the 'peak' of number of 6-12 year olds for men,
we match the distribution of children in the PSID closely. The fit for children aged 0-5 is also good
(not shown).

A4.1.3       Family income and nonlabor income

Table A8b and panels B and C of Appendix Figure A7 show that the fit of family income for both
married men and single men is fairly good, although we understate family income for married men
after age 40. For married women we underpredict family income by 0.06, with a gap of about 0.12
after age 50. We understate family income of single women by 0.17, with the biggest discrepancy
after age 40 (Table A8c and panel C of Appendix Figure A7). The pattern reflects, but is bigger
than, the prediction error for earnings. The standard deviations of family income are understated,
which reflects the fact that we understate the variance of earnings.63
       The model overstates nly by about 0.12 and 0.14 (respectively) for single women and married
women, and by a larger amount for single and married men (Tables A8c and A8b). It understates
the level of nonlabor income (N LY ) for 3 of the 4 groups.64
  61
     Leaving the stochastic component of the earnings residual out of the simulation model means that the decom-
positions are for earnings and family income with the component excluded. This probably does not matter much for
the decompositions of average earnings and family income over a lifetime, which are our main focus. They would
matter more for decompositions for a specific age, for which transitory factors have greater influence.
  62
     We were initially surprised by the large gender gap in age-specific marriage rates between men and women that
starts to open up in the mid thirties. Gender-specific differences across cohorts might influence the statistics. The
fact that our analysis is restricted to household heads and wives, and the higher attrition rates of single men from
the survey appears to explain part of the gap (analysis not shown). However, in the 1994 March CPS sample, 80.0%
of white men between ages 45 and 54 are married, versus 74 percent for white women, and the gap is larger at older
ages. Thus, much of the gap in the actual and simulated data simply reflects a large gender differences in marital
status at older ages. See Saluter, Arlene F., "Marital Status and Living Arrangements: March 1994," Current
Population Reports, Population Characteristics P20-484, Table 1. The values are the sum of married, spouse present
and married, spouse absent. In the March 1975 CPS the male and female values are 91.0% and 85.6% for age 45-54
and 92.6% and 81.4% for age 55-64. See U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census (1975) "Marital Status
and Living Arrangement: March 1975" Series P-20 No. 287. Comparisons to 1975 and 1994 CPS data indicate that
for men and women between age 25 and 34, the PSID marriage rate for heads or spouses overstates marriage rates
for men relative to women in the population at large.
  63
     Panels D, E, and F of Appendix Figure A7 present age profiles for the PSID and simulated values for y aeit .
  64
     The earnings and nonlabor income are modeled in logs, and the error components in the equations for wage      it ,
hours              
       it , and nlyit , are normally distributed. Departures from normality will affect the fit of both the mean and
standard deviation of the levels of the three income variables. Our extended model also includes equations for the
log of transfers, a component of nonlabor income (although it does not play a separate role in the model of earnings,


                                                          58
A4.1.4     Spouse Labor Market Variables and Marital Sorting

Next we consider the spouse variables. These are determined by marriage, divorce, and marital
sorting, as well as by the equations of the earnings model, which determine the evolution of the
spouse's outcomes after the marriage begins. We fit the means and standard deviations of spouses'
education and age well (Table A8b and A8c). The fit of spouses' labor market outcomes are similar
to the fit for sample members. The lifecycle profiles of husbands' and wives' wages, hours, and
labor force status match the data closely, but the standard deviation of wives' hours is somewhat
understated in the simulation (panels A, B, C, and D of Appendix Figure A9). As was the case
for married female sample members, the model overstates earnings of female spouses by an amount
approximately equal to the earnings residual. Similarly, the earnings residual for male spouses
becomes negative after age 40, causing a gap between the simulated data and the PSID to open up
after that age (panel E of Figure A9).
    In Appendix Table A9 we compare regression relationships among some key variables for spouses
in the model in the simulated data and the PSID. We pooled the simulated data and the PSID
data and estimated models that include interactions between a PSID indicator and key variables.
Columns 1 and 2 report a regression of EDU Csit on EDU Cit for married male sample members
and married female sample members. The fit is very good for both.
    Columns 3 and 4 examine the association between spouse's age and own age at the start of a
marriage. We use a linear spline with knots at 31, 39, and 47. The age profiles match fairly well.
    Columns 5 and 6 report regressions of wage           
                                              sit on wageit in the simulated data and the PSID.

For men the slopes are very close. For women, the slope is understated by a modest amount (0.37
versus 0.43).

A4.2       Dynamic Fit of the Model
To evaluate how well the model replicates the dynamics in the data, we run separate bivariate
regressions of simulated and PSID variables wage                                         
                                                it , hoursit , Eit , earnit , nlyit and yit on their lags.

We use all observations for each lag rather than a balanced panel. For each variable xit , Appendix
Table A10 reports estimates of rk , the autoregression coefficient relating xit to its lag xit-k , for
k = 1, 3, 6, 8. The top panel (A10a) refers to men and the bottom panel (A10b) to women. The
table reports point estimates from both the simulated data and the PSID.
    For wages, the simulated and PSID values of r
                                                ^k are fairly close at each lag k for men. The
model overstates wage persistence for women by 0.06 at the first lag but achieves a close fit overall
marriage, and family income), and for log consumption. The transfer model is similar in form to the model of
nonlabor income. It matches the PSID means, standard deviations, and age profiles for all for groups fairly well (not
shown). The model matches the profiles of consumption c aeit reasonably well overall, but underpredicts for single
women after age 40 (Appendix Figure A8).


                                                         59
(columns 1a and 1b).
       For hoursit , the model substantially understates persistence for both men and women (columns

2a and 2b). To obtain insight into this, we separately consider the autoregression coefficients of
the predicted component of hours from the regression model in Table A4a and the hours residual.
We understate persistence of the residual from the hours model (including measurement error) by
a substantial amount. We fit persistence in the regression index very well. However, part of the
understatement of r
                  ^k is associated with a cross covariance between the regression index (which
includes Eit and Uit ) and the hours residual that is not accounted for in the model.65
       Columns 3a and 3b report r
                                ^k for Eit , For men we understate persistence in employment at lags
longer than 1. For example r
                           ^6 is 0.112 in the simulated data and 0.179 in the PSID. For women,
the model slightly overstates persistence.
       The model understates persistence of earnit for men by between 0.13 and 0.16 at the various

lags (columns 4a and 4b). It also understates r
                                              ^1 for women by about 0.15 at the first lag and 0.10
at the 8th lag.
       The model understates persistence in nonlabor income (nlyit ) at the first lag by about .08 and
at the 8th lag by 0.35 for men and 0.29 for women (columns 5a and 5b). However, keep in mind
that levels of nonlabor income are relatively low. We suspect that part of the problem is that a
model with normal errors (in logs) cannot easily account for the substantial number of people who
are at the lower bound that we have imposed on nonlabor income.
       Given the pattern for earnings and nonlabor income, it is not surprising that the model also
                            
understates persistence in yit . For men, the value of r
                                                       ^1 is 0.669 for the model and 0.814 for the data
(columns 6a and 6b). The corresponding values for r
                                                  ^8 are 0.416 and 0.643. The results for women
are similar.
       We examined the coefficient of the regression of wage           
                                                            sit on wagei,t-k , for various values of k

(not reported). For males the coefficient is about 0.32 when k = 1 and 0.28 when k = 8 in both
the simulated and actual data. (The panel is not balanced.) For women the model understates the
link between wage            
                 sit and wagei,t-k by about 0.11 at all lags.


A4.3         Paths of Simulated and PSID Values of Income and Labor Market
             Variables Around Marital transitions
In Section 5 we report impulse responses to exogenous marriage and divorce shocks. We cannot
directly assess how well the estimated responses fit the data. The reason is that marriage transitions
are driven by multiple factors, and we do not observe the marriage and divorce shocks in the PSID.
But we can compare the average paths in the PSID of variables such as work hours, earnings, and
  65
    We did not have much success with a joint model that allows covariance between the hours random effect and
the employment random effect.


                                                     60
family income in the years around a change in marital status to the corresponding average paths in
the simulated data. We do so controlling for event fixed effects. These are displayed in Appendix
figures A10 and A11 for women, and A12 and A13 for men. We display results for the 1944-1964
birth cohorts because we focus on them in our analysis. It should be kept in mind that PSID sample
estimates are quite noisy. The noise affects the vertical location of the sample points relative to the
value in the year before the event, which we norm to zero. Furthermore, both the simulated data
and the actual data reflect the influence of other events which influence marital transitions, such as
births.
       Overall, the difference in the averages of the response over the first few years before and the
first few years after the marriage begins correspond reasonably well. The post-marriage fall in
female earnings appears to be understated. The simulations also suggest that we overstate the
immediate impact of entering marriage on the earnings and work hours of women. This is not
surprising, because the model does not include a distributive lag or partial adjustment mechanism
for hours and for fertility. The pattern is similar, but in the opposite direction, for divorces. For
family income, the marriage and divorce events studies in the simulated and PSID data match fairly
closely for both men and women.66
       While we present impulse responses at annual frequencies, we have more confidence in the
average response over the first few years rather than the immediate response. We have not tried
to generalize the hours, labor force status, and wage equations to allow the effect of marriage to
depend on marriage duration. Johnson and Skinner (1986) and subsequent studies provide evidence
that wives increase labor force attachment in anticipation of a divorce. Incorporating expectations
would require much more structure.




  66
    Event studies for y aeit are broadly similar for women. However, for men marriage has a negative effect on y aeit
and divorce has a positive effect in the PSID, but only small effects in the simulated data. If we assume instead that
single men do not live with (or fully support) their children, the event studies match more closely.


                                                         61
Tables and Figures




                     62
                                     Table 1a: Wage Model: Selected Coefficients

                                                                        (1)             (2)
                                                                       Men          Women
                                  Married                              0.012       -0.042
                                                                      (0.012)        (0.015)
                                  Education                          0.115          0.104
                                                                      (0.004)        (0.005)
                                  Children 0-5 Yrs                                 -0.027
                                                                                     (0.010)
                                  Children 6-12 Yrs                                -0.069
                                                                                     (0.008)
                                  Children 13-18 Yrs                               -0.068
                                                                                     (0.009)
                                  Lag Employed                                      0.051
                                                                                     (0.012)
                                  Lag Unemployed                                   -0.072
                                                                                     (0.020)
                                  Second Lag Employed                               0.059
                                                                                     (0.009)
                                  Second Lag Unemployed                              -0.027
                                                                                     (0.019)
                                  Third Lag Employed                                0.062
                                                                                     (0.009)
                                  Constant                           2.813          2.384
                                                                      (0.015)        (0.027)
                                  R-squared                             0.29           0.30
                                  Observations                         27572          20516
                                     p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01

 Table 1a displays selected parameter estimates for the wage level model, for men and women. Standard errors (in parentheses)
are clustered at the individual level. In addition to the displayed variables, the model also includes a third degree polynomial in
potential experience, interactions of education with potential experience and potential experience squared, and a cubic time trends.
Education and potential experience are normalized so that the coefficient on female and education are for an individual of age
34 with 12 years of education and 16 years of potential experience. For both men and women, we instrument marital status with
the deviations of marital status from individual means. For women, we instrument the lags of employment and unemployment
with deviations from individual means. The models are estimated using individuals aged 23-61. Only observations where either
the reported hourly wage or the predicted hourly wage based on earnings/hours (wage2      ) are available are used. Predicted wages
                                     
based only on demographics (wage3 ) are not used.




                                                                63
                                              Table 1b: Wage Error Process

                                                                    Men         Women
                                                                0.832          0.911
                                                                 (0.029)        (0.043)
                                       Lag Employed             0.141
                                                                 (0.045)
                                       Lag Unemployed             0.045
                                                                 (0.047)
                                       Constant                 -0.135          0.003
                                                                 (0.044)        (0.002)
                                       µ                        0.277          0.243
                                                                 (0.012)        (0.027)
                                       u                        0.130          0.145
                                                                 (0.008)        (0.011)
                                       25                       0.148          0.130
                                                                 (0.023)        (0.047)
                                       mew                        0.164          0.164
                                       R-squared                   0.62          0.56
                                       Observations               19261         12315
                                          p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01

 Table 1b displays the estimated regression coefficients and standard deviation parameters of the wage error process. For men, we
model the wage error as an AR(1) process including lags of employment and unemployment. For women, lags of employment
and unemployment are included in the wage level model for women reported in Table 1a rather than in the wage error process.
See Section 3.3.1. The table displays the estimated standard deviation of unobserved heterogeneity, µ , the standard deviation of
the innovation in  , u   , and the standard deviation of the initial draw of  , 
                                                                                  25 Standard errors (in parentheses) are based on
500 bootstrap draws of the estimation sample. The parameter me     w is the standard deviation of the measurement error of wage.

It is not estimated from the data but assumed to be 0.164 for both genders. For both men and women, the wage error process
is estimated on the sample of individuals aged 23-61 for whom we observe either reported wages or annual earnings and hours.
We do not include wages predicted from only demographics (wage3         ) to obtain these estimates. For both men and women, we
instrument the lag of the wage error with the second and third lag of the change in the wage error. For men, we also instrument the
lags of employment and unemployment with deviations from individual means of these variables. The error component standard
deviations are estimated using the method of moments. See Appendix 2.1




                                                               64
                        Table 2: Single to Married Transitions: Selected Marginal Effects

                                                                           Men           Women
                               Female                                                     0.072
                                                                                         (0.046)
                               Education                                 -0.007        -0.008
                                                                          (0.003)        (0.002)
                               Education × Female                                        0.006
                                                                                         (0.003)
                               Lag Wage                                  0.025         0.029
                                                                          (0.007)        (0.011)
                               Lag Wage × Female                                         -0.026
                                                                                         (0.016)
                               Lag Employed                              0.046         0.053
                                                                         (0.020)         (0.016)
                               Lag Employed × Female                                    -0.049
                                                                                         (0.020)
                               Lag Index for Young Children              0.084         0.098
                                                                          (0.029)        (0.014)
                               Observations                                11774          11774
                                  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01

 Table 2 displays selected marginal effects obtained from the probit equation for marriage in t conditional on being single in t-1.
Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the individual level. The full model includes a cubic in lagged age, the age cubic
interacted with female and a third degree polynomial in year. The index indicating presence of young children is a variable which
increases by 1 for every child younger than 1 years old and increases with 0.5 for every child aged 2-5. We use a pooled sample
of men and women between age 25 and 61 who are single in year t-1. Marginal effects in the first column are evaluated at female
= 0 and age=34, education=12 and year=1982 for a person who has no children and is employed. The second column displays
the marginal effects at the same values, except also setting female to 1. For females, the marginal effects of education, the lag
wage, and lag employment are the sum of the corresponding main effects and interactions involving female.




                                                                65
                   Table 3: The Probability of Remaining Married: Selected Marginal Effects

                                                                                   Married to Married
                      Lag Wage Man                                                      0.00026
                                                                                       (0.00132)
                      Lag Wage Woman                                                    0.00073
                                                                                       (0.00163)
                      Lag Employed Man                                                0.00881
                                                                                       (0.00243)
                      Lag Employed Woman                                             -0.00363
                                                                                       (0.00125)
                      Lag Index for Young Children                                    0.01207
                                                                                       (0.00213)
                      Lag Education Man                                               0.00130
                                                                                       (0.00038)
                      Lag Education Woman                                             0.00099
                                                                                       (0.00036)
                      Female                                                          -0.00208
                                                                                       (0.00104)
                      Absolute Difference Male - Female Wages                          -0.00041
                                                                                       (0.00168)
                      Absolute Difference Male - Female Education                     -0.00077
                                                                                       (0.00038)
                      Absolute Difference Male - Female Age                          -0.00063
                                                                                       (0.00020)
                                                                                          0.24
                      Observations                                                       41240
                         p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01

 Table 3 displays selected marginal effects on the probability of remaining married. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered
at the individual level. The full model includes third degree polynomials in lagged male and female age and a cubic in year. In
order to control for dynamic effects of marriage duration in a flexible way the full model also includes lags of marriage duration
and its square and square root. The marginal effects were computed for a man in a marriage that has been in progress for 8 years,
where both spouses are of age 34 and have 12 years of education. The man is assumed to work and the woman is assumed not
to work. The index for presence of young children is set to one. The male and female wage are set equal the mean wages in the
male estimation sample. The random effect  j(i,t) is set to 0. The model is estimated on the sample of individuals aged 25-61
who were married in the previous period.




                                                               66
                          Table 4: Marital Sorting: Determinants of Spouse's Education

                                                     Male Sample Member               Female Sample Member
                                                    Age 25        After Age 25         Age 25       After Age 25
            Education                              0.585            0.486             0.718           0.590
                                                    (0.023)          (0.030)           (0.028)         (0.035)
            Children Aged 0-5                      -0.333                             -0.099
                                                    (0.050)                            (0.059)
            Lag of Children Aged 0-5                                 -0.320                           -0.463
                                                                      (0.138)                           (0.154)
            Lag of Children Aged 6-12                                 -0.162                           -0.217
                                                                      (0.097)                           (0.098)
            Lag of Children Aged 13-18                                  0.057                            -0.065
                                                                      (0.138)                           (0.149)
            Age                                     0.027              -0.030           0.014            -0.021
                                                    (0.015)           (0.019)          (0.014)          (0.020)
            Age Squared                                                -0.001                          -0.004
                                                                      (0.002)                           (0.002)
            Age Cubed                                                   0.000                             0.000
                                                                      (0.000)                           (0.000)
            Constant                               0.723             0.799            0.606           0.997
                                                    (0.162)           (0.160)          (0.145)          (0.173)
            EDs                                      1.356              1.715           1.724             1.887
            R-squared                                0.49                0.30           0.39               0.37
            Observations                             3498                821            4475               745
               p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01

 Table 4 reports selected coefficients from a regression of spouse's years of education on the sample member's education, children,
and age. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the individual level. The full model includes year and year squared.
Columns 1 and 2 (3 and 4) are spouses of male (female) sample members. The sample for columns 2 and 4 consists of all
individuals aged 25-61 who transition from single to married in year t. The sample for columns 1 and 3 consists of observations
on marriages that are in progress between age 23 and 27. In the simulations, these estimates are used to generate spouse's
education for persons who are married at age 25. The model is estimated using ordinary least squares.




                                                               67
                                         Table 5a: Decomposition of the Lifetime Variance of Labor Market and Family Income Variables: Women

                                                                                    Source of Variation (% Contribution)
                                     (1)        (2)      (3)         (4)         (5)        (6)       (7)           (8)        (9)     (10)          (11)       (12)      (13)        (14)        (15)       (16)
                                    Educ         µ       &          Emp                    Hours     Unearn         EDs        µ~s     s & s          s         Mar      Sd Mar       Mean         SD        Sum
 Outcomes                                                                                             Inc                                                       Hist       FE
 Log Earnings                      26.42      17.57      17.77     -1.34       14.54        4.81                   -0.03      0.02      -1.78       -1.04       4.64       0.17       10.12       0.72      81.58
                                   (3.07)     (4.73)     (2.92)    (0.51)      (7.87)      (3.19)                 (0.54)     (0.53)     (0.52)      (0.48)     (0.70)     (0.01)      (0.05)     (0.03)     (3.51)
 Log Wages                         32.64      36.96       1.43     -0.20       27.36        -0.17                  -0.14     -0.43      -0.85       -0.65       0.94       0.04        2.76       0.43      96.88
                                   (4.08)     (9.62)     (0.55)    (0.49)     (12.59)      (0.48)                 (0.51)     (0.51)     (0.49)      (0.49)     (0.23)     (0.00)      (0.02)     (0.02)     (3.35)
 Log Hours                          8.83       0.38      40.63     -2.09        0.77       19.38                   0.79       1.44      -1.80       -0.46       6.91       0.12        7.36       0.44      74.78
                                   (2.18)     (0.73)     (7.03)    (0.55)      (1.19)      (8.27)                 (0.58)     (0.69)     (0.70)      (0.52)     (0.99)     (0.01)      (0.02)     (0.01)     (3.91)
 Log Fam Earnings                  30.50      12.20      10.36      0.91        8.00        4.61                   6.45       6.34       2.53        1.64       9.26       0.20       11.32       0.65      92.79
                                   (3.10)     (2.28)     (1.65)    (0.57)      (3.94)      (1.40)                 (0.94)     (1.02)     (0.86)      (0.68)     (1.06)     (0.01)      (0.03)     (0.02)     (4.28)
 Log Fam Unearn Inc                 2.53       0.91       2.03      0.48        1.01        1.61       73.71       0.10       0.60       3.42        0.51       1.11       0.05        8.47       0.50      88.03
                                   (1.08)     (0.61)     (0.86)    (0.58)      (0.69)      (0.80)     (3.18)      (0.60)     (0.58)     (0.87)      (0.57)     (0.89)     (0.01)      (0.04)     (0.01)     (5.23)
 Log Fam Inc                       28.42      12.76       6.21      0.52        7.48        1.47      -10.51       7.18       7.69       1.74        2.27       9.24       0.16       11.53       0.54      74.48
                                   (2.81)     (2.29)     (1.21)    (0.50)      (3.63)      (0.98)     (1.20)      (0.92)     (1.15)     (0.65)      (0.69)     (1.08)     (0.01)      (0.03)     (0.02)     (4.29)
 Log Fam Earnings AE               34.21      13.32      10.45      0.47        8.22        3.39                   6.71       6.46       4.01        1.17       1.35       0.07       10.65       0.61      89.77
                                   (2.92)     (2.48)     (1.70)    (0.55)      (4.27)      (1.53)                 (0.91)     (1.06)     (1.04)      (0.72)     (0.30)     (0.01)      (0.03)     (0.02)     (4.05)
 Log Fam Unearn Inc AE              1.42       0.22       2.44      0.09        0.59        1.83       58.44       -0.51      0.00       1.63       -0.21       8.94       0.16        7.80       0.54      74.88
                                   (1.04)     (0.58)     (0.87)    (0.55)      (0.62)      (0.76)     (4.19)      (0.56)     (0.54)     (0.70)      (0.51)     (1.33)     (0.01)      (0.04)     (0.01)     (5.49)
 Log Fam Inc AE                    32.45      14.23       6.11     -0.09        7.89        0.71      -11.09       7.25       7.76       2.96        1.51       0.66       0.04       10.86       0.50      70.35
                                   (2.58)     (2.56)     (1.24)    (0.48)      (4.09)      (1.12)     (1.00)      (0.88)     (1.20)     (0.78)      (0.73)     (0.15)     (0.00)      (0.03)     (0.01)     (3.86)

 AE = Adult Equivalent. Point estimates and bootstrapped standard errors are based on the simulation of 100 lives per PSID sample member. Columns 1-12 report the percentage of the variance of each row variable
explained by the following factors: (1) education, (2) the wage component µ, (3) the permanent employment component  and hours component  , (4) the i.i.d shocks to employment status plus variation in initial
employment conditional on number of children, marital status, and education, (5) the initial draw and shocks u to the autoregressive wage component  , (6) the initial draw 25    h and the shocks u h to  h plus the
                     h
i.i.d. hours shocks , (7) the initial draw and shocks to the autoregressive component of unearned income, (8) the random component        ED s of spouse's education, (9) the random component µ  ~ s of µs (10) s and
s , (11) the random component    ~0s of the initial condition  s and shocks to  s over the marriage and (12) the contribution of random variation in marriage histories conditional on [ µ,  , ,  , EDUC ]. Column
                                                              0                                                                                                                                  25
13 reports the sampling error corrected SD of the marriage history fixed effects. Columns 14 and 15 report the mean and standard deviation across individuals of the lifetime sum of each row variable, expressed on
an annual basis. Column 16 reports the sum of percentages explained by the factors we consider. Section 6.1 discusses the simulation methodology. Bootstrap standard errors based on 500 draws of the estimation
sample are in parentheses.




                                                                                                             68
                                            Table 5b: Decomposition of the Lifetime Variance of Labor Market and Family Income Variables: Men

                                                                                   Source of Variation (% Contribution)
                                     (1)        (2)      (3)          (4)       (5)       (6)        (7)            (8)      (9)      (10)          (11)       (12)      (13)        (14)        (15)       (16)
                                    Educ         µ       &           Emp                 Hours      Unearn          EDs      µ~s      s & s          s         Mar      Sd Mar       Mean         SD        Sum
  Outcomes                                                                                           Inc                                                       Hist       FE
  Log Earnings                     38.40      30.16      26.66       3.53      4.89       2.22                    0.42      0.04       -0.24       -0.03      0.38        0.04       11.18      0.58      106.43
                                   (3.24)     (3.78)     (4.78)     (1.96)    (2.12)     (0.94)                  (0.59)    (0.62)      (0.64)      (0.60)    (0.12)      (0.01)      (0.04)    (0.03)     (4.53)
  Log Wages                        34.35      52.38       5.48       0.73      9.15       0.09                    0.75     -0.53       -0.40       -0.24      0.11        0.01        3.18      0.41      101.86
                                   (2.85)     (5.01)     (3.05)     (0.82)    (3.48)     (0.51)                  (0.49)    (0.50)      (0.53)      (0.49)    (0.06)      (0.00)      (0.02)    (0.01)     (3.46)
  Log Hours                        22.28       1.44      61.36       7.28     -0.83      14.41                   -0.78      0.53       -0.08        0.72      0.73        0.02        8.01      0.26      107.05
                                   (4.25)     (0.92)     (5.33)     (4.05)    (0.96)     (3.71)                  (0.93)    (0.94)      (0.94)      (0.96)    (0.27)      (0.00)      (0.03)    (0.02)     (7.46)
  Log Fam Earnings                 35.06      24.96      22.70       3.49      4.43       2.12                    2.81      2.45        2.79        2.35      1.96        0.08       11.53      0.53      105.12
                                   (2.96)     (3.04)     (4.03)     (1.70)    (1.71)     (0.84)                  (0.76)    (0.87)      (0.87)      (1.37)    (0.37)      (0.01)      (0.03)    (0.02)     (4.85)
  Log Fam Unearn Inc                4.56      -1.12       2.92      -0.45     -0.37       1.26        87.23       1.16      0.19        0.80        0.77      0.00        0.01        8.32      0.45       96.95
                                   (1.46)     (0.59)     (1.01)     (0.62)    (0.60)     (0.60)      (2.12)      (0.92)    (0.62)      (0.63)      (0.70)    (0.12)      (0.01)      (0.03)    (0.01)     (4.68)
  Log Fam Inc                      35.91      25.85      15.25       0.93      4.38       0.75       -10.53       2.73      2.48        2.13        2.38      1.97        0.07       11.67      0.47       84.22
                                   (2.68)     (2.94)     (2.91)     (1.30)    (1.73)     (0.75)      (0.99)      (0.71)    (0.87)      (0.77)      (1.47)    (0.38)      (0.01)      (0.03)    (0.02)     (4.30)
  Log Fam Earnings AE              34.07      23.57      18.73       1.96      3.96       1.83                    3.02      2.27        3.82        2.58      2.41        0.08       10.83      0.53       98.22
                                   (2.69)     (2.59)     (3.50)     (1.34)    (1.58)     (0.76)                  (0.66)    (0.80)      (0.79)      (1.17)    (0.47)      (0.01)      (0.03)    (0.02)     (4.30)
  Log Fam Unearn Inc AE             3.52      -1.30       3.21      -0.18     -0.43       1.10       65.12        0.94     -0.15        0.65        0.61      8.77        0.15        7.61      0.50       81.86
                                   (1.34)     (0.55)     (1.05)     (0.58)    (0.56)     (0.55)      (3.45)      (0.74)    (0.54)      (0.57)      (0.61)    (1.28)      (0.01)      (0.03)    (0.01)     (4.96)
  Log Fam Inc AE                   33.66      23.34      11.43      -0.26      3.74       0.73       -8.98        2.88      2.19        3.18        2.57      3.54        0.09       10.97      0.47       78.03
                                   (2.46)     (2.43)     (2.24)     (0.96)    (1.56)     (0.68)      (0.81)      (0.63)    (0.80)      (0.71)      (1.22)    (0.55)      (0.01)      (0.02)    (0.01)     (3.85)

 AE = Adult Equivalent. Point estimates and bootstrapped standard errors are based on the simulation of 100 lives per PSID sample member. Columns 1-12 report the percentage of the variance of each row variable
explained by the following factors: (1) education, (2) the wage component µ, (3) the permanent employment component  and hours component  , (4) the i.i.d shocks to employment status plus variation in initial
employment conditional on number of children, marital status, and education, (5) the initial draw and shocks u to the autoregressive wage component  , (6) the initial draw 25    h and the shocks u h to  h plus the
                     h
i.i.d. hours shocks , (7) the initial draw and shocks to the autoregressive component of unearned income, (8) the random component        ED s of spouse's education, (9) the random component µ  ~ s of µs (10) s and
s , (11) the random component    ~0s of the initial condition  s and shocks to  s over the marriage and (12) the contribution of random variation in marriage histories conditional on [ µ,  , ,  , EDUC ]. Column
                                                              0                                                                                                                                  25
13 reports the sampling error corrected SD of the marriage history fixed effects. Columns 14 and 15 report the mean and standard deviation across individuals of the lifetime sum of each row variable, expressed on
an annual basis. Column 16 reports the sum of percentages explained by the factors we consider. Section 6.1 discusses the simulation methodology. Bootstrap standard errors based on 500 draws of the estimation
sample are in parentheses.




                                                                                                               69
             Figure 1: Response of Key Labor Market and Income Outcomes to a Divorce Shock
                         Panel A: Married Women                                            Panel B: Married Women




                                                                      1
  .3




                                                                      .5
  .2




                                                                      0
                                                                      -.5
  .1




                                                                      -1
                                                                      -1.5
  0




             35           40             45           50         55          35            40             45            50              55
                           Panel C: Married Men                                             Panel D: Married Men




                                                                      .1
  0




                                                                      0
  -.02




                                                                      -.1
  -.04




                                                                      -.2
  -.06




                                                                      -.3
  -.08




                                                                      -.4
  -.1




             35           40             45           50         55          35            40              45           50              55
                                   Age                                                               Age

                      Employment                  Log Wage                        Log Fam Earnings                 Log Fam Unearn Inc
                      Log Hours                   Log Earnings                    Log Fam Inc                      Log Fam Inc AE


Figure 1 displays the effect of exogenously imposing a divorce shock on labor market and household income and earnings
variables. Panel A and B focus on women and C and D show the results for men. For both genders, the solid line shows the
effect on employment, the long dashes refer to wages, short dashes to hours, combination of dots and long dashes to earnings,
in panels A and C. The respective lines refer to family earnings, family unearned income, family income and family income per
adult equivalent in panels B and D. The thick lines trace out the point estimates and the thinner lines, with corresponding patterns,
90% confidence bands. To obtain the results, we first simulate the lives of 100 copies per PSID sample member, according to the
model estimates. For this baseline simulation, we compute the average values of each outcome variable, for each displayed age.
We then perform the same simulation, but this time imposing that each married individual at age 34 is divorced. The presented
estimates trace out the per-age difference in the average value of each variable between this second simulation and the baseline
simulation. Note that the scales in the different panels are not the same. Confidence bands are obtained by performing 500
bootstrap simulations.




                                                                 70
         Figure 2: The Role of Marriage and Sorting in the Response of Family Income to Divorce
                      Panel A: Married Women                                             Panel B: Married Men
  0




                                                                     0
  -.2




                                                                     -.1
  -.4




                                                                     -.2
  -.6




                                                                     -.3
  -.8




                                                                     -.4
  -1




              35          40           45          50           55             35          40           45          50          55

                                All Channels                               No Sorting
                                No Marriage                                No Sorting And No Marriage

Figure 2 displays the contribution of marriage and sorting in explaining the effect of a divorce shock on family income, panel A
focuses on women and panel B on men. The solid lines are identical to the lines that combine dots and long dashes in panels B
and D in figure 1. That is, the solid lines trace out the effect of exogenously imposing a divorce shock on all married women and
men by comparing average family income in a baseline simulation and a simulation in which divorce is imposed on all married
individuals at age 34 (see notes to figure 1). In figure 2, the difference between the solid line and the line with long dashes should
be interpreted as the role of marital sorting in explaining the effect of divorce on family income. To obtain the "No Sorting"
estimates, we use the same method as when obtaining the "All Channels" line, except we use a version of the marital sorting
model which is meant to capture "no sorting" in the marriage market. In specifying this model, we allow partner characteristics
to be only functions of polynomials in age and year, as opposed to other demographics and labor market variables. We estimate
the parameters of the "no sorting" model by using simulated data from the original model. The lines with long dashes thus trace
out the difference between average family income values per age when divorce is and is not imposed, in an environment where
there is no sorting in the marriage market. Equivalently, we obtain the "No Marriage" line (short dashes) by carrying out the same
steps as for "No Sorting," when replacing the entry into marriage and marriage continuation models with models that allow the
probability of these events to depend only on age and year polynomials. The parameters for these models were also estimated
using data simulated from the original model. The lines that combine dots and long dashes trace out the effect of a divorce shock
when replacing both the sorting and marriage models with these alternative models. Note that the scales in the different panels
are not the same.




                                                                 71
            Figure 3: Response of Key Labor Market and Income Outcomes to a Marriage Shock




                                                                    1.5
                        Panel A: Single Women                                           Panel B: Single Women
  0




                                                                    1
  -.1




                                                                    .5
  -.2




                                                                    0
  -.3




                                                                    -.5
            35          40            45            50         55         35            40            45             50              55
                         Panel C: Single Men                                             Panel D: Single Men




                                                                    .6
  .1
  .08




                                                                    .4
  .06




                                                                    .2
  .04
  .02




                                                                    0
  0




                                                                    -.2




            35          40              45          50         55         35            40              45           50              55
                                  Age                                                             Age

                     Employment                 Log Wage                       Log Fam Earnings                 Log Fam Unearn Inc
                     Log Hours                  Log Earnings                   Log Fam Inc                      Log Fam Inc AE


Figure 3 displays the effect of an exogenously imposed marriage shock on single women and men. To obtain the estimates, we
use the same method as explained in the note to figure 1 however instead imposing that all single individuals marry at age 34.




                                                               72
        Figure 4: Response of Key Labor Market and Income Outcomes to an Unemployment Shock
                        Panel A: Married Women                                            Panel B: Married Women




                                                                     .05
  0
  -.2




                                                                     0
  -.4




                                                                     -.05
  -.6
  -.8




                                                                     -.1
            35          40             45            50         55          35            40             45            50              55
                         Panel C: Married Men                                              Panel D: Married Men




                                                                     .2
  0
  -.2




                                                                     0
  -.4




                                                                     -.2
  -.6




                                                                     -.4
  -.8




                                                                     -.6
  -1




            35          40              45           50         55          35            40              45           50              55
                                  Age                                                               Age

                     Employment                  Log Wage                        Log Fam Earnings                 Log Fam Unearn Inc
                     Log Hours                   Log Earnings                    Log Fam Inc                      Log Fam Inc AE


Figure 4 displays the effect of an exogenously imposed unemployment shock on married women and men. To obtain the estimates,
we use the same method as explained in the note to figure 1 however instead imposing that all individuals become unemployed at
age 34.




                                                                73
              Figure 5: Response of Key Labor Market and Income Outcomes to a Wage Shock
                        Panel A: Married Women                                          Panel B: Married Women




                                                                  .06
  .2
  .15




                                                                  .04
  .1




                                                                  .02
  .05




                                                                  0
  0




            35           40             45         50        55           35            40             45            50              55
                          Panel C: Married Men                                           Panel D: Married Men
  .15




                                                                  .1
                                                                  .08
  .1




                                                                  .06
                                                                  .04
  .05




                                                                  .02
                                                                  0
  0




                                                                          35            40              45           50              55
            35           40           45           50        55                                   Age

                      Log Wage                   Log Hours                     Log Fam Earnings                 Log Fam Unearn Inc
                      Log Earnings                                             Log Fam Inc                      Log Fam Inc AE


Figure 5 displays the effect of an exogenously imposed wage shock on married women and men. To obtain the estimates, we use
the same method as explained in the note to figure 1 however instead imposing a 1 SD increase in wages on all individuals at age
34.




                                                              74
           Figure 6: Response of Key Labor Market and Income Outcomes to a Childbirth Shock
                        Panel A: Married Women                                            Panel B: Married Women




                                                                     .1
  0
  -.1




                                                                     0
                                                                     -.1
  -.2




                                                                     -.2
  -.3
  -.4




                                                                     -.3
            35          40             45            50         55          35            40             45            50              55
                         Panel C: Married Men                                              Panel D: Married Men
  .1




                                                                     0
                                                                     -.05
  .05




                                                                     -.1
  0




                                                                     -.15
  -.05




                                                                     -.2
                                                                     -.25
  -.1




            35          40              45           50         55          35            40              45           50              55
                                  Age                                                               Age

                     Employment                  Log Wage                        Log Fam Earnings                 Log Fam Unearn Inc
                     Log Hours                   Log Earnings                    Log Fam Inc                      Log Fam Inc AE


Figure 6 displays the effect of an exogenously imposed chilbirth shock on married women and men. To obtain the estimates, we
use the same method as explained in the note to figure 1 however instead imposing that all individuals have a child at age 34.




                                                                75
         Figure 7: Response of Key Labor Market and Income Outcomes to a Childbirth shock: Singles
                        Panel A: Single Women                                           Panel B: Single Women
  0




                                                                    .4
  -.1




                                                                    .2
                                                                    0
  -.2




                                                                    -.2
  -.3




                                                                    -.4
  -.4




              35        40            45            50         55         35            40            45             50              55
                         Panel C: Single Men                                             Panel D: Single Men
  .1




                                                                    .1
  .05




                                                                    0
                                                                    -.1
  0




                                                                    -.2
  -.05




                                                                    -.3
  -.1




              35        40              45          50         55         35            40              45           50              55
                                  Age                                                             Age

                     Employment                 Log Wage                       Log Fam Earnings                 Log Fam Unearn Inc
                     Log Hours                  Log Earnings                   Log Fam Inc                      Log Fam Inc AE


Figure 7 displays the effect of an exogenously imposed chilbirth shock on single women and men. To obtain the estimates, we
use the same method as explained in the note to figure 1 however instead imposing that all individuals have a child at age 34.




                                                               76
         Figure 8: The Role of Marriage and Sorting in the Response of Family Income to a Birth
                     Panel A: Married Women                                         Panel B: Married Men
  .02




                                                                 0
  0




                                                                 -.02
  -.02
  -.04




                                                                 -.04
  -.06




                                                                 -.06
  -.08




             35          40           45        50          55              35        40           45        50          55
                                Age                                                          Age

                              All Channels                              No Sorting
                              No Marriage                               No Sorting And No Marriage

Figure 8 displays the role of marriage and sorting in explaining the effect of a childbirth shock on family income for married
women and men. To obtain the estimates, we use the same method as explained in the note to figure 2 however instead imposing
that all individuals have a child at age 34.




                                                             77
                 Figure 9: Response of Marriage to Unemployment, Wage and Birth Shocks




                                                                 .015
  .02




                     Panel A: Unemployment Shock                                    Panel B: Wage Shock, Men
  0




                                                                 .01
  -.02




                                                                 .005
  -.04
  -.06




                                                                 0
  -.08




                                                                 -.005




            35          40           45            50       55           35          40             45           50    55
  .015




                                                                 .25




                     Panel C: Wage Shock, Women                                     Panel D: Child Birth Shock
                                                                 .2
  .01




                                                                 .15
  .005




                                                                 .1
  0




                                                                 .05
  -.005




                                                                 0




            35          40            45           50       55           35          40              45          50    55
                                Age                                                            Age

                                            Married Men                       Single Men
                                            Married Women                     Single Women


Figure 9 displays the effect of marriage to an unemployment, 1 SD wage increase and childbirth shock for married and single
men and women. To obtain the estimates, we use the same method as explained in the note to figure 1 however instead imposing
the mentioned shocks, respectively, at age 34, and tracing out the effect on the probability of marriage.




                                                            78
            Figure 10: Response of Key Labor Market and Income Outcomes to to Spouse Shocks
          Panel A: Women, Response to Husband Unemployment Shock                Panel B: Women, Response to Husband Wage Shock
  .1




                                                                        0
                                                                        -.01
  .05




                                                                        -.02
                                                                        -.03
  0




                                                                        -.04
             35             40           45           50           55           35             40            45           50     55
  .05




                                                                        .05
             Panel C: Men, Response to Wife Unemployment Shock                       Panel D: Men, Response to Wife Wage Shock
  .025




                                                                        .025
  0




                                                                        0
  -.025




                                                                        -.025
  -.05




                                                                        -.05




             35            40           45           50            55           35            40            45           50      55

                                                   Employment                     Log Wage
                                                   Log Hours                      Log Earnings


Figure 10 displays the effect of an exogenously imposed spouse's unemployment shock on sample member's outcomes. To obtain
the estimates, we use the same method as explained in the note to figure 1 however instead imposing unemployment on the spouse
at age 34.




                                                                   79
                     Figure 11: The College-High School Gap in Key Outcomes, by Age
                         Panel A: Women                                                 Panel B: Men
  1




                                                               1
  .8




                                                               .8
  .6




                                                               .6
  .4




                                                               .4
  .2




                                                               .2
  0




                                                               0




       25      30      35      40        45       50      55        25    30       35        40        45    50       55
                               Age                                                          Age

                                        Log Wage                               Log Hours
                                        Log Earnings                           Log Fam Inc

Figure 11 displays the difference in average wages, hours, earnings and family income experienced by women and men, at each
age, when imposing that all individuals have a college degree versus a high school education.




                                                            80
Figure 12: The Response of Labor Market Outcomes to a 1 SD Increase in the Permanent Wage Compo-
nent
                         Panel A: Women                                                  Panel B: Men
  .4




                                                                .4
  .3




                                                                .3
  .2




                                                                .2
  .1




                                                                .1
  0




                                                                0




       25      30       35      40        45      50       55        25     30      35        40        45     50       55
                                Age                                                          Age

                                         Log Wage                                Log Hours
                                         Log Earnings                            Log Fam Inc

Figure 12 displays the effect on average wages, hours, earnings and family income experienced by women and men, at each age,
when imposing that all individuals have a 1 SD higher permanent wage component throughout their lives, compared to that drawn
in the baseline simulation.




                                                             81
 Figure 13: The Contribution of Marriage & Sorting to the College-High School Gap in Family Income
                    Panel A: Education Differential, Women                                Panel B: Education Differential, Men
  .8




                                                                       .8
  .6




                                                                       .6
  .4




                                                                       .4
  .2




                                                                       .2
  0




                                                                       0
        25     30         35          40          45         50   55         25     30         35         40           45        50   55
                        Panel C: µ Differential, Women                                        Panel D: µ Differential, Men
  .25




                                                                       .25
  .2




                                                                       .2
  .15




                                                                       .15
  .1




                                                                       .1




        25     30         35          40         45          50   55         25     30         35         40          45         50   55
                                     Age                                                                  Age

                                            All Channels                     No Sorting
                                            No Marriage                      No Sorting And No Marriage


Figure 13 displays the role of marriage and sorting in explaining the effect of the college-high school differential in family
income, displayed in figure 12. To obtain these estimates, we use the same method as explained in the note to figure 2, but
instead considering the role of turning off each channel in the difference in family income experienced by college and high school
graduates over the lifecycle.




                                                                  82
Appendix Tables and Figures




                              83
                            Table A1: Means and Standard Deviations of Key Variables

                                                                                                Men                  Women
                                                                                          Mean         Sd        Mean         Sd
 Age                                                                                      36.25      7.897      36.13      7.934
 Education                                                                                13.49      2.305      13.10      2.148
 Potential Experience                                                                     16.70      8.194      16.99      8.329
 Log Reported Wage                                                                        2.969      0.483      2.592      0.479
 Log Predicted Wage (wage )                                                               2.937      0.472      2.509      0.432
                                           )
 Log Predicted Wage | Earnings/ Hours (wage2                                              2.937      0.479      2.532      0.467
 Log Hours                                                                                7.614      0.509      6.800      0.990
 Log Earnings                                                                             10.50      0.958      9.100      1.496
 Employed                                                                                 0.944      0.230      0.712      0.451
 Unemployed                                                                               0.028      0.167      0.021      0.146
 Nonparticipation                                                                         0.027      0.162      0.263      0.441
 Married                                                                                  0.796      0.402      0.764      0.423
 Marriage Duration | Married                                                              9.677      8.960      10.25      9.692
 Children Aged 0-5                                                                        0.354      0.630      0.317      0.602
 Children Aged 6-12                                                                       0.533      0.801      0.574      0.829
 Children Aged 13-18                                                                      0.289      0.602      0.345      0.649
 Log Unearned Income                                                                      7.471      1.521      7.645      1.567
 Log Family Income                                                                        10.94      0.676      10.87      0.740
 Log Family Income AE                                                                     10.24      0.703      10.16      0.749
 Level of Family Income                                                                   69781      47628      67108      49336
 Level of Family Income AE                                                                35562      26932      33419      25405
 Log Family Transfers                                                                     6.736      1.077      6.949      1.248
 Log Consumption                                                                          9.177      0.458      9.159      0.483
 Log Consumption AE                                                                       8.425      0.404      8.369      0.418
 Spouse Age | Married                                                                     34.65      7.973      38.99      8.958
 Spouse Education | Married                                                               13.15      1.998      13.26      2.496
 Spouse Potential Experience | Married                                                    15.50      8.161      19.64      9.376
 Spouse Log Reported Wage | Married                                                       2.573      0.476      3.000      0.488
 Spouse Log Predicted Wage | Married (wages )                                             2.494      0.418      2.961      0.472
                                                           s )
 Spouse Log Predicted Wage | Earnings/ Hours, Married (wage2                              2.506      0.465      2.961      0.481
 Spouse Log Earnings | Married                                                            8.843      1.519      10.49      1.049
 Spouse Log Hours | Married                                                               6.647      1.006      7.610      0.551
 Spouse Employed | Married                                                                0.677      0.467      0.945      0.225
 Spouse Unemployed | Married                                                              0.014      0.115      0.021      0.146
 Spouse Nonparticipation | Married                                                        0.307      0.460      0.030      0.172

 Table A1 reports means and standard deviations for men and women in the estimation sample aged 25-61. The sample for log
earnings consists of 27,128 person-year observations for men between the ages 25-61, and 28,967 for women. This corresponds
to 2,154 and 2,028 individual men and women, respectively. Actual estimation samples vary somewhat by equation, as discussed
in the paper. Marriage duration and spouse variables are reported conditional on marriage. The reported wage ( REP WAGE)
is the hourly wage recorded in the PSID at the survey date. As discussed in the paper, in many cases, we do not observe wage.
In such cases we use a predicted wage (wage , wages ) which is based on observed annual earnings divided by hours and/or
demographic variables. The variable "Log Predicted Wage | Earnings/Hours" (wage2       , wages ) is the predicted wage that is never
                                                                                              2
based on only demographics. This wage measure is used in the wage and marital sorting estimations. For spouses, the prediction
is based on observations of the spouse's earnings and hours. Note that there is barely any difference between this variable and the
"Predicted Wage" variable for men. This reflects the fact that in most cases we do observe earnings/hours for men.


                                                                84
  Table A2a: Aggregated Probability Distrib. of Education, Children and Employment at Age 25- Men

                     Children Present
                                                     Married                           Single
                                            Low Educ       High Educ        Low Educ       High Educ
                      Employed                0.201           0.176            0.020            0.013
                      Not Employed            0.012           0.010            0.005            0.002
                     Children not Present
                                                     Married                           Single
                                           High Educ        Low Educ       High Educ        Low Educ
                      Employed                0.073           0.148           0.096             0.195
                      Not Employed            0.004           0.014           0.010             0.022



Table A2b: Aggregated Probability Distrib. of Education, Children and Employment at Age 25- Women

                     Children Present
                                                     Married                           Single
                                            Low Educ       High Educ        Low Educ       High Educ
                      Employed                0.118           0.135            0.029            0.025
                      Not Employed            0.160           0.076            0.023            0.008
                     Children not Present
                                                     Married                           Single
                                           High Educ        Low Educ       High Educ        Low Educ
                      Employed                0.040           0.144           0.032             0.161
                      Not Employed            0.008           0.016           0.010             0.014

 Tables A2a and A2b display aggregated versions of the probability distributions used to make draws of initial conditions. High
and low education are defined by more than 12 years, and 12 years or less, of schooling, respectively. The actual probability
distributions used in the simulations are further disaggregated by birth cohort (1931-1941, 1942-9150, 1951-1960 and 1960-
1971), number of children (up to five), marital duration, and distinguish between the three labor market statuses: employed,
unemployed and not participating in the labor force. These distributions include a total of 432 cells per gender, cohort and
education group. Additional empirical probability distributions are used to draw ages of each child, conditional on number
of children (not displayed). We assume the probability of children's ages conditional on number of children to stay constant
across cohorts, gender and education categories. Our data starts in 1969 implying that not all of the variables included in our
initial conditions are observed at age 25 for the older cohorts. To obtain employment at age 25 for these individuals we predict
employment status using information from younger cohorts. Marital status, marriage duration and children are possible to trace
back to age 25 for the entire sample using PSID survey questions.




                                                              85
       Table A3: The Determinants of Employment and Unemployment: Selected Marginal Effects

                                                                 Men                              Women
                                                    Unemployed         Employed        Unemployed         Employed
        Married                                        -0.0207         0.0403           -0.0300           -0.2940
                                                       (0.1039)         (0.0075)          (0.0036)          (0.0376)
        Education                                      -0.0051         0.0092            -0.0021           0.0577
                                                       (0.0113)         (0.0021)          (0.0009)          (0.0086)
        Children Aged 0-5                                0.0019          0.0005         0.0009            -0.2084
                                                        (0.0016         (0.0007)          (0.0002)          (0.0262)
        Children Aged 6-12                             -0.0008           0.0006         0.0020            -0.1313
                                                       (0.0024)         (0.0069)          (0.0006)          (0.0174)
        Children Aged 13-18                              0.0011          -0.0016           0.0009         -0.0539
                                                       (0.0081)         (0.0092)          (0.0008)          (0.0205)
        Lag Unemployed                                0.0184           0.0228            0.0053            0.1356
                                                       (0.0023)         (0.0030)          (0.0018)          (0.0394)
        Lag Employed                                 -0.0479           0.1371           -0.0203            0.5199
                                                       (0.0060)         (0.0054)          (0.0041)          (0.0273)
        Married × Education                                                                 0.0011        -0.0276
                                                                                          (0.0013)          (0.0085)
        Married × Children Aged 0-5                                                        -0.0075          0.0508
                                                                                          (0.0089)          (0.0305)
        Married × Children Aged 6-12                                                       -0.0052         0.0707
                                                                                          (0.0718)          (0.0192)
        Married × Children Aged 13-18                                                      -0.0007          0.0406
                                                                                          (0.0009)          (0.0219)
        Observations                                    25581            25581             27578             27578

 Table A3 displays estimates of marginal effects of key variables on employment and unemployment. They are based on a
gender specific multinomial logit model with a normally distributed random effect. The full model includes a cubic polynomial
in potential experience, and a quadratic time trend. The logit coefficients are reported in Supplemental Appendix Table B1. For
women, all potential experience and time trend terms are interacted with marriage status. The main effect of marriage is evaluated
at potential experience equal to 16 in 1982. Marginal effects on the probability that the individual is employed are computed for
an individual with values of the random effect  and the explanatory variables such that both the employment probability and the
unemployment probability equal the gender specific sample means.




                                                               86
                       Table A4a: The Log Hours Model: Selected Coefficient Estimates

                                                                         Men           Women
                             Wage                                      0.063          0.304
                                                                        (0.014)        (0.027)
                             Married                                     0.020       0.592
                                                                        (0.014)        (0.165)
                             Education                                 0.014            0.013
                                                                        (0.003)        (0.011)
                             Employed                                  1.467          0.780
                                                                        (0.062)        (0.057)
                             Unemployed                                0.768          0.379
                                                                        (0.076)        (0.068)
                             Children 0-5 Yrs                                        -0.189
                                                                                       (0.039)
                             Children 6-12 Yrs                                       -0.088
                                                                                       (0.030)
                             Children 13-18 Yrs                                       -0.058
                                                                                       (0.027)
                             Married × Education                                       -0.006
                                                                                       (0.013)
                             Married × Employed                                        -0.039
                                                                                       (0.060)
                             Married × Unemployed                                      -0.108
                                                                                       (0.084)
                             Married × Children Aged 0-5                                0.004
                                                                                       (0.040)
                             Married × Children Aged 6-12                               0.032
                                                                                       (0.030)
                             Married × Children Aged 13-18                            0.077
                                                                                       (0.029)
                             Constant                                  5.988          5.753
                                                                        (0.076)        (0.110)
                             R-squared                                    0.29           0.44
                             Observations                                26224          27549
                                p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01

  Table A4a displays selected parameter estimates of the regression model for log hours. The dependent variable is
log(max(200,annual hours)). Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the individual level. The full model also includes
cubics in potential experience and year. For women, the full model also includes spouse's employment, unemployment and wage
as well as interactions between marriage and the first two terms of the potential experience and the first two terms of the year
polynomial. The spouse variables are 0 for single women. For both men and women, the models are estimated on the sample of
individuals aged 25-61. We instrument marriage with the deviation of marriage from its mean for each individual. We instrument
the wage measure using either the reported wage when available or the predicted wage based on demographics (wage3         ). For
women, we instrument the variables measuring children, labor market status and the variables interacted with marriage with the
deviations from individual means of the variable.




                                                              87
                                  Table A4b: Parameters of the Hours Error Process

                                                                      Men         Women

                                     h                             0.589         0.775
                                                                    (0.091)       (0.060)
                                                                   0.199         0.364
                                                                    (0.013)       (0.037)
                                     uh                            0.236         0.307
                                                                    (0.040)       (0.037)
                                        h                          0.261         0.404
                                                                    (0.042)       (0.025)
                                      h                            0.308         0.509
                                                                    (0.017)       (0.021)
                                     meh                             0.122         0.122
                                     R-squared                        0.99          0.99
                                     Number of Moments                 13            13
                                        p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01

 Table A4b displays parameter estimates for the hours error process. Bootstrap standard errors (in parentheses) based on 500
draws of the estimation sample are in parentheses. The parameter h is the autocorrelation coefficient for the hours error process
and  is the standard deviation of unobserved heterogeneity. We assume that  has a truncated normal distribution. As such,
in the simulation, we draw  for each individual from a distribution that is truncated at [-1.64,1.64] standard deviations from the
mean, but which has been scaled such that the resulting draws of  have standard deviations equal to the estimates displayed in
this table. The parameter uh is the standard deviation of the innovation in the hours error process;  h is the standard deviation of
the iid error and meh is the standard deviation of measurement error. The latter is assumed to be equal to 0.122. The parameters
are estimated by fitting the hours error process to the autocovariances of the hours residual at lags 0 to 11. We use unweighted
nonlinear least squares




                                                                88
                    Table A5a: Unearned Income at Age 25: Selected Parameter Estimates
                                                                        Age 25
                                                    Married       Single Men       Single Women
                       Wage Men                     -0.128          0.190
                                                    (0.074)         (0.090)
                       Wage Women                    0.119                               0.041
                                                    (0.078)                             (0.113)
                       Education Men                0.039            -0.007
                                                    (0.015)          (0.019)
                       Education Women               -0.016                             0.034
                                                    (0.018)                             (0.019)
                       Hours Men                   -0.346          -0.344
                                                    (0.059)         (0.079)
                       Hours Women                 -0.084                             -0.369
                                                    (0.024)                             (0.052)
                       Children Aged 0-5             -0.030          -0.034            0.469
                                                    (0.030)          (0.086)            (0.062)
                       Children Aged 6-12            -0.006                            0.477
                                                    (0.038)                             (0.069)
                       Constant                    10.724           9.257             9.840
                                                    (0.541)          (0.651)            (0.523)
                       R-squared                      0.03             0.03               0.23
                       Observations                   5815            1910               1905
                          p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01

 Table A5a shows selected estimates from the model of unearned income model at age 25 for married men and women, single
men, and single women, respectively. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the individual level. In addition to the
displayed estimates, the models include a third degree polynomial in year and age. All equations are estimated using ordinary
least squares using the sample of individuals aged 23-27. Estimates for after age 25 are displayed in table A5b.




                                                             89
                                                   Table A5b: Unearned Income After Age 25: Selected Parameter Estimates
                                                                                                         After Age 25
                                    Single Men        Single Women         Men Marrying         Women Marrying           Ongoing Marriage         Men Divorcing         Women Divorcing
 Lag of Unearned Income              54.182              23.066              0.449                 0.464                     23.370                 0.485                  0.309
                                      (13.677)           (10.043)             (0.035)               (0.042)                    (5.720)               (0.042)                (0.041)
 Lag of Unearned Income2             -9.793              -4.170                                                              -4.273
                                       (2.438)            (1.793)                                                              (1.019)
 Lag of Unearned Income3              0.778              0.336                                                               0.347
                                       (0.190)            (0.141)                                                              (0.080)
 Lag of Unearned Income4             -0.023              -0.010                                                              -0.010
                                       (0.005)            (0.004)                                                              (0.002)
 Wage Men                             0.165                                    0.250                                          -0.041                    -0.038
                                       (0.047)                                 (0.125)                                         (0.021)                 (0.142)
 Wage Women                                                0.032                                      0.427                  0.114                                              0.173
                                                          (0.037)                                     (0.176)                  (0.021)                                         (0.145)
 Education Men                        0.034                                     -0.002                                       0.017                      0.040
                                       (0.010)                                 (0.026)                                         (0.005)                 (0.028)
 Education Women                                          0.020                                        0.038                  0.016                                             0.034
                                                          (0.008)                                     (0.032)                  (0.006)                                         (0.028)
 Hours Men                            -0.243                                    -0.067                                       -0.213                   -0.251
                                       (0.031)                                 (0.101)                                         (0.015)                 (0.109)
 Hours Women                                             -0.235                                      -0.158                  -0.054                                          -0.262
                                                           (0.021)                                    (0.070)                  (0.008)                                         (0.060)
 Children Aged 0-5                     0.167              0.094                 -0.021               0.380                    -0.028                   0.209                  0.308
                                       (0.097)             (0.044)             (0.109)                (0.127)                  (0.011)                 (0.096)                 (0.088)
 Children Aged 6-12                                       0.166                                        -0.031                   -0.014                                       0.367
                                                           (0.022)                                    (0.075)                  (0.008)                                         (0.078)
 Children Aged 13-18                                      0.152                                        0.075                   -0.013                                         0.348
                                                           (0.024)                                    (0.105)                  (0.011)                                         (0.089)
 Constant                           -103.289             -39.968               4.088                 4.372                  -39.511                   5.744                   6.761
                                      (28.297)            (20.821)              (0.928)               (0.762)                 (11.856)                 (0.981)                 (0.678)
 R-squared                              0.34                 0.55                 0.28                  0.23                     0.44                    0.29                    0.26
 Observations                           4235                5566                  721                   653                     38076                    608                     671
    p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01

 Table A5b displays selected estimates from the model of unearned income after age 25. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the individual level. Columns 1-2 refer to single men and
women, columns 3-4 to men and women at transitions into marriage, column 5 is for continuing marriages, and the last 2 columns show the estimates for transitions out of marriage. The full models
include third degree polynomials in age and year. All equations are estimates using ordinary least squares including individuals aged 25 and over.
                            Table A6: Marital Sorting on Unobserved Wage Components

                                        Male Sample Member                      Female Sample Member
                                      Younger than 30 After 30                Younger than 30 After 30
                  µ s                      0.349***            0.284***            0.412***            0.379***
                                            (0.004)             (0.006)             (0.004)             (0.006)
                   s                       0.878***            0.638***            1.139***            0.412***
                                               (-)              (0.025)                (-)              (0.024)
                  R-squared                  0.270               0.428               0.224                0.256
                  Observations                240                 240                 240                  240

 Table A6 displays estimates of the parameters determining the relationship between sample member and spouse's unobserved
wage components, as given by the model presented in section 3.5.2 in the paper. Standard errors are in parentheses. Given the
specification of our sorting model, we require that the estimated -parameters be such that µ    ~ si and ~ sit0 have positive variance.
To assure this, we constrain the -parameters by estimating the difference between the leftmost and rightmost terms in the
expressions for the variances of µ ~ si and ~ sit0 (see section 3.5.2). This difference is constrained to be non-negative. We then
recover the -parameters from these estimates. Standard errors for the -parameters are obtained using the delta method. The
parameter estimates for  s are constrained, which is why the standard errors are omitted. The parameters are estimated by
nonlinear least squares which fits moments of the wage residuals of the spouses at different lags. In estimating these parameters,
we only include residuals for sample members and spouses in such cases when the wage is either observed or is imputed using
earnings/hours. That is, we do not use wages that have been predicted based on only demographics for this estimation. See
Appendix A2.3




                                                                 91
Table A7: The Effects of Education and Existing Children on the Prob. of Having Another Child: Marginal
Effects

                                                                 Men                       Women
                                                         Married        Single      Married        Single
                    Education                            0.006         -0.001       0.010          -0.004
                                                          (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.002)
                    Lag Children Aged 0-5                  -0.001      -0.007        -0.006          0.005
                                                          (0.004)      (0.007)       (0.004)       (0.004)
                    Lag Children Aged 6-12               -0.052         0.002      -0.043           0.003
                                                          (0.006)      (0.002)       (0.006)       (0.002)
                    Lag Children Aged 13-18              -0.060        -0.003      -0.058           -0.007
                                                          (0.010)      (0.005)       (0.010)       (0.006)
                    Observations                          17819         4152         18174          5294
                       p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01

 Table A7 displays selected marginal effects of education and the sample members' existing children on the probability of having
another child. The full model includes a cubic in lagged age and a quadratic in year. Standard errors are in parentheses. The model
is estimated separately by gender and marital status. Only individuals between ages 25 and 50 are included in the estimation.
Married individuals whose spouse is younger than 19 or older than 69 are dropped. Marginal effects are computed for individuals
aged 34 with 12 years of education with no children under age 18.




                                                                92
                                                         Table A8a: Comparison of PSID and Simulated Means and Standard Deviations
                                                                                                    Men                                           Women
                                                                                    PSID                  Simulated                 PSID                 Simulated
                                                                                 Mean    Sd              Mean      Sd            Mean    Sd             Mean      Sd
                                    Age                                          35.98       7.58        35.98         7.58     35.86       7.62        35.86           7.62
                                    Education                                    13.49       2.31        13.49         2.31     13.10       2.15        13.10           2.15
                                    Log Wage                                      2.93       0.47         2.93         0.48      2.51       0.43         2.50           0.50
                                    Log Hours                                     7.62       0.50         7.60         0.48      6.80       0.99         6.79           0.79
                                    Employed                                      0.94       0.23         0.94         0.23      0.71       0.45         0.70           0.46
                                    Unemployed                                    0.03       0.17         0.03         0.17      0.02       0.15         0.02           0.15
                                    Nonparticipation                              0.03       0.16         0.03         0.16      0.26       0.44         0.27           0.45
                                    Employed to Unemployed                        0.02       0.15         0.02         0.15      0.02       0.13         0.02           0.13
                                    Unemployed to Employed                        0.69       0.46         0.70         0.46      0.58       0.49         0.61           0.49
                                    Log Earnings                                 10.51       0.94        10.53         0.74      9.10       1.49         9.29           1.05
                                    Level of Earnings                            49844      44649        48243        35778     19853      21498        18417          22023
                                    Log Transfers                                 6.73       1.06         6.74         1.08      6.94       1.23         6.93           1.20
                                    Level of Transfers                            2247       8856         1574         2932      3208      11455         2411           7815
                                    Married                                       0.80       0.40         0.80         0.40      0.77       0.42         0.78           0.42
                                    Marriage Duration | Married                   9.46       8.69         9.78         8.74     10.07       9.44        10.25           9.24
                                    Prob( Marriedt+1 | Marriedt )                 0.97       0.18         0.97         0.17      0.97       0.18         0.97           0.17
                                    Prob(Singlet+1 | Marriedt )                   0.16       0.36         0.16         0.37      0.11       0.32         0.12           0.32
                                    Children Aged 0-5                             0.36       0.63         0.35         0.62      0.32       0.61         0.33           0.62
                                    Children Aged 6-12                            0.54       0.80         0.53         0.79      0.58       0.83         0.58           0.83
                                    Children Aged 13-18                           0.29       0.61         0.35         0.67      0.35       0.65         0.40           0.72
                                    Age of Spouse | Married                      34.39       7.68        34.62         7.86     38.75       8.71        38.68           8.68
                                    Education of Spouse | Married                13.15       2.00        13.25         2.02     13.26       2.50        13.35           2.31
                                    Log Wage of Spouse | Married                  2.49       0.42         2.47         0.50      2.96       0.47         2.97           0.48
                                    Log Hours of Spouse | Married                 6.65       1.01         6.72         0.80      7.62       0.54         7.59           0.50
                                    Spouse Employed | Married                     0.68       0.47         0.68         0.47      0.95       0.22         0.95           0.22
                                    Spouse Unemployed | Married                   0.01       0.12         0.01         0.12      0.02       0.15         0.02           0.15
                                    Spouse Nonparticipation | Married             0.31       0.46         0.30         0.46      0.03       0.17         0.03           0.17
                                    Log earnings of Spouse | Married              8.84       1.52         9.20         1.04     10.50       1.03        10.56           0.75
                                    Log Family Income                            10.95       0.67        10.91         0.66     10.87       0.74        10.80           0.78
                                    Level of Family Income                       69352      46974        66978        44269     66977      49024        63486          46035
                                    Log of Unearned Income                        7.45       1.51         7.64         1.23      7.63       1.56         7.76           1.27
                                    Level of Unearned Income                      6671      16042         5353        12148      7784      18013         6283          13960
                                    Family Income AE                             10.22       0.69        10.19         0.68     10.11       0.74        10.07           0.75
                                    Log Consumption AE                            8.42       0.40         8.42         0.40      8.37       0.42         8.36           0.41
                                    Observations                                 27320                 13660000                 29141                 14570500
Table A8a shows the means and standard deviations of variables in the PSID data and the simulated data, with 500 simulated lives for each PSID observation by gender
                                           Table A8b: Comparison of PSID and Simulated Means and Standard Deviations by Marital Status: Men
                                                                                                     Single                                      Married
                                                                                     PSID                 Simulated                PSID                 Simulated
                                                                                  Mean    Sd             Mean     Sd            Mean    Sd             Mean      Sd
                                     Age                                          34.26      7.56        33.93        7.49     36.43       7.52        36.50         7.51
                                     Education                                    13.77      2.23        13.45        2.28     13.42       2.32        13.50         2.31
                                     Log Wage                                      2.84      0.48         2.82        0.47      2.96       0.47         2.96         0.47
                                     Log Hours                                     7.50      0.63         7.52        0.54      7.65       0.46         7.62         0.46
                                     Employed                                      0.90      0.30         0.89        0.31      0.96       0.20         0.96         0.21
                                     Unemployed                                    0.05      0.22         0.06        0.23      0.02       0.15         0.02         0.15
                                     Nonparticipation                              0.05      0.22         0.05        0.23      0.02       0.14         0.02         0.14
                                     Employed to Unemployed                        0.04      0.19         0.04        0.19      0.02       0.13         0.02         0.13
                                     Unemployed to Employed                        0.63      0.48         0.60        0.49      0.72       0.45         0.76         0.42
                                     Log Earnings                                 10.25      1.08        10.35        0.79     10.57       0.89        10.58         0.72
                                     Level of Earnings                            41178     32949        41107       31465     52027      46890        50035        36563
                                     Log Transfers                                 6.79      1.11         6.77        1.08      6.71       1.05         6.73         1.08
                                     Level of Transfers                            2547     15556        1643        3106      2171        6098         1556         2886
                                     Married                                       0.00      0.00         0.00        0.00      1.00       0.00         1.00         0.00
                                     Marriage Duration | Married                                                               11.99       8.08        12.24         8.10
                                     Prob( Marriedt+1 | Marriedt )                                                              0.97       0.18         0.97         0.17
                                     Prob(Singlet+1 | Marriedt )                                                                1.00       0.00         1.00         0.00
                                     Children Aged 0-5                             0.07       0.29        0.10        0.33      0.43       0.68         0.41         0.66
                                     Children Aged 6-12                            0.27       0.59        0.27        0.59      0.61       0.84         0.59         0.81
                                     Children Aged 13-18                           0.18       0.50        0.23        0.56      0.32       0.63         0.38         0.69
                                     Age of Spouse | Married                                                                   34.39       7.68        34.62         7.86
                                     Education of Spouse | Married                                                             13.15       2.00        13.25         2.02
                                     Log Wage of Spouse | Married                                                               2.49       0.42         2.47         0.50
                                     Log Hours of Spouse | Married                                                              6.65       1.01         6.72         0.80
                                     Spouse Employed | Married                                                                  0.68       0.47         0.68         0.47
                                     Spouse Unemployed | Married                                                                0.01       0.12         0.01         0.12
                                     Spouse Nonparticipation | Married                                                          0.31       0.46         0.30         0.46
                                     Log earnings of Spouse | Married                                                           8.84       1.52         9.20         1.04
                                     Log Family Income                            10.51      0.77        10.49        0.71     11.06       0.60        11.02         0.60
                                     Level of Family Income                       47081     35728        45595       33179     74917      47792        72348        45075
                                     Log of Unearned Income                        7.35      1.44         7.55        1.17      7.48       1.53         7.67         1.24
                                     Level of Unearned Income                      5586     13568         4487       10031      6945      16596         5571        12615
                                     Family Income AE                             10.41      0.79        10.28        0.76     10.17       0.66        10.17         0.66
                                     Log Consumption AE                            8.56      0.43         8.54        0.42      8.39       0.39         8.39         0.39
                                     Observations                                 5600                  2741931                21720                 10918069
Table A8b shows the means and standard deviations of variables in the PSID data and the simulated data for single men and married men, with 500 simulated lives for each PSID observation.
                                         Table A8c: Comparison of PSID and Simulated Means and Standard Deviations by Marital Status: Women
                                                                                                    Single                                     Married
                                                                                    PSID                 Simulated               PSID                  Simulated
                                                                                 Mean    Sd             Mean     Sd           Mean    Sd              Mean      Sd
                                    Age                                          35.52      7.86        35.22        7.86     35.97       7.55       36.05         7.54
                                    Education                                    13.32      2.25        13.12        2.16     13.03       2.12       13.09         2.15
                                    Log Wage                                      2.57      0.46         2.56        0.49      2.49       0.42        2.48         0.50
                                    Log Hours                                     7.24      0.79         7.12        0.73      6.67       1.00        6.70         0.79
                                    Employed                                      0.85      0.36         0.84        0.37      0.67       0.47        0.67         0.47
                                    Unemployed                                    0.04      0.21         0.04        0.21      0.01       0.12        0.02         0.12
                                    Nonparticipation                              0.11      0.31         0.12        0.32      0.31       0.46        0.32         0.47
                                    Employed to Unemployed                        0.03      0.17         0.03        0.18      0.01       0.11        0.01         0.11
                                    Unemployed to Employed                        0.61      0.49         0.65        0.48      0.55       0.50        0.58         0.49
                                    Log Earnings                                  9.75      1.24         9.68        1.00      8.90       1.51        9.18         1.04
                                    Level of Earnings                            27926     22080        25434       26817     17408      20707       16397        19984
                                    Log Transfers                                 7.39      1.38         7.44        1.35      6.80       1.15        6.78         1.11
                                    Level of Transfers                            4423      8152        4642        14119     2839       12259        1769         4409
                                    Married                                       0.00      0.00         0.00        0.00      1.00       0.00        1.00         0.00
                                    Marriage Duration | Married                                                               13.24       8.67       13.20         8.42
                                    Prob( Marriedt+1 | Marriedt )                                                              0.97       0.18        0.97         0.17
                                    Prob(Singlet+1 | Marriedt )                                                                1.00       0.00        1.00         0.00
                                    Children Aged 0-5                             0.12       0.38        0.13        0.40      0.38       0.65        0.38         0.66
                                    Children Aged 6-12                            0.39       0.72        0.34        0.68      0.64       0.85        0.64         0.86
                                    Children Aged 13-18                           0.29       0.60        0.31        0.65      0.37       0.67        0.43         0.73
                                    Age of Spouse | Married                                                                   38.75       8.71       38.68         8.68
                                    Education of Spouse | Married                                                             13.26       2.50       13.35         2.31
                                    Log Wage of Spouse | Married                                                               2.96       0.47        2.97         0.48
                                    Log Hours of Spouse | Married                                                              7.62       0.54        7.59         0.50
                                    Spouse Employed | Married                                                                  0.95       0.22        0.95         0.22
                                    Spouse Unemployed | Married                                                                0.02       0.15        0.02         0.15
                                    Spouse Nonparticipation | Married                                                          0.03       0.17        0.03         0.17
                                    Log earnings of Spouse | Married                                                          10.50       1.03       10.56         0.75
                                    Log Family Income                            10.20      0.75        10.03        0.82     11.08       0.60       11.02         0.61
                                    Level of Family Income                       34124     23773        31703       28764     76903      50340       72634        46007
                                    Log of Unearned Income                        7.70      1.44         7.82        1.24      7.61       1.59        7.75         1.28
                                    Level of Unearned Income                      6134     11545         6269       13432      8284      19528        6287        14108
                                    Family Income AE                              9.86      0.89         9.76        0.91     10.18       0.67       10.16         0.67
                                    Log Consumption AE                            8.29      0.47         8.27        0.45      8.39       0.40        8.39         0.40
                                    Observations                                  6817                 3256372                22324                11314128
Table A8c shows the means and standard deviations of variables in the PSID data and the simulated data for single women and married women married, with 500 simulated lives for each PSID observation.
                                       Table A9: Fit of Spouse Characteristics

                                            Spouse's Education               Spouse's Age               Spouse's Wage
                                             (1)            (2)            (3)          (4)            (5)          (6)
                                             Men           Women           Men         Women           Men         Women
 PSID Data                                   0.348         -0.520          0.613       -0.078         0.037       -0.201
                                            (0.269)        (0.344)        (0.600)      (0.617)       (0.067)       (0.066)
 Education                                 0.570          0.690
                                            (0.001)        (0.001)
 Log Wage                                                                                           0.367          0.369
                                                                                                     (0.001)        (0.001)
 Education × PSID Data                      -0.030          0.036
                                            (0.020)        (0.025)
 Log Wage × PSID                                                                                      0.013        0.063
                                                                                                     (0.024)       (0.026)
 Age spline 25-31                                                        0.912         0.949
                                                                          (0.001)       (0.001)
 Age spline 32-39                                                        0.745         0.942
                                                                          (0.003)       (0.003)
 Age spline 40-47                                                        0.670         1.030
                                                                          (0.005)       (0.006)
 Age spline 48-55                                                        0.789         0.704
                                                                          (0.009)       (0.014)
 Age spline 25-31 × PSID Data                                             -0.023         0.011
                                                                          (0.025)       (0.027)
 Age spline 32-39 × PSID Data                                              0.008       -0.129
                                                                          (0.066)       (0.077)
 Age spline 40-47 × PSID Data                                             -0.011         0.090
                                                                          (0.137)       (0.166)
 Age spline 48-55 × PSID Data                                              0.128        -0.016
                                                                          (0.219)       (0.312)
 Constant                                  5.552          4.314          0.816         3.854        1.392          1.952
                                            (0.011)        (0.013)        (0.027)       (0.029)      (0.003)        (0.003)
 R-squared                                  0.43           0.41            0.68          0.68         0.13           0.13
 Observations                             10939716       11336396        3399021       3468813      1507592        1300192
    p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01

 Table A9 displays results of regressions with the spouse's education, age and wage as the outcome variable, including both
simulated and PSID data in the regressions. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the individual level. The control
variables are the sample member's characteristics, as well as interactions with whether the data comes from the PSID or is
simulated.




                                                             96
                                                      Table A10a: Dynamic Fit, Men
               Wages                 Hours             Employment               Earnings          Unearned Income           Family Income
            (1a)    (1b)          (2a)    (2b)          (3a)  (3b)            (4a)    (4b)          (5a)    (5b)             (6a)     (6b)
  Lag      PSID     SIM          PSID     SIM          PSID   SIM            PSID     SIM          PSID     SIM             PSID      SIM
  1        0.822      0.842      0.709      0.409      0.418      0.432      0.787      0.652      0.625        0.546       0.814      0.669
          (0.004)               (0.004)               (0.006)               (0.004)               (0.004)                  (0.004)
  3         0.75      0.778      0.509      0.202      0.259      0.182      0.677      0.537      0.509        0.197       0.731      0.533
          (0.004)               (0.006)               (0.007)               (0.006)               (0.006)                  (0.004)
  6        0.694      0.716      0.435      0.116      0.179      0.112      0.629      0.465      0.435        0.065       0.671      0.446
          (0.007)               (0.008)               (0.008)               (0.008)               (0.008)                  (0.007)
  8        0.679      0.689      0.414      0.098      0.181      0.097      0.610      0.442      0.389        0.043       0.643      0.416
          (0.008)               (0.009)               (0.008)               (0.009)               (0.008)                  (0.008)

 Table A10a shows the dynamic fit of the model for men. Each row in the table shows the coefficient, or standard error, estimated when regressing
each outcome variable on its own lag, as indicated in the leftmost column, using the PSID and simulated data, respectively. Simulations are based
on 2,137,000 lives, 500 for each PSID sample member. Simulation error is negligible.




                                                    Table A10b: Dynamic Fit, Women
               Wages                 Hours             Employment               Earnings          Unearned Income           Family Income
            (1a)    (1b)          (2a)    (2b)          (3a)  (3b)            (4a)    (4b)          (5a)    (5b)             (6a)     (6b)
  Lag      PSID     SIM          PSID     SIM          PSID   SIM            PSID     SIM          PSID     SIM             PSID      SIM
  1        0.797      0.857      0.809      0.612      0.418      0.652      0.871      0.725      0.657        0.589       0.800      0.699
          (0.004)               (0.004)               (0.006)               (0.003)               (0.004)                  (0.004)
  3        0.749      0.796      0.638      0.446      0.259      0.435      0.726      0.602      0.527        0.238       0.709      0.531
          (0.004)               (0.004)               (0.007)               (0.004)               (0.006)                  (0.004)
  6        0.711      0.722      0.495      0.305      0.179      0.351      0.591      0.479      0.414        0.086       0.647      0.412
          (0.007)               (0.006)               (0.008)               (0.006)               (0.007)                  (0.007)
  8        0.700      0.685      0.423      0.248      0.181      0.324      0.519      0.426      0.349        0.054       0.619      0.368
          (0.008)               (0.007)               (0.008)               (0.007)               (0.008)                  (0.008)

Table A10b shows the dynamic fit of the model for women. Each row in the table shows the coefficient, or standard error, estimated when regressing
each outcome variable on its own lag, as indicated in the leftmost column, using the PSID and simulated data, respectively. Simulations are based
on 2,137,000 lives, 500 for each PSID sample member. Simulation error is negligible.




                                                                     97
                        Table A11a: The Effect of Marriage on Family Income and Household Production: Estimates for Transitions into Marriage

                                                                               Men                                                               Women
                                                                                             Fam. Inc.+                                                          Fam. Inc.+
                                                  Housework Hours          Fam. Inc.     Value of Housework          Housework Hours          Fam. Inc.      Value of Housework
           Married                                     0.598                -0.059                0.051                      0.083            0.590                 0.513
                                                        (0.054)              (0.026)              (0.025)                   (0.058)             (0.031)              (0.027)
           Education                                    -0.031             0.055                0.047                       0.044              0.039                0.030
                                                        (0.019)              (0.011)              (0.009)                   (0.021)             (0.012)              (0.010)
           Log Predicted Wage (wage )                   -0.039             0.786                0.698                      -0.177              0.873                0.724
                                                        (0.078)              (0.055)              (0.047)                   (0.085)             (0.048)              (0.043)
           Children Aged 0-5                             0.007             -0.220               -0.199                       0.090            -0.311                -0.201
                                                        (0.075)              (0.034)              (0.033)                   (0.062)             (0.047)              (0.035)
           Children Aged 6-12                           -0.029                -0.040               -0.049                   0.079             -0.240                -0.171
                                                        (0.062)              (0.036)              (0.034)                   (0.048)             (0.029)              (0.023)
           Children Aged 13-18                           0.072                -0.050               -0.040                    -0.092           -0.132                -0.117
                                                        (0.074)              (0.031)              (0.026)                   (0.058)             (0.033)              (0.030)
           Constant                                  -149.670                 4.185              -7.797                  -144.670             13.096                  2.632
                                                        (8.946)              (2.694)              (3.741)                   (8.190)             (2.832)              (4.125)
           R-squared                                      0.39               0.46                  0.46                      0.46                0.57                 0.55
           Observations                                   1590               1838                  1621                      1484                1668                 1468
              p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01

 Table A11a reports OLS regressions of the log of total annual hours of household production (columns 1 and 3, log family income per adult equivalent (columns 2 and 4, and the log of the sum per
adult equivalent of family income and the value of household production (columns 3 and 6) on marital status and other variables. Standard errors are clustered at the individual level. To monetize
household production, we value each hour of household work performed by either the sample member or the spouse (as reported in the PSID survey) at the 25th percentile of the wage distribution for
women (USD 8.98). When the sample member is single only the sample member's hours are included. Hours of household work is censored at the 99th percentile of the male and female distributions,
respectively. The sample includes observations of individuals aged 25-61 two years prior and two years after a transition into marriage. The complete model also includes quadratics in potential
experience and year.




                                                                                                 98
                      Table A11b: The Effect of Marriage on Family Income and Household Production: Estimates for Transitions out of Marriage

                                                                                 Men                                                                Women
                                                                                                Fam. Inc.+                                                           Fam. Inc.+
                                                   Housework Hours          Fam. Inc.       Value of Housework          Housework Hours           Fam. Inc.      Value of Housework
           Married                                       0.652              -0.353                -0.224                      0.378               0.519                0.407
                                                          (0.063)             (0.031)               (0.031)                    (0.052)             (0.020)              (0.028)
           Education                                     -0.047              0.045                0.040                         0.022             0.070                0.048
                                                          (0.020)             (0.011)               (0.010)                    (0.022)             (0.006)              (0.012)
           Log Predicted Wage (wage )                      0.050             0.860                0.743                       -0.201              0.676                0.666
                                                          (0.098)             (0.055)               (0.049)                    (0.099)             (0.020)              (0.054)
           Children Aged 0-5                               0.036            -0.101                 -0.085                     0.141               -0.226               -0.156
                                                          (0.074)             (0.034)               (0.034)                    (0.057)             (0.011)              (0.031)
           Children Aged 6-12                              0.026            -0.125                -0.116                        0.028             -0.180               -0.144
                                                          (0.047)             (0.027)               (0.024)                    (0.041)             (0.009)              (0.023)
           Children Aged 13-18                            -0.017               -0.045               -0.034                     -0.078             -0.169               -0.142
                                                          (0.060)             (0.037)               (0.033)                    (0.058)             (0.010)              (0.030)
           Constant                                    -141.339                3.985                -6.065                  -128.644              7.922                  2.537
                                                          (9.703)             (2.897)               (4.445)                    (9.677)             (0.627)              (4.448)
           R-squared                                       0.45                0.46                  0.45                       0.41                 0.46                 0.48
           Observations                                    1127                1379                  1177                       1377                26289                 1374
              p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01

Table A11b reports estimates of the same regression models as Table 11a, but for the sample of 25-61 year olds 2 years prior and after a divorce. See the note to Table 11a.




                                                                                                   99
                                     Table A11c: The Effect of Marriage on Family Income and Household Production: All Observations

                                                                                Men                                                       Women
                                                                                              Fam. Inc.+                                                 Fam. Inc.+
                                                  Housework Hours          Fam. Inc.      Value of Housework          Housework Hours    Fam. Inc.   Value of Housework
           Married                                      0.716              -0.115                  -0.028                   0.410        0.519           0.467
                                                         (0.029)            (0.023)               (0.022)                    (0.026)      (0.020)         (0.016)
           Education                                    -0.012             0.040                 0.036                     -0.020        0.070           0.055
                                                         (0.005)            (0.005)               (0.004)                    (0.006)      (0.006)         (0.005)
           Log Predicted Wage (wage )                     0.014            0.775                 0.664                     -0.141        0.676           0.579
                                                         (0.023)            (0.019)               (0.017)                    (0.025)      (0.020)         (0.018)
           Children Aged 0-5                            0.085              -0.218                -0.164                     0.108        -0.226          -0.167
                                                         (0.018)            (0.009)               (0.009)                    (0.018)      (0.011)         (0.010)
           Children Aged 6-12                             0.012            -0.171                -0.146                     0.029        -0.180          -0.150
                                                         (0.012)            (0.009)               (0.008)                    (0.012)      (0.009)         (0.008)
           Children Aged 13-18                         -0.081              -0.131                -0.120                    -0.103        -0.169          -0.157
                                                         (0.018)            (0.011)               (0.010)                    (0.017)      (0.010)         (0.009)
           Constant                                   -184.794             5.450                 -2.927                   -181.205       7.922             -0.849
                                                         (1.619)            (0.585)               (0.869)                    (1.548)      (0.627)         (0.896)
           R-squared                                      0.65                0.47                  0.44                          0.64     0.46             0.44
           Observations                                  20919               24472                 20718                         22582    26289            22151
              p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01

Table A11c reports estimates of the same regression models as Table 11a, but uses the entire sample of individuals aged 25-61.




                                                                                                 100
Table A12: Percentage contributions of Sorting on Education and Unobserved Wage Components to the Variance of
Outcomes at Age 55, by Gender
                                                     Women                                               Men
                                                                     Marital Sorting Variables
                                     (1)            (2)        (3)         (4)         (5)            (6)        (7)         (8)
  Outcomes                        Education          µ                     All      Education          µ                     All
  Log Fam Earnings                  11.119         3.026       0.584     13.729        7.981        3.305       1.904      13.194
                                    (1.370)      (0.948)     (0.680)     (1.503)      (1.174)      (1.235)     (0.830)     (1.588)
  Log Fam Inc                       11.642         3.601       0.839     15.086        8.609        3.348       1.529      14.017
                                    (1.304)      (0.989)     (0.651)     (1.473)      (1.077)      (1.258)     (0.740)     (1.544)
  Log Fam Inc AE                    12.947         4.486       0.677     17.204        8.871        3.584       1.664      14.041
                                    (1.297)      (1.113)     (0.685)     (1.473)      (0.945)      (1.190)     (0.654)     (1.366)
  Log Fam Earn AE                   12.329         3.795       0.639     15.579        8.449        3.667       1.967      13.697
                                    (1.393)      (1.036)     (0.700)     (1.536)      (1.024)      (1.179)     (0.726)     (1.417)
  Log Fam Unearn Inc                 1.399         0.218       0.437      0.458        1.567        -0.268      -1.292      1.518
                                    (0.777)      (0.582)     (0.532)     (0.827)      (0.945)      (0.596)     (0.578)     (0.958)
  Log Fam Unearn Inc AE              0.184        -0.150      -0.477      -0.823       1.305        -0.462      -0.579      0.986
                                    (0.763)      (0.509)     (0.503)     (0.805)      (0.814)      (0.540)     (0.532)     (0.815)
  Log Consumption AE                19.000         3.135       0.344     22.124        7.356        2.063       0.906      10.237
                                    (1.758)      (0.819)     (0.542)     (1.730)      (1.572)      (0.782)     (0.472)     (1.743)
  Log Earnings                       -5.949       -2.898      -1.345      -9.760       0.143        -0.123      0.143       0.361
                                    (1.057)      (0.941)     (0.513)     (1.605)      (0.634)      (0.649)     (0.625)     (0.643)
  Log Wages                          -0.486        0.446      -0.624      -0.561      -0.261        -0.317      -0.097     -0.142
                                    (0.503)      (0.503)     (0.500)       (0.5)      (0.518)      (0.518)       (0.5)     (0.505)
  Log Hours                          -5.610       -1.911      -0.600      -8.258      -0.287        0.245       -0.257      0.866
                                    (1.207)      (0.663)     (0.497)     (1.465)      (0.970)      (0.994)     (0.989)     (0.945)

 Table A12 displays estimates of the contribution of sorting on education and the unobserved wage components to the variance of several
outcomes. The estimates are based on 100 simulations per PSID sample member. Bootstrap standard errors based on 500 draws of the
estimation sample are in parentheses. See section 6.2.3.




                                                                  101
                      Table A13a: Decomposition of the Variance of Labor Market and Family Income Variables at Different Ages: Women

              (1)      (2)      (3)       (4)     (5)       (6)      (7)      (8)      (9)     (10)      (11)     (12)     (13)     (14)     (15)     (16)
             Educ       µ       ,        Emp               Hours    Unearn     EDs     µ~s      s , s     s       Mar     Sd Mar    Mean      SD      Sum
                                                                     Inc                                          Hist      FE
Log Wages
 age = 26    22.54    43.76    -0.13    2.35     25.58     -0.61             -0.23    -0.78    -0.53    -0.20    2.25     0.06     2.36     0.37     94.00
             (3.03)   (8.88)   (0.48)   (0.78)   (8.78)    (0.49)            (0.48)   (0.48)   (0.51)   (0.49)   (0.67)   (0.01)   (0.02)   (0.01)   (3.35)
 age = 35    21.09    25.79    -0.12    0.47     44.88     -0.44             -0.56    -0.24    -0.41    -0.70    2.27     0.08     2.52     0.48     92.03
             (2.84)   (6.78)   (0.53)   (0.56)   (9.15)    (0.52)            (0.56)   (0.51)   (0.52)   (0.50)   (0.49)   (0.01)   (0.02)   (0.02)   (3.73)
 age = 45    22.57    24.52    2.22     0.43     49.17     0.06              -0.27    -0.21    -0.42    -0.92    0.50     0.04     2.66     0.49     97.64
             (3.86)   (7.42)   (0.58)   (0.54)   (11.02)   (0.49)            (0.51)   (0.55)   (0.50)   (0.50)   (0.15)   (0.00)   (0.03)   (0.04)   (3.47)
 age = 55    26.70    23.55    1.70     0.84     48.08     -0.09             0.18     0.03     -0.37    -0.13    0.04     0.01     2.73     0.50     100.52
             (5.63)   (7.39)   (0.59)   (0.52)   (11.76)   (0.51)            (0.49)   (0.50)   (0.49)   (0.49)   (0.02)   (0.00)   (0.04)   (0.04)   (3.36)
Log Hours
 age = 26    2.80     0.01     3.97     6.95     0.03      45.23             0.27     0.46     -0.46    -0.03    13.55    0.32     6.71     0.81     72.76
             (0.75)   (0.40)   (1.41)   (0.63)   (0.40)    (2.73)            (0.38)   (0.41)   (0.42)   (0.38)   (1.43)   (0.02)   (0.02)   (0.01)   (3.12)
  age = 35   1.37     0.50     9.66     7.24     1.10      55.62             0.90     0.48     -0.37    0.28     5.43     0.19     6.85     0.77     82.22
             (0.62)   (0.44)   (1.97)   (0.67)   (0.55)    (2.76)            (0.43)   (0.46)   (0.45)   (0.48)   (0.73)   (0.01)   (0.02)   (0.01)   (3.43)
  age = 45   1.57     -0.66    14.61    6.75     0.91      64.78             0.16     -0.21    -0.73    -0.16    0.55     0.06     7.07     0.72     87.57
             (0.83)   (0.48)   (2.22)   (0.69)   (0.72)    (3.16)            (0.47)   (0.49)   (0.48)   (0.47)   (0.20)   (0.01)   (0.03)   (0.01)   (3.36)
  age = 55   5.86     0.28     12.29    7.32     1.64      60.91             0.61     0.54     -1.18    0.35     0.11     0.03     6.89     0.75     88.74
             (1.34)   (0.44)   (2.18)   (0.71)   (0.79)    (3.35)            (0.46)   (0.46)   (0.51)   (0.48)   (0.11)   (0.01)   (0.05)   (0.01)   (3.85)
Log Earnings
 age = 26 11.38       8.18     1.60     6.47     5.01      29.48             0.06     -0.36    -0.87    -0.40    12.91    0.38     9.07     0.98     73.47
             (1.61)   (1.95)   (0.96)   (0.64)   (1.81)    (2.08)            (0.43)   (0.44)   (0.45)   (0.41)   (1.35)   (0.02)   (0.03)   (0.01)   (3.38)
 age = 35 9.35        8.38     6.57     4.85     16.42     31.65             0.74     0.30     -0.35    -0.20    5.97     0.26     9.37     1.00     83.67
             (1.39)   (2.09)   (1.29)   (0.62)   (4.33)    (2.17)            (0.49)   (0.49)   (0.46)   (0.49)   (0.77)   (0.02)   (0.04)   (0.02)   (3.63)
 age = 45 11.43       8.16     10.97    4.16     20.41     34.81             0.14     -0.64    -0.75    -0.58    0.80     0.09     9.74     0.96     88.93
             (1.83)   (2.42)   (1.54)   (0.65)   (6.48)    (3.11)            (0.51)   (0.52)   (0.52)   (0.50)   (0.23)   (0.01)   (0.04)   (0.03)   (3.51)
 age = 55 18.63       8.03     8.71     4.08     19.17     31.47             0.01     0.10     -1.28    -0.10    0.11     0.04     9.61     1.01     88.96
             (2.87)   (2.24)   (1.53)   (0.65)   (6.70)    (3.10)            (0.49)   (0.48)   (0.50)   (0.48)   (0.09)   (0.01)   (0.06)   (0.04)   (3.64)
                 Table A13a Continued : Decomposition of the Variance of Labor Market and Family Income Variables at Different Ages: Women

              (1)       (2)      (3)       (4)     (5)      (6)      (7)      (8)      (9)     (10)      (11)     (12)     (13)     (14)      (15)     (16)
             Educ        µ       ,        Emp              Hours    Unearn     EDs     µ~s      s , s     s       Mar     Sd Mar    Mean       SD      Sum
                                                                     Inc                                          Hist      FE
Log Family Earnings
 age = 26 6.72         7.06     3.27     -0.61    5.15     18.62             1.57     5.14     0.95     1.14     37.58    0.51     10.38     0.84     86.59
             (1.57)    (1.23)   (0.89)   (0.79)   (1.67)   (1.43)            (0.61)   (0.89)   (0.65)   (0.63)   (1.94)   (0.02)   (0.02)    (0.02)   (4.58)
 age = 35 16.40        5.72     5.87     3.88     8.71     16.20             4.52     5.80     1.63     2.90     12.04    0.29     10.64     0.87     83.67
             (2.11)    (1.30)   (1.09)   (0.73)   (2.42)   (1.28)            (0.98)   (0.92)   (0.74)   (0.84)   (1.02)   (0.02)   (0.03)    (0.02)   (5.01)
 age = 45 20.87        6.88     8.23     2.85     9.89     16.85             4.70     3.61     3.01     2.64     1.38     0.10     10.79     0.88     80.93
             (2.49)    (1.40)   (1.28)   (0.74)   (3.66)   (1.46)            (0.95)   (0.86)   (0.87)   (0.84)   (0.39)   (0.01)   (0.04)    (0.03)   (4.99)
 age = 55 25.48        5.94     8.66     2.69     8.91     14.15             4.36     2.71     2.66     2.12     0.93     0.10     10.57     1.00     78.62
             (2.98)    (1.23)   (1.30)   (0.62)   (3.72)   (1.55)            (0.91)   (0.68)   (1.32)   (0.72)   (0.35)   (0.02)   (0.06)    (0.04)   (4.89)
Log Family Income
 age = 26 4.41         6.22     2.88     -1.22    4.70     14.60    -1.17    1.74     5.77     1.11     0.98     34.77    0.43     10.51     0.73     74.79
             (1.18)    (1.14)   (0.73)   (0.66)   (1.65)   (1.20)   (0.54)   (0.56)   (0.92)   (0.58)   (0.56)   (1.85)   (0.02)   (0.02)    (0.01)   (4.13)
 age = 35 13.48        5.91     3.92     2.75     7.84     11.71    -1.47    5.08     6.70     1.44     3.82     10.09    0.23     10.81     0.73     71.29
             (1.64)    (1.23)   (0.85)   (0.62)   (2.17)   (1.07)   (0.75)   (0.86)   (0.92)   (0.63)   (0.87)   (1.00)   (0.01)   (0.02)    (0.01)   (4.88)
 age = 45 18.70        6.15     4.69     1.45     8.07     11.98    -2.90    4.69     4.06     2.49     2.62     1.47     0.09     10.96     0.76     63.46
             (2.14)    (1.29)   (0.95)   (0.60)   (3.21)   (1.18)   (0.88)   (0.87)   (0.85)   (0.73)   (0.84)   (0.39)   (0.01)   (0.03)    (0.02)   (4.58)
 age = 55 22.23        5.71     4.89     1.98     8.06     8.87     2.68     4.94     3.56     2.96     2.88     0.93     0.08     10.88     0.84     69.70
             (2.52)    (1.06)   (0.94)   (0.53)   (3.08)   (1.13)   (1.80)   (0.83)   (0.70)   (0.98)   (0.74)   (0.34)   (0.01)   (0.05)    (0.03)   (4.99)
Log Family Unearned Income
 age = 26 -0.86      -0.44      -0.41    -0.35    -1.11    0.27     87.44    -0.18    -0.89    -0.32    -0.85    1.97     0.15     7.41      1.10     84.26
            (0.65) (0.54)       (0.55)   (0.55)   (0.56)   (0.57)   (1.52)   (0.53)   (0.53)   (0.54)   (0.55)   (1.16)   (0.03)   (0.02)    (0.01)   (4.44)
 age = 35 0.58       0.27       1.00     1.09     0.38     0.96     88.82    0.78     0.97     0.74     0.56     1.01     0.13     7.77      1.27     97.17
            (0.61) (0.51)       (0.54)   (0.51)   (0.49)   (0.50)   (1.24)   (0.48)   (0.49)   (0.51)   (0.48)   (0.54)   (0.02)   (0.03)    (0.01)   (3.85)
 age = 45 0.25       0.14       1.10     0.30     0.24     1.38     92.29    1.02     0.22     1.45     0.50     0.03     0.05     7.97      1.31     98.91
            (0.58) (0.47)       (0.53)   (0.49)   (0.50)   (0.50)   (1.36)   (0.47)   (0.48)   (0.50)   (0.45)   (0.16)   (0.01)   (0.05)    (0.01)   (3.61)
 age = 55 0.22       0.22       1.13     0.10     0.46     0.87     89.64    -0.77    0.60     2.45     0.54     0.06     0.06     8.45      1.42     95.54
            (0.45) (0.43)       (0.49)   (0.41)   (0.45)   (0.47)   (2.33)   (0.44)   (0.43)   (0.61)   (0.42)   (0.16)   (0.01)   (0.08)    (0.02)   (4.02)
Log Family Income AE
 age = 26 11.03        6.79     1.87     1.77     4.84     15.20    -0.72    2.40     5.75     1.82     1.36     6.45     0.18     9.86      0.70     58.56
             (1.38)    (1.22)   (0.68)   (0.59)   (1.84)   (1.22)   (0.50)   (0.54)   (0.89)   (0.61)   (0.54)   (0.99)   (0.01)   (0.02)    (0.01)   (3.91)
 age = 35 15.89        5.89     2.91     1.49     7.36     10.54    -0.88    4.33     6.09     1.82     3.34     2.71     0.12     9.98      0.72     61.51
             (1.49)    (1.17)   (0.77)   (0.59)   (2.15)   (0.98)   (0.72)   (0.77)   (0.87)   (0.65)   (0.84)   (0.34)   (0.01)   (0.02)    (0.01)   (4.59)
 age = 45 13.94        6.66     4.66     1.45     9.43     13.45    -1.75    4.85     3.94     3.91     2.68     0.60     0.06     10.34     0.69     63.83
             (1.74)    (1.40)   (0.90)   (0.56)   (3.60)   (1.20)   (0.97)   (0.80)   (0.87)   (0.85)   (0.89)   (0.14)   (0.00)   (0.03)    (0.02)   (4.14)
 age = 55 22.78        6.60     5.86     2.24     9.89     11.32    4.83     4.91     3.96     5.42     3.23     0.19     0.04     10.47     0.75     81.24
             (2.37)    (1.23)   (0.97)   (0.52)   (3.65)   (1.23)   (2.19)   (0.81)   (0.74)   (1.32)   (0.81)   (0.13)   (0.01)   (0.04)    (0.02)   (4.46)
Footnote for table A13. AE = Adult Equivalent. Tables A13a and A13b show estimates of variance decompositions for several
variables at several ages, based on simulations of 100 lives per PSID sample member. Bootstrapped standard errors are in
parentheses. Table A13a focuses on women and A13b on men. To compute the contribution to the variable of each source for
each age we use the equivalent method as for the lifetime variance, as explained in the paper. Except, we consider the variance of
each variable in each panel of tables A13a and A13b at specific ages, in the baseline model and when turning off the contribution
of each shock, as opposed to the sum of each variable over life. Columns 1-12 report the percentage of the variance of the
variable indicated by each panel explained by the following factors: (1) education, (2) the wage component µ, (3) the permanent
employment component  and hours component  , (4) the i.i.d shocks to employment status plus variation in initial employment
conditional on number of children, marital status, and education, (5) the initial draw and shocks u to the autoregressive wage
component  , (6) the initial draw 25   h and the shocks u h to  h plus the i.i.d. hours shocks h , (7) the initial draw and shocks

to the autoregressive component of unearned income, (8) the random component EDs of spouse's education, (9) the random
component µ ~ s of µs (10) s and s , (11) the random component    s of the initial condition  s and shocks to  s over the marriage
                                                                 ~0                          0
and (12) the contribution of random variation in marriage histories conditional on [µ,  , , 25 , EDUC ]. Column 13 reports the
sampling error corrected SD of the marriage history fixed effects. Columns 14 and 15 report the mean and standard deviation
across individuals of the lifetime sum of each row variable. Column 16 reports the sum of percentages explained by the factors
we consider. Section 6.1 discusses the simulation methodology.




                                                              104
                        Table A13b: Decomposition of the Variance of Labor Market and Family Income Variables at Different Ages: Men

              (1)      (2)      (3)       (4)     (5)      (6)      (7)       (8)     (9)     (10)      (11)     (12)     (13)     (14)     (15)     (16)
             Educ       µ       ,        Emp              Hours    Unearn     EDs     µ~s      s , s     s       Mar     Sd Mar    Mean      SD      Sum
                                                                    Inc                                          Hist      FE
Log Wages
 age = 26    10.59    60.31    0.04     -0.66    24.65    0.17              0.05     -0.59    -0.50    -0.72    0.63     0.03     2.70     0.36     93.99
             (1.84)   (4.70)   (0.54)   (0.55)   (4.71)   (0.53)            (0.51)   (0.52)   (0.53)   (0.51)   (0.27)   (0.01)   (0.01)   (0.01)   (3.53)
 age = 35    23.49    42.85    2.20     0.94     29.11    -0.15             0.45     -0.70    -0.37    -0.16    0.43     0.03     2.92     0.43     98.09
             (2.40)   (4.32)   (1.68)   (0.85)   (4.66)   (0.52)            (0.52)   (0.54)   (0.55)   (0.51)   (0.17)   (0.00)   (0.01)   (0.01)   (3.56)
 age = 45    32.23    37.54    4.96     2.84     25.92    0.47              0.63     -0.05    -0.26    0.12     0.03     0.01     3.06     0.46     104.43
             (2.96)   (4.19)   (2.87)   (1.47)   (4.53)   (0.52)            (0.50)   (0.51)   (0.52)   (0.50)   (0.01)   (0.00)   (0.02)   (0.01)   (3.82)
 age = 55    31.04    33.85    13.94    4.82     23.31    -0.21             0.79     -0.59    -1.04    -0.68    0.01     0.01     3.12     0.48     105.24
             (4.13)   (5.55)   (6.66)   (2.40)   (4.91)   (0.57)            (0.51)   (0.54)   (0.56)   (0.53)   (0.01)   (0.00)   (0.04)   (0.03)   (4.39)
Log Hours
 age = 26    4.06     0.90     16.39    14.80    0.71     59.38             -0.51    -0.66    0.53     0.76     0.97     0.05     7.61     0.48     97.34
             (0.93)   (0.75)   (2.91)   (4.01)   (0.71)   (2.46)            (0.74)   (0.70)   (0.72)   (0.71)   (0.29)   (0.01)   (0.02)   (0.01)   (5.52)
  age = 35   2.59     -0.81    16.60    21.13    -0.79    68.77             0.33     -0.44    -1.41    0.52     0.38     0.03     7.61     0.44     106.88
             (1.25)   (0.74)   (2.70)   (1.83)   (0.71)   (2.89)            (0.74)   (0.73)   (0.74)   (0.72)   (0.14)   (0.00)   (0.02)   (0.01)   (5.05)
  age = 45   7.75     0.90     28.30    28.12    -0.16    55.98             0.40     0.41     0.58     -0.32    0.04     0.02     7.58     0.50     122.01
             (2.19)   (0.79)   (3.85)   (2.40)   (0.78)   (4.22)            (0.79)   (0.75)   (0.77)   (0.79)   (0.04)   (0.00)   (0.03)   (0.02)   (5.73)
  age = 55   10.94    1.05     35.08    28.83    0.12     28.91             0.16     0.09     0.20     -0.31    0.06     0.02     7.30     0.69     105.14
             (2.67)   (0.58)   (4.83)   (2.05)   (0.58)   (3.29)            (0.61)   (0.59)   (0.60)   (0.59)   (0.03)   (0.00)   (0.05)   (0.04)   (7.06)
Log Earnings
 age = 26 8.50        22.84    10.04    7.59     9.54     34.53             -0.19    -0.65    0.03     0.21     1.43     0.08     10.31    0.62     93.87
             (1.23)   (2.08)   (1.80)   (2.95)   (1.84)   (1.40)            (0.61)   (0.58)   (0.59)   (0.60)   (0.35)   (0.01)   (0.02)   (0.01)   (4.62)
 age = 35 16.64       20.28    12.01    12.22    13.28    30.73             1.01     -0.19    -0.53    0.54     0.68     0.06     10.54    0.66     106.65
             (1.97)   (2.06)   (2.62)   (1.40)   (2.57)   (1.76)            (0.64)   (0.66)   (0.67)   (0.65)   (0.19)   (0.01)   (0.03)   (0.02)   (4.51)
 age = 45 25.57       16.82    22.42    17.04    10.76    24.98             0.57     0.50     0.59     0.13     0.03     0.02     10.64    0.74     119.42
             (2.62)   (2.02)   (4.09)   (2.09)   (2.37)   (2.04)            (0.65)   (0.65)   (0.69)   (0.67)   (0.02)   (0.00)   (0.04)   (0.03)   (5.00)
 age = 55 25.22       10.08    34.16    18.20    6.34     13.86             0.25     -0.20    -0.36    -0.59    0.05     0.03     10.41    0.98     107.01
             (3.33)   (1.56)   (5.23)   (1.97)   (1.66)   (2.07)            (0.59)   (0.58)   (0.61)   (0.60)   (0.02)   (0.00)   (0.07)   (0.06)   (6.06)
                    Table A13b Continued : Decomposition of the Variance of Labor Market and Family Income Variables at Different Ages: Men

              (1)        (2)      (3)       (4)     (5)      (6)      (7)      (8)      (9)     (10)      (11)     (12)     (13)     (14)      (15)     (16)
             Educ         µ       ,        Emp              Hours    Unearn     EDs     µ~s      s , s     s       Mar     Sd Mar    Mean       SD      Sum
                                                                      Inc                                          Hist      FE
Log Family Earnings
 age = 26 7.54         18.93     7.94     5.22     8.12     27.01             -0.26    0.51     0.94     0.04     11.82    0.21     10.52     0.61     87.81
             (1.16)    (1.80)    (1.57)   (2.51)   (1.80)   (1.21)            (0.62)   (0.73)   (0.63)   (0.62)   (1.03)   (0.01)   (0.02)    (0.01)   (4.63)
 age = 35 15.35        16.31     10.98    9.95     10.18    22.62             1.80     1.71     1.54     3.08     3.43     0.12     10.81     0.63     96.96
             (1.80)    (1.75)    (2.36)   (1.26)   (2.06)   (1.36)            (0.73)   (0.82)   (0.75)   (1.05)   (0.47)   (0.01)   (0.02)    (0.01)   (5.03)
 age = 45 22.59        13.72     19.53    12.96    7.13     17.68             2.31     2.42     2.41     4.44     0.20     0.04     10.99     0.69     105.41
             (2.45)    (1.73)    (3.58)   (1.72)   (1.78)   (1.44)            (0.81)   (0.88)   (0.87)   (1.68)   (0.09)   (0.01)   (0.03)    (0.03)   (5.57)
 age = 55 24.64        9.03      28.61    13.61    5.36     10.91             3.49     2.02     1.61     3.65     0.14     0.04     10.85     0.87     103.07
             (3.11)    (1.37)    (4.51)   (1.61)   (1.30)   (1.50)            (0.85)   (0.86)   (0.83)   (1.75)   (0.08)   (0.01)   (0.06)    (0.05)   (6.58)
Log Family Income
 age = 26 7.53         18.86     6.33     3.59     7.81     24.95    -2.43    0.11     0.11     0.50     0.05     11.02    0.19     10.60     0.56     78.42
             (1.14)    (1.76)    (1.29)   (2.03)   (1.76)   (1.12)   (0.34)   (0.58)   (0.69)   (0.56)   (0.56)   (0.99)   (0.01)   (0.02)    (0.01)   (4.19)
 age = 35 15.93        16.02     8.44     7.62     10.14    20.50    -1.50    2.06     2.03     1.66     3.69     3.19     0.11     10.91     0.60     89.79
             (1.68)    (1.65)    (1.72)   (1.02)   (1.96)   (1.17)   (0.45)   (0.65)   (0.78)   (0.68)   (1.02)   (0.47)   (0.01)   (0.02)    (0.01)   (4.50)
 age = 45 21.59        12.93     14.25    8.95     6.81     15.45    -2.95    2.06     2.08     1.93     4.58     0.18     0.03     11.10     0.64     87.86
             (2.18)    (1.61)    (2.64)   (1.34)   (1.71)   (1.20)   (0.60)   (0.73)   (0.82)   (0.77)   (1.69)   (0.09)   (0.00)   (0.03)    (0.02)   (5.01)
 age = 55 23.05        9.14      20.73    9.20     4.75     9.79     -3.15    3.80     1.72     1.27     3.88     0.13     0.03     11.06     0.74     84.31
             (2.62)    (1.27)    (3.35)   (1.27)   (1.31)   (1.25)   (1.39)   (0.80)   (0.86)   (0.79)   (1.84)   (0.07)   (0.01)   (0.04)    (0.03)   (5.95)
Log Family Unearned Income
 age = 26 -0.41      -0.67       -0.65    -1.53    -1.31    -0.09    95.90    -0.67    -0.83    -0.67    -0.46    0.17     0.04     7.32      1.06     88.77
            (0.64) (0.54)        (0.57)   (0.76)   (0.56)   (0.54)   (0.56)   (0.58)   (0.60)   (0.54)   (0.58)   (0.19)   (0.02)   (0.02)    (0.01)   (4.23)
 age = 35 1.17       0.21        0.10     0.53     -0.43    0.63     96.98    0.08     0.26     0.18     -0.06    0.00     0.04     7.61      1.20     99.68
            (0.61) (0.51)        (0.54)   (0.52)   (0.53)   (0.53)   (0.41)   (0.53)   (0.56)   (0.51)   (0.52)   (0.05)   (0.01)   (0.02)    (0.01)   (3.80)
 age = 45 1.30       0.19        1.17     0.45     0.68     0.89     97.08    0.17     0.33     0.88     0.07     0.00     0.04     7.83      1.28     103.21
            (0.62) (0.48)        (0.52)   (0.51)   (0.50)   (0.49)   (0.50)   (0.50)   (0.49)   (0.51)   (0.50)   (0.03)   (0.00)   (0.04)    (0.01)   (3.62)
 age = 55 0.73       0.67        2.59     1.36     0.03     0.96     95.84    0.10     0.74     0.68     1.35     -0.01    0.05     8.29      1.40     105.03
            (0.52) (0.46)        (0.65)   (0.48)   (0.46)   (0.47)   (0.97)   (0.46)   (0.47)   (0.46)   (0.48)   (0.02)   (0.00)   (0.07)    (0.02)   (3.62)
Log Family Income AE
 age = 26 11.12         15.53    4.53     1.07     6.68     20.98    -1.30    0.40     -0.12    1.18     0.66     8.58     0.18     10.06     0.62     69.30
             (1.29)     (1.41)   (0.89)   (1.51)   (1.44)   (0.90)   (0.34)   (0.51)   (0.54)   (0.49)   (0.47)   (0.91)   (0.01)   (0.02)    (0.01)   (3.60)
 age = 35 15.00         12.92    5.65     5.54     7.97     17.32    -0.83    2.23     1.67     2.20     3.37     6.43     0.17     10.12     0.65     79.47
             (1.49)     (1.27)   (1.13)   (0.77)   (1.57)   (0.88)   (0.39)   (0.56)   (0.68)   (0.59)   (0.76)   (0.72)   (0.01)   (0.02)    (0.01)   (3.93)
 age = 45 15.45         11.78    11.51    7.80     6.60     15.64    -1.80    1.94     1.67     3.07     4.56     2.06     0.09     10.38     0.63     80.30
             (1.79)     (1.38)   (2.13)   (1.17)   (1.61)   (1.02)   (0.55)   (0.65)   (0.76)   (0.69)   (1.49)   (0.27)   (0.00)   (0.03)    (0.01)   (4.66)
 age = 55 21.90         9.00     18.67    8.98     4.82     10.77    -1.13    3.51     1.58     1.72     3.97     0.03     0.02     10.55     0.70     83.81
             (2.43)     (1.21)   (2.98)   (1.18)   (1.30)   (1.22)   (1.56)   (0.70)   (0.80)   (0.72)   (1.81)   (0.02)   (0.00)   (0.04)    (0.03)   (4.98)
                            Table A14: Marital Sorting: Determinants of Spouse's Age

                                                   Male Sample Member               Female Sample Member
                                                  Age 25        After Age 25        Age 25        After Age 25
           Education                              0.081           0.222            -0.284            -0.002
                                                  (0.037)         (0.100)           (0.060)         (0.119)
           Children Aged 0-5                       -0.053                            -0.052
                                                  (0.083)                           (0.118)
           Lag of Children Aged 0-5                               -1.085                               -0.222
                                                                    (0.359)                           (0.453)
           Lag of Children Aged 6-12                                 0.495                             0.400
                                                                    (0.304)                           (0.337)
           Lag of Children Aged 13-18                              1.593                               -0.590
                                                                    (0.451)                           (0.542)
           Age                                    0.809            0.604            0.973            1.037
                                                   (0.027)          (0.063)          (0.028)          (0.074)
           Age Squared                                               -0.007                            0.007
                                                                    (0.005)                           (0.007)
           Age Cubed                                                 0.001                             -0.001
                                                                    (0.000)                           (0.001)
           Constant                              -2.521           -4.082            2.755            2.231
                                                  (0.277)           (0.478)          (0.313)          (0.573)
           as                                      2.409             4.878            3.433             5.787
           R-squared                                0.20              0.54             0.15             0.53
           Observations                            3511               833             4477               755
              p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01

 Table A14 displays selected estimates of spouse's age at the start of the marriage on sample member characteristics, including
age. The full model includes a second degree polynomial in year. The sample for columns 2 and 4 includes all individuals ages
25-61 in the year that they transition from single to married. These equations are used to simulate spouse's age for marriages
that start after age 25. The sample for columns 1 and 3 consists of individuals who are married and between ages 23-27. These
equations are used to simulated spouse's age for marriages that are in progress at age 25. The model is estimated using ordinary
least squares. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the individual level.




                                                         107
                                  Figure A1: Simulated and PSID Age Profiles: Employed and Unemployed
                  1                     Panel A: All                                   Panel B: Married                               Panel C: Single




                                                                      1




                                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                    .9
                                                                      .9
                  .9
   Employment




                                                                                                                    .8
                                                                      .8
                  .8




                                                                                                                    .7
                                                                      .7
                  .7




                                                                                                                    .6
                                                                      .6
                  .6




                                                                                                                    .5
                                        Panel D: All                                   Panel E: Married                               Panel F: Single
                                                                      .04




                                                                                                                    .1
                  .04




                                                                                                                    .08
   Unemployment




                                                                      .03
                  .03




                                                                                                                    .06
                                                                      .02
                  .02




                                                                                                                    .04
                                                                      .01
                  .01




                                                                                                                    .02
                  0




                                                                      0




                                                                                                                    0
                        25   30    35      40          45   50   55         25   30   35    40       45   50   55         25
                                                                                                                           26   30   35    40       45   50   55
                                           Age                                              Age                                            Age

                                                                            Men PSID                      Women PSID
                                                                            Men SIM                       Women SIM


Figures A1-A9 display the average values of each key variable at each age for data simulated using the model with estimated
parameters and 500 copies per PSID sample member, and the PSID data. Solid lines with circle and triangle markers refer to
male and female PSID sample members, respectively. Solid lines with no markers refer to simulated males and dashed lines
to simulated females. The shaded areas indicate 90% confidence bands around the PSID male data points and the dotted lines
indicate the same for PSID female sample members. In figure A1, panels A-C display the results for employment and panels
D-F for unemployment. To reduce noise in the unemployment panels, the data has been aggregated by five-year intervals. In
figure A1, panels A and D include all men and women, while panels B, E and C, F break out married and single individuals,
respectively.




                                                                                       108
                                                 Figure A2: Simulated and PSID Age Profiles: Nonparticipation
                                              Panel A: All                                    Panel B: Married                                Panel C: Single




                        .4




                                                                                                                              .5
                                                                             .4




                                                                                                                              .4
                        .3




                                                                             .3
   Nonparticipation




                                                                                                                              .3
                        .2




                                                                             .2




                                                                                                                              .2
                        .1




                                                                             .1




                                                                                                                              .1
                        0




                                                                             0




                                                                                                                              0
                              25    30    35      40 45           50   55          25    30   35     40 45        50    55          25
                                                                                                                                     26 30    35    40 45         50   55
                                                  Age                                                Age                                            Age

                                                                            Men PSID                                   Women PSID
                                                                            Men SIM                                    Women SIM

Figure A2 displays the information as described in the note to figure A1 for nonparticipation.

                                                Figure A3: Simulated and PSID Age Profiles: Wages and Hours
                                              Panel A: All                                     Panel B: Married                                Panel C: Single
                      3.2




                                                                            3.2




                                                                                                                             3.2
                                                                            3
                      3




                                                                                                                             3
   Log of Wages




                                                                            2.8
                      2.8




                                                                                                                             2.8
                                                                            2.6
                      2.6




                                                                                                                             2.6
                                                                            2.4
                      2.4




                                                                            2.2




                                                                                                                             2.4




                                              Panel D: All                                     Panel E: Married                                Panel F: Single
                                                                            8
                      7.6




                                                                                                                             7.5
                      7.4
   Log of Hours




                                                                            7.5
                      7.2




                                                                                                                             7
                      7




                                                                            7
                      6.8




                                                                                                                             6.5
                                                                            6.5
                      6.6




                             25    30    35      40          45   50   55         25    30    35    40       45   50    55         25
                                                                                                                                    26   30   35    40       45   50   55
                                                 Age                                                Age                                             Age

                                                                                  Men PSID                        Women PSID
                                                                                  Men SIM                         Women SIM


Figure A3 displays the information as described in the note to figure A1 for wages and hours
                                             Figure A4: Simulated and PSID Age Profiles: Earnings
                                  Panel A: All                         Panel B: Married                      Panel C: Single




                                                                                           2.5




                                                                                                                               2.5
                     11




                                                           11




                                                                                                 11
                                                     2
                                                           10.5




                                                                                                 10.5




                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                           2
                     10.5




                                                     1.5




                                                                                                                                     Log of Earnings Residual
                                                                                                                               1.5
   Log of Earnings




                                                                                           1.5
                                                           10




                                                                                                 10
                     10




                                                     1
                                                           9.5




                                                                                                 9.5




                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                           1
                     9.5




                                                     .5




                                                                                                                               .5
                                                                                           .5
                                                           9




                                                                                                 9
                     9




                                                     0




                                                                                                                               0
                                                           8.5




                                                                                                 8.5
                                                                                           0




                                                                                                                               -.5
                     8.5




                                                     -.5




                                                                                           -.5
                                                           8




                                                                                                 8

                            25 30 35 40 45 50 55                  25 30 35 40 45 50 55                  25 30 35 40 45 50 55
                                     Age                                   Age                                   Age

                                                       Men SIM                            Men PSID
                                                       Women SIM                          Women PSID
                                                       Men Residual                       Women Residual


In figure A4, the lines with square and triangle markers display the information described in figure A1 for earnings. Solid square
and triangle markers display earnings per age in the PSID for men and women, respectively. Hollow square and triangle markers
show the same information for the simulated data. Long and short dashed lines display the earnings residual for men and women,
respectively, present in the PSID data. The earnings residual is defined as the difference between reported ln earningsit and
ln hoursit + ln wageit . That is, a negative earnings residual implies that reported annual earnings are lower than what would be
expected if computing annual earnings by multiplying annual hours and the hourly wage rate. Note that the left y-axes refer to
the values for earnings and the right y-axes refer to the values for the earnings residual.




                                                                            110
                                                                       Figure A5: Simulated and PSID Age Profiles: Marriage
                                                                      Panel A: Married                                                                             Panel B: Marriage Duration




                                     .9




                                                                                                                                             30
                                                                                                                Years Married
                                     .8




                                                                                                                                             20
    Married
                                     .7




                                                                                                                                             10
                                     .6




                                                                                                                                             0
                                                             Panel C: Marriage Continues                                                                            Panel D: Single to Married
    Prob(Marriedt | Marriedt-1)




                                                                                                                                             .2
                                                                                                                Prob(Marriedt | Singlet-1)
                                     1
                                     .99




                                                                                                                                             .15
                                     .98




                                                                                                                                             .1
                                     .97




                                                                                                                                             .05
                                     .96
                                     .95




                                                                                                                                             0
                                            25        30          35            40     45        50        55                                      25        30         35    40         45            50        55
                                                                                Age                                                                                           Age

                                                                                           Men PSID                                                     Women PSID
                                                                                           Men SIM                                                      Women SIM

Figure A5 displays the information as described in the note to figure A1 for marriage, marriage duration, marriage continuation
and entry into marriage. The data for the latter two have been aggregated into 5 year intervals.

                                                      Figure A6: Simulated and PSID Age Profiles: Children Aged 6-12, 13-18
                                                            Panel A: All                                    Panel B: Married                                                         Panel C: Single
                                                                                                                                                                   .8
                                     1




                                                                                           1
   Nr. of Children 6-12 Years Old
                                     .8




                                                                                                                                                                   .6
                                     .6




                                                                                                                                                                   .4
                                                                                           .5
                                     .4




                                                                                                                                                                   .2
                                     .2




                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                           0
                                     0




                                                            Panel D: All                                    Panel E: Married                                                         Panel F: Single
                                                                                                                                                                   .8
                                                                                           1
   Nr. of Children 13-18 Years Old
                                     .8




                                                                                           .8




                                                                                                                                                                   .6
                                     .6




                                                                                           .6




                                                                                                                                                                   .4
                                     .4




                                                                                           .4




                                                                                                                                                                   .2
                                     .2




                                                                                           .2




                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                           0
                                     0




                                           25    30    35      40          45    50   55        25    30   35            40                        45   50    55        25
                                                                                                                                                                         26   30    35    40       45       50   55
                                                               Age                                                       Age                                                              Age

                                                                                                Men PSID                                                Women PSID
                                                                                                Men SIM                                                 Women SIM

                                                                                                            111
Figure A6 displays the information as described in the note to figure A1 for children aged 6-12 and 13-18.
                                    Figure A7: Simulated and PSID Age Profiles: Family Income and Family Income AE
                                                    Panel A: All                                       Panel B: Married                                 Panel C: Single




                                                                                  11.4




                                                                                                                                     11
                          11.2
   Log Family Income




                                                                                  11.2
                          11




                                                                                                                                     10.5
                                                                                  11
                          10.8




                                                                                                                                     10
                                                                                  10.8
                          10.6
                          10.4




                                                                                  10.6




                                                                                                                                     9.5
                                                    Panel D: All                                       Panel E: Married                                 Panel F: Single




                                                                                  10.8




                                                                                                                                     11
                          10.6
   Log Family Income AE




                                                                                  10.6
                          10.4




                                                                                                                                     10.5
                                                                                  10.4
                          10.2




                                                                                  10.2




                                                                                                                                     10
                          10




                                                                                  10
                          9.8




                                                                                                                                     9.5
                                   25    30    35      40          45   50   55           25    30    35    40       45   50    55          25
                                                                                                                                             26   30   35    40       45   50   55
                                                       Age                                                  Age                                              Age

                                                                                          Men PSID                        Women PSID
                                                                                          Men SIM                         Women SIM


Figure A7 displays the information as described in the note to figure A1 for family income and family income per adult
equivalent.

                                                      Figure A8: Simulated and PSID Age Profiles: Consumption AE
                                                    Panel A: All                                      Panel B: Married                                 Panel C: Single
                             8.7




                                                                                    8.7




                                                                                                                                      8.8
                                                                                    8.6
                             8.6




                                                                                                                                      8.6
    Log Consumption AE




                                                                                    8.5
                             8.5




                                                                                                                                      8.4
                                                                                    8.4
                             8.4




                                                                                                                                      8.2
                                                                                    8.3
                             8.3




                                    25    30    35      40 45           50   55            25    30   35     40 45        50    55           25
                                                                                                                                              26 30    35    40 45         50   55
                                                        Age                                                  Age                                             Age

                                                                                   Men PSID                                    Women PSID
                                                                                   Men SIM                                     Women SIM
                                                                                                       112
Figure A8 displays the information as described in the note to figure A1 for consumption per adult equivalent.
Figure A9: Simulated and PSID Age Profiles: Spouse Wages, Hours, Employment, Unemployment, and
Earnings
                                                Panel A: Log of Spouse Wages                                                        Panel B: Log of Spouse Hours
             3.2




                                                                                                          8
                      3
    Log of Spouse Wages




                                                                                              Log of Spouse Hours
                                                                                                            7.5
          2.6   2.8




                                                                                                   7
   2.4




                                                                                                          6.5
             2.2




                                                   Panel C: Spouse Employment                                                      Panel D: Spouse Unemployment




                                                                                                                  .04
             1




                                                                                              Spouse Unemployment
   Spouse Employment




                                                                                                            .03
                 .9




                                                                                                      .02
     .7    .8




                                                                                                .01
             .6




                                                                                                          0




                          25                30           35   40      45       50        55                             25         30      35     40         45                              50   55
                                                              Age                                                                                 Age

                                                                      Husband PSID                                                      Wife PSID
                                                                      Husband SIM                                                       Wife SIM


                                                                             Panel E: Log of Spouse Earnings
                                 8.5 9 9.5 10 10.5 11




                                                                                                                                                                        1 1.5 2 2.5 3
                                                                                                                                                              Log Spouse Earnings Residual
                               Log of Spouse Earnings




                                                                                                                                                                    .5
                                          8




                                                                                                                                                               0
                                          7.5




                                                                                                                                                              -.5




                                                        25       30           35           40                                45           50            55
                                                                                          Age

                                                                           Husband SIM                                            Husband PSID
                                                                           Wife SIM                                               Wife PSID
                                                                           Husband Residual                                       Wife Residual




Panels A-D of figure A9 display the information as described in the note to figure A1 for spouse's wages, hours, employment and
unemployment. Panel E displays the same information as shown in figure A4, for spouses.

                                                                                          113
                                         Figure A10: Simulated and PSID Event Studies: Marriage
              .4                         Panel A: Women                                                             Panel B: Women




                                                                                        .4
                                                                                        .2
             .2




                                                                            Log Earnings
   Log Hours




                                                                                  0
       0




                                                                            -.2
              -.2




                                                                                        -.4
              -.4




                           -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4         5   6   7   8                             -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4         5   6   7   8
                                         Panel C: Women                                                             Panel D: Women
                     1.5




                                                                                     .2 .4 .6 .8
                                                                               Log Family Income AE
   Log Family Income
     0    .5     1




                                                                            -.2 0
              -.5




                           -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4         5   6   7   8                             -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4         5   6   7   8
                                         Time Since Event                                                           Time Since Event

                                                            Simulated                                          PSID

Figures A10-13 display the results of event studies using simulated data based on 500 copies per PSID sample member, and
the PSID data. Solid lines with square markers indicate coefficients estimated using the PSID data and dashed lines indicate
coefficients estimated using the simulated data. Solid lines without markers indicate 90% confidence bands around the PSID
estimates (errors around coefficients based on simulated data are negligible). Each event study includes event fixed effects. The
regressions include no controls in addition to the event fixed effects. Figure A10 displays the results for women, using hours,
earnings, family income and family income per capita as the outcome variables, when the event considered is marriage.




                                                                        114
                                       Figure A11: Simulated and PSID Event Studies: Divorce
                                       Panel A: Women                                                             Panel B: Women




                                                                                      1
              .4
               .2




                                                                                       .5
                                                                            Log Earnings
     Log Hours
      -.2 0




                                                                          -.5    0
              -.4
              -.6




                                                                                      -1
                         -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4         5   6   7   8                             -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4         5   6   7   8
                                       Panel C: Women                                                             Panel D: Women
     -.8 -.6 -.4 -.2 0




                                                                                                0
                                                                             Log Family Income AE
     Log Family Income




                                                                          -.6     -.4     -.2
              -1




                         -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4         5   6   7   8                             -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4         5   6   7   8
                                       Time Since Event                                                           Time Since Event

                                                          Simulated                                          PSID

Figure A11 displays the results discussed in the note to figure A10 for women when the event considered is divorce.




                                                                      115
                                          Figure A12: Simulated and PSID Event Studies: Marriage
                                            Panel A: Men                                                                 Panel B: Men




                .15




                                                                                           .4
       0 .05 .1




                                                                                           .2
                                                                                Log Earnings
     Log Hours




                                                                              -.2    0
                -.1 -.05




                                                                                           -.4
                             -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4         5   6   7   8                               -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4         5   6   7   8
                                            Panel C: Men                                                                 Panel D: Men




                                                                                                     .2
     -.4 -.2 0 .2 .4 .6




                                                                                Log Family Income AE
         Log Family Income




                                                                              -.2 -.1     0     .1
                             -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4         5   6   7   8                               -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4         5   6   7   8
                                           Time Since Event                                                             Time Since Event

                                                              Simulated                                            PSID

Figure A12 displays the results discussed in the note to figure A10 for men when the event considered is marriage.

                                           Figure A13: Simulated and PSID Event Studies: Divorce
                                            Panel A: Men                                                                 Panel B: Men
                .2




                                                                                           .2
                                                                                           .1
               .1




                                                                              Log Earnings
     Log Hours




                                                                                      0
         0




                                                                                -.1
                -.1




                                                                                           -.2
                -.2




                                                                                           -.3




                             -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4         5   6   7   8                               -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4         5   6   7   8
                                            Panel C: Men                                                                 Panel D: Men
                       .1




                                                                                                    .6
                                                                                 Log Family Income AE
     Log Family Income
      -.3 -.2 -.1 0




                                                                                    0    .2    .4
                -.4




                                                                              -.2




                             -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4         5   6   7   8                               -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4         5   6   7   8
                                           Time Since Event                                                             Time Since Event

                                                              Simulated                                            PSID

Figure A13 displays the results discussed in the note to figure A10 for men when the event considered is divorce.

                                                                          116
        Figure A14: Response of Key Labor Market and Income Outcomes to an Unemployment Shock
                        Panel A: Single Women                                           Panel B: Single Women




                                                                    .1
  0




                                                                    0
  -.2




                                                                    -.1
  -.4




                                                                    -.2
  -.6




                                                                    -.3
  -.8




                                                                    -.4




             35         40            45            50         55         35            40            45             50              55
                         Panel C: Single Men                                             Panel D: Single Men
                                                                    .2
  0
  -.2




                                                                    0
                                                                    -.2
  -.4




                                                                    -.4
  -.6




                                                                    -.6
  -.8




                                                                    -.8
  -1




             35         40             45           50         55         35            40              45           50              55
                                 Age                                                              Age

                    Employment                  Log Wage                       Log Fam Earnings                 Log Fam Unearn Inc
                    Log Hours                   Log Earnings                   Log Fam Inc                      Log Fam Inc AE


Figure A14 displays the effect of an exogenously imposed unemployment shock on single women and men. To obtain the
estimates, we use the same method as explained in the note to figure 1 however instead imposing that all individuals become
unemployed at age 34.




                                                               117
         Figure A15: Mean Response of Family Income, Disaggregated by Marriage and Sorting Channels
                    Panel A: Unemployment Shock, Married Women                        Panel B: Unemployment Shock, Married Men




                                                                      0
  0




                                                                      -.1
  -.02




                                                                      -.2
  -.04
  -.06




                                                                      -.3
  -.08




                                                                      -.4




               35              40          45            50      55              35            40           45            50     55
                    Panel C: Unemployment Shock, Single Women                         Panel D: Unemployment Shock, Single Men
                                                                      0
  0
  -.05




                                                                      -.2
  -.1
  -.15




                                                                      -.4
  -.2
  -.25




                                                                      -.6




               35             40             45         50       55              35            40             45          50     55
                                       Age                                                              Age

                                              All Channels                  No Sorting
                                              No Marriage                   No Sorting And No Marriage


Figure A15 displays the role of marriage and sorting in explaining the effect of an unemployment shock on married and single
women and men. To obtain the estimates, we use the same method as explained in the note to figure 2 however instead imposing
that all individuals become unemployed at age 34.




                                                                 118
            Figure A16: Response of Key Labor Market and Income Outcomes to a Wage Shock
                        Panel A: Single Women                                           Panel B: Single Women
  .2




                                                                  .2
  .15




                                                                  .15
  .1




                                                                  .1
  .05




                                                                  .05
  0




                                                                  0




            35           40            45         50         55           35            40            45             50              55
                          Panel C: Single Men                                            Panel D: Single Men
                                                                  .15
  .15




                                                                  .1
  .1




                                                                  .05
  .05




                                                                  0
  0




                                                                          35            40              45           50              55
            35           40           45          50         55                                   Age

                      Log Wage                  Log Hours                      Log Fam Earnings                 Log Fam Unearn Inc
                      Log Earnings                                             Log Fam Inc                      Log Fam Inc AE


Figure A16 displays the effect of an exogenously imposed 1 SD positive wage shock on single women and men. To obtain the
estimates, we use the same method as explained in the note to figure 1 however instead imposing that all individuals experience
1 SD higher wages at age 34.




                                                             119
        Figure A17: Mean Response of Family Income, Disaggregated by Marriage and Sorting Channels
                   Panel A: Wage Shock, Married Women                                 Panel B: Wage Shock, Married Men
  .05




                                                                   .08
  .04




                                                                   .06
  .03




                                                                   .04
  .02




                                                                   .02
  .01
  0




                                                                   0




              35         40           45            50        55              35          40            45            50      55
  .15




                                                                   .15




                   Panel C: Wage Shock, Single Women                                  Panel D: Wage Shock, Single Men
                                                                   .1
  .1




                                                                   .05
  .05




                                                                   0
  0




              35         40             45         50         55              35           40             45             50   55
                                  Age                                                               Age

                                         All Channels                    No Sorting
                                         No Marriage                     No Sorting And No Marriage


Figure A17 displays the role of marriage and sorting in explaining the effect of a positive 1 SD wage shock on married and single
women and men. To obtain the estimates, we use the same method as explained in the note to figure 2 however instead imposing
that all individuals experience a 1 SD wage shock at age 34.




                                                              120
     Figure A18: Mean Response of Family Income, Disaggregated by Marriage and Sorting Channels
               Panel A: Child Shock, Single Women                                Panel B: Child Shock, Single Men
  .1




                                                                 .06
  .05




                                                                 .04
  0




                                                                 .02
  -.05




                                                                 0
                                                                 -.02
  -.1
  -.15




                                                                 -.04




             35          40           45        50          55              35          40           45       50          55
                                Age                                                            Age

                               All Channels                             No Sorting
                               No Marriage                              No Sorting And No Marriage

Figure A18 displays the role of marriage and sorting in explaining the effect of a childbirth shock on single women and men. To
obtain the estimates, we use the same method as explained in the note to figure 2 however instead imposing that all individuals
have a child at age 34.




                                                             121
    Figure A19: Mean Response of Family Earnings, Disaggregated by Marriage and Sorting Channels
                   Panel A: Education Differential, Women                                Panel B: Education Differential, Men




                                                                      .8
  .8




                                                                      .6
  .6




                                                                      .4
  .4




                                                                      .2
  .2




        25    30         35          40          45         50   55         25     30         35         40           45        50   55
                       Panel C: µ Differential, Women                                        Panel D: µ Differential, Men
  .22




                                                                      .26
  .2




                                                                      .24
  .18




                                                                      .22
  .16




                                                                      .2
  .14




                                                                      .18




        25    30         35          40         45          50   55         25     30         35         40          45         50   55
                                    Age                                                                  Age

                                           All Channels                     No Sorting
                                           No Marriage                      No Sorting And No Marriage


Figure A19 displays the role of marriage and sorting in explaining the effect of the college-high school differential in family
earnings. To obtain these estimates, we use the same method as explained in the note to figure 2, but instead considering the
role of turning off each channel in the difference in family earnings experienced by college and high school graduates over the
lifecycle.




                                                                 122
Marriage Dynamics, Earnings Dynamics, and Lifetime
                 Family Income
          Joseph G. Altonji, Disa Hynsjo, and Ivan Vidangos


 Supplemental Appendix




                                 123
            Table B1: Labor Market Status: Selected Multinomial Logit Estimates
                                            Men                       Women
                                    Unemployed Employed        Unemployed Employed
Education                              -0.018      0.166         0.117         0.292
                                       (0.041)      (0.037)       (0.053)       (0.044)
Married                                 0.034      0.790        -2.597        -1.642
                                       (0.168)      (0.147)       (0.316)       (0.210)
Children Aged 0-5                       0.160        0.094      -0.746        -1.080
                                       (0.134)      (0.118)       (0.175)       (0.136)
Children Aged 6-12                     -0.038        -0.008     -0.402        -0.675
                                       (0.108)      (0.096)       (0.113)       (0.089)
Children Aged 13-18                     0.018        -0.020        -0.160     -0.277
                                       (0.136)      (0.121)       (0.136)       (0.105)
Lag Unemployed                        2.204        1.594        0.776          0.725
                                       (0.273)      (0.212)       (0.268)       (0.211)
Lag Employed                          1.751        3.547        0.972          2.626
                                       (0.219)      (0.140)       (0.198)       (0.138)
Married × Children Aged 0-5                                        -0.175       0.236
                                                                  (0.209)       (0.142)
Married × Children Aged 6-12                                       0.010       0.348
                                                                  (0.141)       (0.094)
Married × Children Aged 13-18                                      0.122        0.209
                                                                  (0.172)       (0.112)
Married × Lag Unemployed                                           0.357         -0.159
                                                                  (0.358)       (0.256)
Married × Lag Employed                                             -0.373      -0.273
                                                                  (0.237)       (0.146)
Potential Experience                   0.026         0.023         -0.030        -0.023
                                      (0.017)       (0.014)       (0.021)       (0.016)
Potential Experience2                -0.010        -0.010        -0.005       -0.006
                                      (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.002)       (0.001)
Potential Experience3                  0.000        0.000           0.000      0.000
                                      (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)
Married × Education                                                -0.050     -0.139
                                                                  (0.060)       (0.043)
Married × Potential Experience                                     -0.020         0.013
                                                                  (0.025)       (0.017)
Married × Potential Experience2                                     0.003      0.005
                                                                  (0.002)       (0.002)
Married × Potential Experience3                                    -0.000     -0.000
                                                                  (0.000)       (0.000)
Year                                  0.032          0.000        0.042           0.019
                                      (0.015)       (0.012)       (0.019)       (0.014)
Year2                                -0.007        -0.005       -0.007           -0.002
                                      (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.002)       (0.001)
Married × Year                                                  0.158          0.032
                                                                  (0.028)       (0.014)
Married × Year2                                                    -0.003         0.002
                                                                  (0.003)       (0.001)
Constant                              1.119        2.218            0.373      1.874
                                       (0.289)      (0.226)       (0.262)       (0.202)
                                       1.625                      1.608
Observations                           25581                      27578
   p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01
Footnote for table B1. Table B1 coefficients and (standard errors) for the multinomial logit model of labor market status. It
includes normally distributed unobserved heterogeneity. Not participating in the labor force is the base outcome. We use Stata's
Structural Estimation Modeling (SEM) package for estimation. Because we do not observe initial conditions in most cases, we
expect initial conditions bias to lead unconstrained MLE estimates to overstate state dependence and understate the importance of
unobserved heterogeneity. Simulations reveal that unconstrained estimates imply lower persistence in employment compared to
the data, especially at long lags. To correct for this, we re-estimate the labor market status model while constraining the variance
of unobserved heterogeneity to be equal to twice the size of the unconstrained estimate. We do this for both men and women.
Since this parameter is constrained to a specific value in the estimation, there is no standard error. The standard error on the
unconstrained estimate (which is 1.32 for men and 1.29 for women) are 0.27 and 0.10 for men and women, respectively. The
samples are restricted to individuals between ages 25 and 61. For those who are married, we exclude individuals whose spouse is
over age 61.




                                                               125
                      Table B2: Single to Married Transitions: Probit Coefficient Estimates

                                                                          Single to Married
                                 Female                                          0.376
                                                                                (0.244)
                                 Education                                    -0.040
                                                                                (0.012)
                                 Education × Female                              0.032
                                                                                (0.018)
                                 Lag Wage                                     0.152
                                                                                (0.056)
                                 Lag Wage × Female                               -0.135
                                                                                (0.085)
                                 Lag Employed                                 0.277
                                                                                (0.080)
                                 Lag Employed × Female                         -0.256
                                                                                (0.106)
                                 Lag Index for Young Children                 0.511
                                                                                (0.070)
                                 Lag Age                                      -0.019
                                                                                (0.004)
                                 Lag Age2                                        -0.000
                                                                                (0.000)
                                 Lag Age × Female                               -0.008
                                                                                (0.005)
                                 Lag Age2 × Female                               -0.000
                                                                                (0.000)
                                 Year                                            -0.001
                                                                                (0.005)
                                 Year2                                          0.001
                                                                                (0.000)
                                 Year3                                          -0.000
                                                                                (0.000)
                                 Constant                                     -1.651
                                                                                (0.180)
                                 Observations                                    11774
                                    p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01

Table B2 displays MLE probit coefficients for the model of single to married transitions equation. Standard errors (in parentheses)
are clustered at the individual level. The dependent variable is Marit . We estimate the model for men and women combined using
all individuals between age 25 and 61 who were single in t-1. The variables education, age and year have been normed at the
values 12, 34 and 1982, respectively. The index indicating presence of young children is a variable which increases with 1 for
every child younger than 1 years old and increases with 0.5 for every child aged 2-5.




                                                          126
Table B3: The Probability of Remaining Married: Probit Coefficient Estimates

                                                   Married to Married
    Lag Wage Man                                           0.007
                                                         (0.035)
    Lag Wage Woman                                         0.019
                                                         (0.040)
    Lag Employed Man                                   0.232
                                                         (0.051)
    Lag Employed Woman                                 -0.096
                                                         (0.030)
    Lag Index for Young Children                       0.318
                                                         (0.039)
    Lag Education Man                                  0.034
                                                         (0.008)
    Lag Education Woman                                0.026
                                                         (0.009)
    Female                                               -0.055
                                                         (0.028)
    Absolute Difference Male - Female Wages               -0.011
                                                         (0.044)
    Absolute Difference Male - Female Education         -0.020
                                                         (0.010)
    Absolute Difference Male - Female Age              -0.017
                                                         (0.005)
    Lag Age Male                                       0.015
                                                         (0.004)
    Lag Age Female                                         0.006
                                                         (0.005)
    Lag Age Male2                                          0.000
                                                         (0.000)
    Lag Age Female2                                        0.000
                                                         (0.000)
    Lag Age Male3                                         -0.000
                                                         (0.000)
    Lag Age Female3                                       -0.000
                                                         (0.000)
    L.Marriage Duration                                   -0.029
                                                         (0.034)
    L.Marriage Duration2                                   0.000
                                                         (0.001)
                          1
    L.Marriage Duration 2                                0.252
                                                         (0.132)
    Year                                               -0.015
                                                         (0.004)
    Year2                                              0.001
                                                         (0.000)
    Year3                                                  0.000
                                                         (0.000)
    Constant                                           1.081
                                                         (0.192)
                                                           0.243
    Observations                                          41240
       p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01
Footnote for table B3. Table B3 displays MLE probit coefficients for the married to married model. Standard errors are in
parentheses. The dependent variable is Marit .The model includes a normally distributed marriage specific random effect  j(i,t)
that captures unobserved heterogeneity in marriage stability. The variables that measure the difference between male and female
wages, education and age are computed as absolute differences around the mean arithmetic differences in the sample. The model
is estimated using all sample members aged 25-61 who were married in the previous period.




                                                             128
                      Table B4: Probit Model of the Probability of Having Another Child

                                                                   Men                   Women
                                                      Married            Single   Married        Single
                 Education                            0.031            -0.039     0.062        -0.104
                                                       (0.007)        (0.030)      (0.009)       (0.029)
                 Lag Children Aged 0-5                  -0.008         -0.280       -0.037        0.132
                                                       (0.022)        (0.241)      (0.024)       (0.089)
                 Lag Children Aged 6-12               -0.273            0.062     -0.281          0.085
                                                       (0.022)        (0.089)      (0.023)       (0.059)
                 Lag Children Aged 13-18              -0.316           -0.110     -0.376         -0.187
                                                       (0.047)        (0.168)      (0.053)       (0.125)
                 Lag Age                              -0.071           -0.006     -0.097        -0.065
                                                       (0.007)        (0.027)      (0.010)       (0.031)
                 Lag Age2                             -0.004           -0.001     -0.007         -0.010
                                                       (0.001)        (0.003)      (0.001)       (0.006)
                 Lag of Age3                            0.000          -0.000        0.000       -0.001
                                                       (0.000)        (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.001)
                 Year                                   0.000           0.023        0.000        0.013
                                                       (0.002)        (0.018)      (0.003)       (0.009)
                 Year2                                  0.000          -0.001        0.000       -0.000
                                                       (0.000)        (0.002)      (0.000)       (0.001)
                 Constant                             -1.254         -2.322       -1.378       -2.154
                                                       (0.041)        (0.147)      (0.049)       (0.139)
                 Observations                          17819             4152      18174          5294
                    p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01

 Table B4 displays selected MLE probit coefficients and standard errors for the probability of having another child. The full
model includes a cubic in lagged age and a quadratic in year. The model is estimated separately by gender and marital status.
Only individuals between ages 25 and 50 are included in the estimation. Married individuals whose spouse is younger than 19 or
older than 69 are dropped.




                                                             129
Table B5 : Marital Sorting: Probit Estimates of Effects of Own Characteristics Spouse's Employment.
Male Sample Member, Female Spouse

                                                                      Spouse Employed
                                   Education                                0.042
                                                                          (0.030)
                                   Lag Wage                                 0.045
                                                                          (0.126)
                                   Lag Employed                            0.595
                                                                          (0.332)
                                   Lag Unemployed                          -0.117
                                                                          (0.389)
                                   Lag Children Aged 0-5                  -0.231
                                                                          (0.120)
                                   Lag Children Aged 6-12                  -0.085
                                                                          (0.077)
                                   Lag Children Aged 13-18                  0.100
                                                                          (0.122)
                                   Potential Experience                    -0.009
                                                                          (0.016)
                                   Potential Experience2                   -0.000
                                                                          (0.001)
                                   Potential Experience3                    0.000
                                                                          (0.000)
                                   Year                                    -0.004
                                                                          (0.010)
                                   Year2                                    0.001
                                                                          (0.001)
                                   Constant                                 0.113
                                                                          (0.501)
                                   Observations                              818
                                      p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01

 Table B5 displays estimates of the equation for spouse's employment status at the start of marriage for male sample members.
Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the individual level. For the purpose of the marital sorting estimation, we only
rely on observed wages and wages predicted using earnings divided by hours (wage2       ). That is, the estimation of these models
do not include instances in which wage is predicted using only demographics (wage3      ). The model is estimated on using male
sample members who transition into marriage between age 25 and 61. The simulation model also uses equations that describe
initial conditions of marital sorting on employment, which are estimated using individuals aged 23-27 (not reported).




                                                         130
Table B6 : Marital Sorting: Probit Estimates of Effects of Own Characteristics Spouse's Employment.
Female Sample Member, Male Spouse

                                                       Spouse Unemployed            Spouse Employed
                    Education                               -0.191                         0.043
                                                             (0.110)                     (0.077)
                    Lag Wage                                  0.559                        0.071
                                                             (0.449)                     (0.323)
                    Lag Employed                              0.707                      0.619
                                                             (0.572)                     (0.361)
                    Lag Unemployed                            1.221                        0.659
                                                             (0.859)                     (0.683)
                    Potential Experience                      -0.004                       0.001
                                                             (0.030)                     (0.021)
                    Potential Experience2                     0.001                       -0.003
                                                             (0.003)                     (0.002)
                    Lag Children Aged 0-5                     0.207                       -0.159
                                                             (0.282)                     (0.227)
                    Lag Children Aged 6-12                  0.602                          0.110
                                                             (0.197)                     (0.166)
                    Lag Children Aged 13-18                   0.302                       -0.007
                                                             (0.270)                     (0.204)
                    Year                                    0.079                        0.035
                                                             (0.031)                     (0.019)
                    Year2                                  -0.012                       -0.005
                                                             (0.003)                     (0.002)
                    Constant                                  -2.149                     1.807
                                                             (1.321)                     (0.885)
                    Observations                               694
                       p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01

 Table B6 displays MLE estimates of a multinomial probit model of spouse's labor force status at the start of marriage for female
sample members and male spouses. The coefficients are normed with not participating in the labor force as the reference category.
Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the individual level. Marginal effects on the employment and unemployment
probabilities are in Table B8. For the purpose of the marital sorting estimation, we only rely on observed wages and wages
predicted using earnings divided by hours (wage2   ). That is, the estimation of these models do not include instances in which
wage is predicted using only demographics (wage3    ). The model is estimated using female sample members who transition into
marriage between age 25 and 61. The simulation model also uses equations that describe initial conditions of marital sorting on
employment, which are estimated using individuals aged 23-27 (not reported).




                                                         131
Table B7: Marital Sorting: Selected Marginal Estimates of Sorting on Employment. Male Sample Mem-
ber, Female Spouse

                                                                       Spouse Employed
                                   Education                                 0.013
                                                                            (0.009)
                                   Lag Wage                                  0.012
                                                                            (0.035)
                                   Lag Employed                            0.189
                                                                            (0.081)
                                   Lag Unemployed                           -0.002
                                                                            (0.096)
                                   Lag Children Aged 0-5                   -0.066
                                                                            (0.032)
                                   Lag Children Aged 6-12                   -0.022
                                                                            (0.021)
                                   Lag Children Aged 13-18                   0.016
                                                                            (0.034)
                                   Observations                               833
                                      p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01

 Table B7 reports marginal effects of the marital sorting equation for spouse's employment status. Standard errors (in parentheses)
are clustered at the individual level. Marginal effects are evaluated at age 34, education 12 no children and wages equal to the
sample mean and employment equal to 1. Year was set to 1982. See further notes for table B5.




                                                          132
Table B8 : Marital Sorting: Selected Marginal Estimates of Sorting on Employment. Female Sample
Member, Male Spouse

                                                        Spouse Unemployed            Spouse Employed
                     Education                               -0.012                       0.012
                                                              (0.006)                    (0.007)
                     Lag Children Aged 0-5                     0.014                      -0.012
                                                              (0.010)                    (0.015)
                     Lag Children Aged 6-12                  0.025                        -0.012
                                                              (0.009)                    (0.014)
                     Lag Children Aged 13-18                   0.013                      -0.013
                                                              (0.009)                    (0.013)
                     Lag Wage                                  0.023                      -0.014
                                                              (0.018)                    (0.023)
                     Lag Employed                              0.016                       0.011
                                                              (0.021)                    (0.026)
                     Lag Unemployed                            0.033                       0.004
                                                              (0.026)                    (0.043)
                     Observations                               749                         749
                        p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01

 Table B8 reports marginal effects of the marital sorting equation for a male spouse's employment status. Marginal effects are for
a woman with 12 years of education, at age 34, with no children, in year 1982 and with a wage equal to the sample mean and who
worked in the last period. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the individual level. For further notes see table B6




                                                         133
