                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 ECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS AND PSEUDO-WEALTH

                                      Joseph E. Stiglitz

                                     Working Paper 28415
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28415


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   January 2021




Institute for New Economic Thinking The views expressed herein are those of the author and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Joseph E. Stiglitz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Economic Fluctuations and Pseudo-Wealth
Joseph E. Stiglitz
NBER Working Paper No. 28415
January 2021
JEL No. B22,E03,E21,E44,E60,G01,G12,G18

                                          ABSTRACT

What can explain the large changes in aggregate demand that occur in the absence of any
seemingly corresponding shock to the underlying state variables of the economy? We show that
macroeconomic volatility can arise from dispersions of beliefs among agents. These dispersions
give rise to bets and other trades in speculative assets. Such trades give rise to pseudo-wealth,
wealth that individuals believe they have on the basis of expectations of returns on these gambles.
In the aggregate, when there are enough opportunities for trade and large enough dispersions in
beliefs, this perceived wealth may be dangerously untethered from either market wealth or the
real wealth of the economy. Given the increased dispersion in beliefs that naturally arises from
unprecedented shocks, the theory of pseudo-wealth provides new understandings of both the
origins of unanticipated fluctuations and their magnitude, markedly different from prevailing
theories grounded in common knowledge and beliefs among individuals. This paper explores the
empirical and theoretical underpinnings of pseudo-wealth, links the concept to observed
macroeconomic fluctuations, and lays out a research agenda that might help us better understand
the role of pseudo-wealth and the circumstances in which it is pronounced.


Joseph E. Stiglitz
Uris Hall, Columbia University
3022 Broadway, Room 212
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
jes322@columbia.edu
                           Economic Fluctuations and Pseudo-Wealth
                                               Joseph E. Stiglitz 1

A new view of macro-economic dysfunction shifts the locus of attention from the role of rigid
wages to the discordance between the magnitude of changes in aggregate demand and the
sluggishness of adjustments, particularly of wages and prices, in a decentralized economic
system. After all, wages are not rigid--they fell by some one-third in the Great Depression. And
there are high levels of unemployment in developing countries with weak or no unions and little
or no job protections. The danger of focusing on wage rigidities is that it leads to an obvious
prescription: make wages more flexible. But as the 25% reduction in wages in Greece in the
aftermath of the 2010 crisis made evident, such a large reduction in wages almost surely was a
contributing factor in the economic depression that followed. Guzman and Stiglitz (2020b)
explain why decentralized nominal wage reductions may indeed lead to severe economic
downturns, and can be disequilibrating. 2


Expectations and animal spirits
In this new approach, attention is shifted towards explanations of large changes in aggregate
demand in the absence of any seemingly corresponding shock to the underlying state variables
of the economy--there is no war that devastates; prior to 2020, no pandemic; no news that could
account for the magnitude of some of the observed changes. (Indeed, what one might have
thought of as important news affecting future prospects of the economy--faster than expected
climate change--seems to have had little impact.)


Earlier economics literature, from Keynes on, focused on large changes in expectations as driving
changes in aggregate demand--animal spirits, the sudden belief that the future is brighter than
previously thought leads to a corresponding sudden increase in consumption and investment.


    University Professor, Columbia University. This paper is based on joint work with Martin Guzman, and represents
    1

an application of ideas developed in Guzman and Stiglitz (2020a). Research assistance from Parijat Lal and Victoria
Mooers and financial support from INET are gratefully acknowledged.
  2
    Keynes himself was explicit in arguing that nominal wage reductions would not solve the problem of cyclical
unemployment.

1
There is something fundamentally unsatisfactory about such an explanation; it says, in effect,
that we can't explain what is going on--that depends on some deep enquiry into the psychology
of, say, entrepreneurs, another discipline. Economists can only analyze the consequences of
these seemingly random and inexplicable changes in beliefs.


More recently, President Obama seems to have taken the animal spirits theory seriously, inspired
by Akerlof and Shiller (2015), trying to manipulate beliefs, by having his economics team talk
about green shoots. It didn't work, perhaps not surprisingly. Market participants knew that he
and his advisors wanted to "change the narrative," and this undermined the credibility and
impact of what they said. 3 It was just a more sophisticated version of what those in the financial
sector had long emphasized--the importance of instilling "confidence," which (they argued)
would only be achieved through reducing deficits. The new narrative looked more broadly--
talking about "green shoots."


Unanticipated shocks keep happening: Going beyond DSGE
In recent decades, economists indoctrinated in the belief that individuals are rational have
discounted such theories; those theories seem untethered from the data--expectations should
be based on past data, and rational individuals doing so won't suddenly change their
expectations. But that interpretation of economic behavior--even of rational behavior--is too
narrow, and models based on that interpretation (such as real business cycle theories and DSGE,
dynamic stochastic general equilibrium, models) have not done well, especially at the critical
points of time when the predictions and prescriptions of the models are of such importance, say
in the years surrounding the 2008 crisis. And for good reason: those events are almost always
"out of equilibrium" events, unanticipated events where contracts are broken, plans not fulfilled.
Guzman and Stiglitz (2020b) have formulated another approach, the dynamic disequilibrium
model with noise.




   It might have been the case that there were multiple equilibria, and the Administration was trying to get the
    3

economy coordinated on a good equilibrium.

2
In a world that is always evolving, never stationary, with large events and ideas that were not
contemplated always occurring, economic agents are always struggling to interpret the "news,"
to understand the implications for the future. Those moments of crises are moments when past
data give us uncertain perspectives on the future, and so different individuals, looking at the
same past behavior, may well come to different views about what lies ahead.


There are several aspects of this expectations formation process that are crucial. First, as we
have just noted, different individuals come to different views. There is extensive heterogeneity
in beliefs. Most of this paper is concerned with the evidence behind that statement and the
implications. Theorems saying that individuals, as they exchange information, come to have
"common knowledge"--a state of affairs in which all individuals agree about the probabilities of
different events, a set of shared beliefs--clearly don't apply. 4 It is an important question why
that is so; but for this paper, we do not need to answer that question.


But while they don't come to a set of shared beliefs, individuals do look to each other, both
because each individual knows his information is incomplete, and therefore others' views can
complement his information set; and because individuals know that there may be flaws or biases
in his information processing. Besides, humans are social beings, and part of human sociability
is exchanging views.


Because, in general, others' views affect one's own, there can be herding behavior--sometimes
referred to as "group think." And group think can give rise to large social multipliers: optimism
and pessimism can be contagious; as optimism by one group, leading to more consumption and
investment, spreads to others, the overall increase in aggregate will be much larger than it would
have been in the absence of such contagion. Such herding behavior can even be, in some sense,
rational, as individuals incorporate into their beliefs signals concerning information about others'
information embedded in their actions. 5 There can be a wave of optimism or pessimism through


   Aumann (1976) provides among the first formal definitions of common knowledge in economics.
    4

   Devenow and Welch (1996) provide a review of papers on the economics of rational herding in financial markets,
    5

and Zhang and Liu (2012) provide evidence for this from microloan markets in the United States. See also Banerjee

3
an economy, a wave not perfectly justified by past evidence but which may be at least partially
self-justifying, i.e. the optimism leads to more investment and consumption, which justifies the
optimism. Individuals don't have precise expectations; it's not as if their actions are based on
beliefs of growth of 4.25%, and then, when it turns out that growth is 4.21%, they say, ah, my
model was wrong; but rather their beliefs are that growth will be, say, greater than 3%, and when
it turns out that it was 4.21%, they say, ah, my views of the world are correct.


When individual's beliefs are highly interdependent, beliefs can be very unstable: they can
change quickly from very optimistic to very pessimistic, on the basis of certain "news" that
neither ex ante nor ex post would seem to justify the magnitude of the shift in beliefs.


Widespread changes in such beliefs can induce large changes in aggregate demand, larger than
can perhaps be rationally justified by any news, but more importantly for our purpose, larger
than can be easily accommodated by the sluggish adjustment processes that characterize a
decentralized economy. 6


The key role of dispersion in beliefs
This paper is concerned with another dimension of beliefs that has been swept under the rug in
the rational expectations modeling that has dominated the literature in recent decades. There
are large dispersions in beliefs--there is not common knowledge, an assertion which should be
obvious to anyone, but the maintained hypothesis in most macro modeling is that this is not the
case. Any micro-founded macroeconomics has to come to terms with why that is so and its
consequences. In two earlier papers, Guzman and Stiglitz (2015, 2020a) have argued that
changes in the magnitude of dispersion in beliefs and opportunities to engage in trades based on
that dispersion can give rise to fluctuations in aggregate perceptions of wealth, in indebtedness,


(1992), Bikhchandani et al 1992 and Caplin and Leahy (1993). Additionally, see Trueman (1994) and Clement and
Tse (2005) on herding behavior specifically in the context of analyst forecasts.
   6
     There is a large literature explaining why price and quantity adjustments will be sluggish. Macro economists
have relied on Calvo-style staggered contracts and menu costs, but probably more important is that in the presence
of uncertainty and risk aversion, optimal behavior entails sluggish adjustment, enabling one to learn more about the
environment. See Greenwald and Stiglitz (1989).

4
and in aggregate consumption. Guzman and Stiglitz refer to the wealth that individuals believe
they have on the basis of expectations of returns on gambles, such as bets with others or
investments in risky assets, but which in the aggregate may be untethered to the real wealth of
the economy, as pseudo-wealth. 7 They argue that the existence of pseudo-wealth is an
important but neglected feature of any economy in which there is not common knowledge, i.e.
in which individuals differ in their beliefs.


Pseudo-wealth has its origins in economic transactions that are an inherent part of an economic
system characterized by agents with heterogeneous beliefs--pseudo-wealth is an endogenous
outcome of a market economy that provides opportunities for agents with different beliefs to
create assets or liabilities. These include not just betting opportunities, but any financial
transaction in which payments are defined over states 8 and beliefs about the probability of the
occurrence of these states may differ across individuals.


Changes in the extent of dispersion of beliefs, and the ability and willingness to engage in
"effective bets" on those differences (a concept which will be explained in greater detail in
section 1, but for the moment can be thought of as simply financial transactions engendered by
differences in beliefs), give rise to fluctuations in aggregate pseudo-wealth, and with aggregate
demand, and especially consumption, related to aggregate wealth perceptions, fluctuations in
aggregate pseudo-wealth naturally give rise to economic volatility.


Pseudo-wealth and market wealth
There can be marked disparities between pseudo-wealth and market wealth, and between both
of these and any "true" estimate of the wealth of the economy--and this, as we shall see, itself
has important implications for economic fluctuations. Changes, say in markets or regulations,


    There is a literature addressing the question of the impact of heterogenous beliefs on market prices and
    7

therefore market wealth in the presence of constraints on short sales. By contrast, we are concerned here with
perceived wealth. See fn. 28 and the preceding discussion below.
  8
    Not necessarily Arrow-Debreu (AD) states of nature: contracts can be defined over variables which depend on
the underlying AD states. For instance, financial instruments may have payouts that are a function of profits or
market value, which themselves are a function of the underlying states of nature.

5
can reduce the volatility of market wealth but increase that of pseudo-wealth. Aggregate
demand depends on both: pseudo-wealth reflects individuals' (beliefs about their) opportunity
set, and therefore should drive consumption. But in a world of imperfect and asymmetric
information, where there may be credit rationing and collateral constraints may be binding,
market wealth can also be an important determinant of aggregate demand. Depending on the
circumstances, changes in one or the other may be more important; understanding empirically
the relative importance of each in different circumstances should be an important part of the
empirical agenda going forward. 9


Changes in pseudo-wealth are related to the increased dispersion in beliefs which naturally arises
from moments, such as new discoveries, new political movements, and severe downturns,
associated with the "unexpected," the implications of which are hard to forecast. These
moments almost always have something in common with the past, but the question is, how
much? Those advocating for some of these changes, such as the financial innovations of the
latter part of the 20th century and the beginning of this century, herald them as ushering in a new
world. If so, reliance on data from the past is of questionable value. But it is often in these
champions' self-interest to so characterize them; others will see the world in more evolutionary
terms. The quandary that this puts both analysts and ordinary citizens in--and the near
schizophrenia to which it gives rise--is illustrated by the financial innovations to which I just
referred. While the champions of these innovations claimed that the new financial products
enabled markets to better spread and share risks, making the economy more stable and the
financial products correspondingly safer, to evaluate the risk of these products, they used data
from the pre-innovation era. But the "innovation" had in fact ushered in an era of fraud and
moral hazard, so the quality of loans issued was markedly lower than those of the earlier era. In
the early years of the century, there simply wasn't the data to ascertain that that was the case--
any model based on past data was clearly irrelevant. Of course, some analysts recognized that


    9
     As section 4 below emphasizes, consumption (and more broadly aggregate demand) is also a function of
perceived uncertainty, and the situations in which there are increases in dispersions of beliefs may also be
circumstances in which there are increases in uncertainty, making the challenge of parsing out the role of market vs.
pseudo-wealth all the more difficult.

6
there had been a change in incentives, and that the change in incentives likely would change
outcomes. Others looked to the design of untested contract provisions--at least untested under
these circumstances--to provide adequate incentives. 10 There was no way at the moment to
resolve the differences in views: the new financial products accordingly gave rise to disparate
beliefs about what would happen, disparate beliefs that could and did give rise to pseudo-
wealth--and this pseudo-wealth played a role in accelerating the boom and bubble. 11


Kindleberger (1978) has closely studied the booms and bubbles and the associated busts and
panics that have characterized capitalism over the centuries. New technologies, innovations, are
at the center of most, and for good reason. There is inevitably a burst of optimism among some
about the potential of such technologies. The theory of pseudo-wealth helps us understand
better the above "excesses" associated with such events; it says that even if on average citizens
are correct in their estimates, the inevitable dispersion in beliefs can unleash and/or accelerate a
boom.


Pseudo-wealth can also help explain downward movements in the economy. There can be
negative pseudo-wealth, where the amount debtors believe that they will repay creditors
exceeds what creditors believe that they will receive. This disparity increases after the breaking
of a bubble; the resulting decline in aggregate pseudo-wealth contributes to the depth of the
recession.


Guzman and Stiglitz (2015, 2020) thus argue that the theory of pseudo-wealth provides a better
understanding of both the origins of fluctuations and their magnitude: in some cases, pseudo-
wealth serves to amplify fluctuations originating from other sources; in other cases, the fact that




     In particular, what was called the "put back provision," where mortgages that were defective were put back to
    10

the mortgage originator; it was, in effect, a money-back guarantee that the mortgages were as they were
represented to be. As it turned out, virtually all the large financial institutions issuing these guarantees refused to
honor them, and only did so after long and expensive litigation.
  11
     There is a wealth of analytic and popular writing describing this episode, including Stiglitz (2010a, 2010b), Gai,
Haldane, and Kapadia (2011), Geanakoplos et al. (2012), and Wolf (2014), among others.

7
pseudo-wealth can exceed market and actual wealth by a considerable amount can itself be the
source of the economic disturbance.


We suggest, in particular, that the events at the center of Guzman and Stiglitz's (2020b) analysis
of dynamic disequilibrium models with noise--where macro-economic inconsistencies get
revealed, where significant numbers of market participants come to realize (or believe) that
previously made plans can't be realized, e.g. large numbers of households realize that their
consumption plans are not feasible--are moments in time marked by large changes in the
dispersion of beliefs and thus potentially in pseudo-wealth, which may amplify the consequences
of the disturbances that occur at those moments. These are moments in which there can be a
sudden change, not just in those plans, but also in agents' understandings about the economy.


Pseudo-wealth as a source of perturbations
At the same time, pseudo-wealth can itself be a source of perturbations: The very fact that
pseudo-wealth may exceed actual wealth by a significant amount means that plans cannot be
consistent. At some point, there will have to be a revision. Whether those revisions are
smooth--a succession of small revisions that can be accommodated without a crisis--or sudden,
and thus crisis inducing, depends on the disparity between pseudo-wealth and actual wealth and
the rate of change of the disparity between the two, as well as on the processes of social
contagion of beliefs. 12


This paper explores further the empirical and theoretical foundations of the theory of pseudo-
wealth and attempts to link pseudo-wealth more closely to macroeconomic fluctuations. It does
not provide a full-blown test of the relevance of the theory, e.g., ascertaining the fraction of large
macroeconomic fluctuations associated with fluctuations in pseudo-wealth or identifying
particular fluctuations in which pseudo-wealth played a dominant role.




    It is important to emphasize that while it is almost inevitable that pseudo-wealth will give rise to macroeconomic
    12

inconsistencies, macroeconomic inconsistencies can arise much more generally whenever there are incomplete
markets or contracts (that is, always).

8
Its task is more modest: to lay out some of the ingredients of a research agenda that might help
us understand better the role of pseudo-wealth in economic fluctuations; to review the evidence
on the importance of beliefs heterogeneity and some indirect theory and evidence suggesting
why it is plausible that pseudo-wealth could have large effects, to identify circumstances under
which one might expect pseudo-wealth to play an important role, i.e. not only to explain why
dispersions in beliefs might persist, but to identify the circumstances in which dispersions in
beliefs might increase or decrease, giving rise to fluctuations in pseudo-wealth which in turn give
rise to fluctuations in aggregate demand.


There are thus seven intertwined pillars in the theory of macroeconomic fluctuations which we
have been developing: (a) The stochastic processes describing the evolution of the economy are
not stationary; there are always unanticipated events--events which couldn't be anticipated; (b)
accordingly markets and contracts are inherently incomplete; (c) individuals inevitably have
different views about the future--there is not common knowledge; in particular, they have
different interpretations of key events that mark the evolution of our economy and society; (d)
differences in views give rise to pseudo-wealth; (e) in the absence of a complete set of markets,
there must necessarily arise moments of macroeconomic inconsistency, with economic plans and
contracts being broken --these are often moments of crisis and deep downturns; (f) pseudo-
wealth can exacerbate the magnitude of the macroeconomic inconsistencies; (g) moments at
which such inconsistencies get revealed (or when it becomes widely understood that there are
such inconsistencies) spark a widespread awareness that previous beliefs were, in some
fundamental and deeply relevant sense, wrong, and individuals have to form new world views,
and as they do that, there will be an increased dispersion in beliefs, giving rise to the possibility,
or even likelihood, of marked changes in aggregate pseudo-wealth.


This set of explanations of fluctuations stands in marked contrast to that underlying real business
cycle theory, or even dynamic stochastic general equilibrium theories, where the stochastic
processes are stationary, there is common knowledge--no dispersion in beliefs--and while
contracts are not complete, neither are they ever broken; there are never any macroeconomic


9
inconsistencies; and when they happen--crises do occur, events that are outside the model--
market participants forge ahead, reaffirming their belief in equilibrium analysis, behaving as if
there will never be another instance in which such an event occurs. In the most popular versions,
based on the representative agent model, the absence of markets and the incompleteness of
contracts does not matter at all, since no trade occurs in markets and there are no meaningful
contracts.


Outline of paper
The paper has seven sections beyond this introduction and the conclusion. In the first, we
describe the many forms of pseudo-wealth--how it arises in a multiplicity of asset and financial
transactions. The second and third sections look at both the direct and indirect evidence on the
lack of common knowledge, the existence of significant dispersions in beliefs, and how such
dispersions can persist. The fourth section discusses circumstances in which differences in beliefs
may not give rise to pseudo-wealth, or may do so only to a very limited extent. The fifth and sixth
sections then connect pseudo-wealth to macroeconomic fluctuations. The seventh section
outlines an empirical research agenda.


       1. The many forms of pseudo-wealth


The basic intuition behind the theory of pseudo-wealth is simple: If individuals differ in their
beliefs, they will engage in trade--for instance, by making bets (later in this section, we will note
a wider range of opportunities for trade based on dispersions in beliefs). Each participant in the
bet believes it will win (on average) and so the sum of the individuals' perceived wealth exceeds
the wealth of the economy. A well-documented empirical regularity is that an individual's
consumption depends on their wealth (Fair, 2020); indeed, any standard theory with individuals
maximizing utility subject to a budget constraint has consumption today increasing with
perceived wealth, holding all else constant. 13 If there are changes in the magnitude of disparities
in beliefs or in the opportunities or the willingness to "bet" on those differences, then there will


  13
       Except for individuals who face borrowing constraints.

10
be fluctuations in aggregate pseudo-wealth. There is a presumption that if aggregate (perceived)
wealth fluctuates, aggregate consumption will fluctuate. And it is easy to construct models
where the impact of this fluctuation in aggregate consumption is amplified through
macroeconomic externalities, as we discuss more fully in sections 5 and in 6.


Aggregate pseudo-wealth will vary with an increase or decrease in "open bets," and that will be
affected by the dispersion of beliefs. When the economy is behaving smoothly, say, during the
Great Moderation, there may be widespread consensus on how the economy functions. But
when an event that was not widely anticipated, or even more strongly, was believed to be
virtually impossible under prevailing beliefs about the economy, such as the creation and then
breaking of the housing bubble, there is likely to be an increase in the dispersion of beliefs, as
different individuals "read" into the situation different lessons: some see a bubble; others do
not; some blame the Fed for maintaining interest rates at too low of a level, others blame not
fully rational and excessively greedy and short-sighted market participants, some blame the
regulator for doing too little, some for doing too much, some look to structural flaws in decision
making and corporate governance that lead to excessive short sightedness. Disagreements
abound, and whenever there are disagreements, there are opportunities for bets.


The simplest source of pseudo-wealth is that generated by the bets just described. But pseudo-
wealth arises even when there are not formal bets, simply as a result of structured finance. In
each of the situations described below, we assume that beliefs are on average correct. Thus, in
a world where demand curves for assets were linear in returns, the price would reflect average
expectations--that is, would perfectly reflect underlying returns. While with non-linear demand
functions there would be some deviation from this, the departure of aggregate perceived wealth
from this benchmark with which we are concerned in this paper are much larger. Below, we
illustrate with four examples.
     (a) Assume there are two types of individuals A and B, and two assets,  and . A believes 
        yields  + , while  yields  - , and conversely for B. A will buy , B, , so that
                                      
        aggregate perceived wealth is 2  + 2, potentially far in excess of aggregate wealth. An


11
         increase in dispersion here means an increase in : the larger , the greater the value of
         perceived wealth . A change in beliefs, where A now believes that  will do better in
         the future by  (for a total change in beliefs of 2), and conversely for B, leads A and B
         to trade their assets. These are purely speculative trades, based on changes in beliefs
         (and explored further in the next section). This trade itself leads to an increase in the
         value of aggregate pseudo wealth (compared to the previous situation) of 4, a change
         in perceived wealth that (with similar changes in others engaging in trade) can have
         macroeconomic consequences.
     (b) Short sales. This assumes no short sales. If A and B can engage in short sales, A will hold
         negative amounts of , and conversely for B, and their aggregate (perceived) wealth will
         be much larger. 14 At the same time, allowing short sales lowers the market value of
         shares--without short sales, type A bids up the price of  to  +  (if they are risk

         neutral), and similarly for ; but with short sales, the prices of both assets will fall. If we
         assume that on average individuals are rational (i.e., the true value of each asset is )

         then allowing short sales reduces the disparity between market wealth and true wealth,
         but increases the disparity between pseudo-wealth and both market wealth and true
         wealth--a disparity that can have strong macroeconomic consequences. 15
     (c) Financial structuring. Assume now that there is only one asset, and that the two groups
         of individuals differ in their view of the returns on that asset, with A believing the returns
         to be  +  and B believing them to be  - . The corporation raises funds by issuing

         bonds to B, committing them to pay a fixed amount R, equal to say  (assumed to be

         less than  - ), with the residual going to the equity holders, A, who (believe they will)

         get  +  -  , so now aggregate perceived wealth is  + : it reflects the perspective

         of the optimists, even though it is only on average that society's judgments are correct.
         Again, the greater the dispersion, i.e., the greater , the greater perceived wealth. In this
         case, market wealth as well as perceived wealth increases with dispersion. Competition


14
  There is a literature focusing on the impact on market prices (and hence on market wealth) of heterogeneous
expectations in the presence of short sales. See the discussion below and in fn. 28.
  15
     By the same token, restricting trade (increasing transactions costs) reduces the value of pseudo-wealth. In more
general models, it can reduce the volatility in both market wealth and pseudo-wealth.

12
          among the optimists will drive up the value of equity to  +  -  , 16 so that aggregate

          market wealth is  + , increasing with the dispersion in beliefs and with perceived

          wealth.
       (d) Debt. Perceived wealth may, of course, be less than true wealth. Debtors may believe
          they will pay more than creditors believe that they will receive, so there is negative
          pseudo-wealth. 17 Consider a debt contract where the debtors believe that they will fulfill
          their debt contract, and so their wealth is  -  , where  is the debt payment. But the

          creditors believe that there is a probability 1 -  that the debtors will pay nothing, so the
          expected debt payment is . Then the creditors' wealth is  +  , so aggregate wealth

          is  + 
                 - (1 - ) . 1 -  reflects the dispersion in beliefs. The greater the dispersion

          in beliefs, the greater negative pseudo-wealth.


These various forms of pseudo-wealth interact and play out in different ways in the context of
different fluctuations. If people shared the same view (e.g. concerning the growth in housing
prices), had the same preferences, and faced the same constraints, then all would take an equity
position to reap the gains. To some extent, those who lend money to the equity holders are taking
a bet: that the returns won't be as high as the equity owners believe. 18 A financial instrument
which trades off income in the good states for income in the bad states can be viewed as a bet,
with both parties believing that they are going to win, and this gives rise to pseudo-wealth.


If this interpretation is plausible, it suggests that behind periods of large increases in debt there
are often large increases in hidden pseudo-wealth, providing at least part of the explanation for
the "boom" aspects of these periods. (Guzman and Stiglitz, 2020a). The contraction that follows
the boom--when equity owners discover that the returns are not as high as they thought, and




  16
      This requires that there be no short sales. If there are, the pessimists will drive down the price of equity. The
role of restrictions on short sales is highlighted in some of the research described below.
   17
      This aspect of debt contracts was first explored in Stiglitz (1972), which provided an early discussion of the
consequences of heterogeneous beliefs.
   18
      Of course, differences in portfolios are also motivated by differences in risk aversion and differences in holdings
of non-traded assets. We comment on the particular role played by differences in beliefs later in this paper.

13
debt holders discover that matters are even worse than they thought--is associated with a
collapse of pseudo-wealth and a conversion of positive into negative aggregate pseudo-wealth.


We have also noted that dispersions in beliefs can lead to an increase in market wealth. As we
noted earlier, what matters for consumption today for individuals who are not credit constrained
is perceived wealth, not market wealth 19; but what matters for credit constrained individuals is
market wealth, not perceived wealth. Similar arguments hold for firms: a firm that believes it is
wealthier (has more pseudo-wealth) may be more willing to bear risk and invest; but a firm whose
balance sheets have improved, for instance as a result of an increase in the value of its assets,
may be both more willing and more able to invest. 20 In a world with financial market frictions,
with credit and equity rationing, an increase in wealth can increase the ability and willingness of
individuals and firms to borrow 21, and of banks and other financial institutions to lend (see
Greenwald and Stiglitz, 2003), thereby increasing investment.


This paper focuses in particular on the role of pseudo (perceived) wealth and its fluctuations in
macroeconomic volatility. And when we refer to pseudo-wealth and its volatility, we do so
comprehensively, through all the mechanisms described above, and perhaps others.




  19
      Matters are slightly more complicated: the interest rate at which individuals can borrow will be a function of
the value of the collateral they can provide and/or the value of the assets that lenders believe they can seize in
bankruptcy. This can affect individuals' consumption today, especially when there are disparities in beliefs about
the value of these assets in the future, at the time when the default occurs. See, e.g. Stiglitz (1972) and Greenwald
and Stiglitz (1993).
   20
      The latter statement itself is a marked departure from the neoclassical theory of investment, which emphasizes
only future prospective marginal returns relative to the cost of capital. It is predicated on the existence of capital
market imperfections of the kind emphasized by Greenwald and Stiglitz (1993, 2003).
   21
      See, for instance, Stiglitz and Weiss (1981, 1986, 1992), Kiyotaki and Moore (1997) and Greenwald and Stiglitz
(1993). Of course, asymmetries of information imply dispersions in beliefs (knowledge). The differences in beliefs
with which we are concerned here are markedly different from those emphasized in the earlier literature on
information asymmetries.

14
       2. Direct and Indirect Evidence on the lack of common knowledge
There is ample evidence of (a) the lack of common knowledge and differences in beliefs; (b) the
persistence of differences; (c) changes in those differences over time; and (d) differences in
beliefs mattering for economic outcomes. 22


Differences in prior beliefs and in the interpretation of the evidence available could arise from
different experiences and exposures, as well being the consequence of behavioral biases (like
confirmation bias) that have been extensively investigated by behavioral economists. For our
analysis, what matters is that beliefs differ, independently of what creates those differences.


The evidence is both direct and indirect, both macroeconomic and microeconomic.


Direct evidence is provided by survey results about expectations. 23 Surveys substantiate large
differences in beliefs in a whole host of areas. See Fetzer et al. (2020), for instance, on the
dispersion of beliefs about coronavirus risk factors and economic anxieties. (In the next sections,
we explain why we should not be surprised by such dispersion and its persistence.)


Dispersion is strong even among experts: In January 2018, the disparity between the bottom 10
"blue chip" GDP growth forecasts for 2019 and the top 10 was almost 50%. 24 There was no
evidence of "common knowledge," even among this group of experts who are supposed to have
access to and process all available information. There is also evidence that different groups
within society process information differently, and so come to different beliefs, e.g. about

  22
      Dispersion in beliefs can have macroeconomic consequences through different channels. If consumption is not
a linear function of wealth, then aggregate consumption will be a function of wealth dispersion--including, as
emphasized here, of the dispersion in pseudo-wealth. If consumption is not a linear function of the real interest
rate, dispersion in beliefs about the real interest rate will affect aggregate consumption. Tsiaplias (2020) provides
evidence, for instance, of the variation over time in dispersion about beliefs about inflation among consumers. As
we emphasize below, however, the effects with which we are concerned are different and likely to be larger and
more variable that these aggregation effects.
   23
      See Hamermesh (1985) on subjective expectations and probabilities of survival, Manski and Straub (2000) on
varying worker perceptions of job insecurity, Fisman and O'Neill (2009) on gender differences in beliefs on the
returns to effort, and Beber, Breedon, and Buraschi (2010) on differences in beliefs based on currency forecasts,
among others.
   24
      For a more extensive discussion of forecaster disagreements, see Dovern et al 2012.

15
inflation or GDP. Guzman (2010b), for instance, provides evidence on different expectations by
gender.


Persistent dispersion in beliefs is, indeed, a pervasive feature of market economies, though the
magnitude of dispersion may change over times. 25 See, for instance, Patton and Timmermann
(2010) on persistence and changes in differences in views among economic forecasters. Jiang and
Sun (2014) document both different levels of and changes in the dispersion in beliefs among
mutual funds. Bamber, Barron, and Stober (1997) look at changes in the dispersion of beliefs
among investors before and after earnings announcements.


While at one time, economists expressed skepticism about the relevance of information obtained
from surveys ("just words"), a host of studies have shown that the data produced by surveys is
economically significant. Beliefs as reflected in surveys matter for both microeconomic and
macroeconomic behavior, and the explanatory power of survey data is receiving increasing
recognition. This view has been forcefully defended, for instance, by Gennaioli and Shleifer
(2018). Giglio et al. (2019) not only document persistence of heterogeneity of beliefs, but also
provide evidence on the link between beliefs revealed by surveys and real actions taken by survey
respondents (the analysis focuses on a sample of U.S.-based clients of Vanguard, one of the
world's largest asset management firms).                  Guzman (2010a), among others, shows that
introducing information from surveys improves the predictive performance in macroeconomic
models. 26




25
   The only circumstances in which one would expect there not to be dispersion in beliefs are those in which markets
are informationally efficient. Grossman and Stiglitz (1980) showed that markets are essentially never informationally
efficient--if they were, no one would pay to obtain information; there was always dispersion in beliefs. Shiller, in a
series of papers (partially summarized in Shiller 2014) provided convincing empirical evidence.
26
   Kaufmann and Scheufele (2017) show this for a business tendency survey for Switzerland. Fuhrer (2017) embeds
survey expectations in a standard DSGE (in typical versions of which individuals have rational expectations, so
beliefs incorporate all past data), and shows that doing so improves the identification of key parameters and that
slow-moving expectations does a better job of accounting for the persistence in aggregate data than other
explanations, including autocorrelated shocks.



16
Trading volumes
A body of evidence on dispersion in beliefs particularly related to our theory of pseudo-wealth
concerns the large trading volumes in asset markets and large bets that occur in derivative and
credit default swaps markets. The extent and nature of this trading is hard to explain based solely
on (changes in) individual circumstances, e.g. it is greater than can be accounted for by changes
in the value and risk characteristics of individuals' holdings of non-tradeable assets, such as their
human capital. (Stiglitz, 1982, also notes that if what was driving portfolio allocations were
attempts to hedge changes in human capital, the information provided by financial
intermediaries would be markedly different from that which is provided.)


Indeed, in the absence a dispersion of beliefs, with fixed non-traded assets (human capital), there
would be no speculative trade. Differences in priors are a necessary condition for speculative
trade, i.e., trade that is unrelated to differences in preferences, endowments, or constraints. In
models with heterogeneous information but common priors, no-trade theorems apply (Milgrom
and Stokey, 1982; Stiglitz, 1982), unless rationality is not common knowledge (Neeman, 1996).


The magnitude of trading volumes is consistent with dispersions in beliefs of a kind which could
and would naturally give rise to the existence of pseudo-wealth. And fluctuations in those trading
volumes is consistent with changes in beliefs and fluctuations in the value of pseudo-wealth. In
fact, there is a large empirical literature directly relating dispersion in beliefs with trading
volumes. Bildersee, Radhakrishnan, and Ronen (1996) find that trading volume is positively
correlated with contemporaneous dispersion of beliefs. Li and Li (2014) also document a robust
positive relationship between the belief dispersion among household investors and the stock
market trading volume, using more than 30 years of survey data 27.


Not surprisingly, dispersion in beliefs not only affects trading volumes but also market
outcomes--implying that even if individuals on average predicted correctly, the fact that they
disagree itself has consequences (consistent with the theory being presented here, but not with


  27
       See also Bamber et al (1997).

17
standard models entailing linear aggregation--but as we have emphasized, the effects with
which we are concerned with in this paper go well beyond those associated just with
aggregation.) Diether et al. (2002) analyze how analysts' differences of opinion on the earnings
forecasts about stocks affect asset prices. Hong and Stein (1999) predict that negative skewness
in returns will be most pronounced in periods of more trading volume, and Chen, Hong, and Stein
(2001)'s empirical work confirms this pattern in the daily returns of individual stocks. Skewness
here captures the empirical fact that big price changes are more likely to be negative rather than
positive, or that stock markets "melt down, but they don't melt up," as Chen, Hong, and Stein
(2001) put it. Given the positive link between dispersion in beliefs and trading volumes, and in
turn the positive relationship between trading volume and negative skewness, the literature
suggests that disagreement alone can help us understand the vulnerability of markets to crashes,
especially those that occur without an associated large public news event.


Macroeconomics
If the dispersion of beliefs affects trading in financial assets and outcomes in financial markets, it
almost immediately follows that dispersion in beliefs will have macroeconomic consequences.


Notably, Geanakopolis and his co-authors (Fostel and Geanakopolis, 2012, 2013, Geanakopolis,
1989, 2003, 2010) explain excessive volatility of asset prices based on the interaction between
heterogeneous expectations, collateral and sale constraints, and leverage. 28 Bad news in the
economic environment can be amplified through the interaction between leverage and collateral
constraints, in a world with endogenously determined contracts, leading to large changes in the
"marginal buyer" of an asset, and thus in asset market prices. This in turn has macroeconomic
consequences, leading to a leverage cycle. 29                   Note that these theories are strongly
complementary to that developed here: in both, dispersions in beliefs are central. The theories




28
   For a somewhat different approach, see Scheinkman and Xiong (2003).
29
   These leverage cycles are markedly different from the credit cycles discussed at the end of the previous section,
in which there are asymmetries of information, but not dispersions in beliefs.

18
developed here focus on the implications for aggregate consumption and on aggregate
investment. 30


Geanakopolis and related work focused on changes in market wealth. But changes in the
dispersion in beliefs, operating through changes in pseudo-wealth--say a willingness of
households to borrow and a willingness of banks to lend--can give rise to much the same
dynamic. This work shares with ours an emphasis on the importance of the dispersion of beliefs
and changes over the cycle in that dispersion. As we noted, however, at the end of the previous
section, the channels through which market and pseudo-wealth affect the economy are quite
different.


Other macroeconomic phenomena, such as the exchange rate premium, have also been traced
to heterogeneity in information and beliefs. (See, e.g. Bacchetta and Wincoop, 2006, Bebr et al,
2010). 31


     3. Persistence of dispersion
Not only can there can exist large differences in beliefs, but those differences can be sustained,
at least for a while: All that we require is that there is not common knowledge, implying that at
least one of the assumptions which give rise to "common knowledge" is not satisfied. 32


Rare events
The type of events that are at the core of our analysis are of a kind over which there are not
enough opportunities for learning, so that heterogeneity of beliefs can be a persistent feature of


30
    As we have noted, as aggregate perceived wealth increases, in general, current desired levels of aggregate
consumption increase. Similarly, as the perceived wealth of enterprises increases, their willingness to undertake
investment increases and the willingness of financial institutions to make loans increases.
31
   There is a long tradition of looking to forecasting errors as a source of business fluctuations (Pigou, 1926 and more
recently, Phelps, 1999). Pseudo-wealth focuses, though, not on average mistakes but on dispersion. More recent
literature has shown that such cyclical fluctuations can even be based on rational expectations--but differential
beliefs, i.e., a lack of common knowledge, based on differential information. (See Beaudry and Portier, 2004, 2006).
   32
      See Milgrom (1981) for a discussion of the conditions under which common knowledge prevails. Kurz (1994)
and Kurz and Motolese (2001) provide a general theory for the persistence of heterogeneous expectations, and
discuss the role of such heterogeneity in economic volatility.

19
the environment. These "rare" events are those which occur sufficiently infrequently that there
is no way to formulate an objective conditional probability distribution. We might all come to an
agreement about the probability distribution of life expectancies, given the large data base. Even
if it is the case that the economic system can process well events that are not rare, it is difficult
to learn enough about the probability distributions of rare events because by definition we do
not get many observations of such events. There is no way that one can formulate an objective
distribution of an event of enormous economic consequences, such as the re-election of a
demagogue like Donald Trump.


While each such event is rare, in the sense just defined, the occurrence of such "rare" events is
not rare, and they are the events which dominate much of our thinking. Such events--whether
it's the breaking of a housing bubble, the election of a demagogue, the occurrence of a pandemic-
- are the kinds of events that give rise to the large economic fluctuations which should be at the
center of macroeconomic analysis. And the change in pseudo-wealth that is associated with such
events can play an important role in amplifying the consequences of these shocks.


Natural selection
Some economists have argued to the contrary, that even if the conditions under which there is
common knowledge do not hold, those who can more accurately predict the future--those with
close to what might be thought of as rational expectations--will predominate. This is sometimes
called the natural selection hypothesis, which contends that the financial wealth of agents with
incorrect beliefs trends towards zero in the long run.


The economic environments in which the natural selection hypothesis holds are generally distinct
from those of concern here, where there is no "objective" probability distribution. If the event
over which there is speculative trade is rare, there are not enough opportunities for the agents
with the objective beliefs to prevail.




20
In reality, of course, some individuals may have better judgments in one area, others in another.
They may both have overconfidence in their judgments in areas which are not of their
competence. They thus may make profits from bets (investments) in one area, losses in others;
but all the while, there may be betting opportunities, with variability in aggregate pseudo-wealth
affecting macroeconomic fluctuations.


Even in an economic environment not predominated by rare events, there are plausible
conditions under which the natural selection hypothesis fails and the economic system exhibits
persistent heterogeneity in beliefs--consistent with what is documented in empirical work on
beliefs and with observed economic behavior. Cao (2018), for instance, lays out one model in
which margin requirements protect the wealth of the optimists, so that the over-optimistic
agents may nonetheless survive. 33


     4. Beyond dispersions in beliefs
Heterogeneous expectations are necessary but not sufficient for pseudo-wealth to have large
macroeconomic consequences. There must, for instance, be preferences such that individuals'
behavior responds to these large differences in beliefs (e.g., individuals are not too risk averse--
though no matter how risk averse, under the standard assumptions, they will engage in some
trade, so pseudo-wealth and its fluctuations will play some role in macroeconomic volatility) and
opportunities for those with different beliefs to engage in "trades."


And, while ceteris paribus an increase in pseudo-wealth would be expected to lead to an increase
in consumption, the world is not one marked by ceteris paribus, so it is not inevitable that the
induced fluctuations in aggregate perceived wealth lead to increased volatility of consumption.
For instance, a financial innovation such as the creation of a market for bets in a context of
heterogeneous beliefs will lead to increases in expected wealth. On its own, that will tend to



33
  Dosi et al. (2020) and Siniskaya and Tesfatsion (2015) have recently demonstrated that what might seem "better"
learning processes--using more sophisticated estimation processes compared to more myopic expectations--
actually result in poorer systemic performance.

21
increase consumption. But it will also increase wealth volatility. 34 The increased volatility will
tend to increase precautionary savings. Thus, it is possible that an event, or other change in the
economy that leads to an increase in aggregate pseudo-wealth, not lead to an increase in
aggregate consumption. 35 But empirically, it is plausible that, at least in many instances, the
wealth effects dominate over the precautionary savings effects, and Guzman and Stiglitz (2020a)
develop a model in which that is the case. 36


With more general models of decision making under uncertainty, it is plausible that there may
be asymmetric responses to increases in dispersions in beliefs associated with especially deep
economic downturns--where precautionary behavior inhibits undertaking even small bets with
positive expected gains, as individuals demand greater "flexibility" to respond to the unknown
future (Kreps (1979, 1992))--and increases in dispersion in beliefs associated with an economic
boom/price bubble, where more optimistic individuals/less risk averse individuals take
advantage of differences in beliefs to engage in trades which increase pseudo-wealth and amplify
the bubble. 37


34
   This paper does not inquire into the welfare economics of pseudo-wealth. Even if the financial innovation that
completes the market creates risk in an economy that would be otherwise stable, from the viewpoint of individual
beliefs, engaging in such bets is Pareto efficient (putting aside any macroeconomic externalities to which such
betting activities give rise.) We note that if the planner had prohibited the bet, the society would have experienced
a smoother path of consumption, and each individual's consumption profile would have been smoother. As we
noted in our earlier paper, if we allow the planner to take a stance on beliefs, and the planner uses beliefs that are
consistent, such that the sum of the planner's perceived probabilities of all possible states is equal to one, as in the
case of "reasonable beliefs" analyzed in Brunnermeier, Simsek, and Xiong (2014), then the betting equilibrium would
exhibit a lower level of social welfare, and indeed, using the planner's beliefs, each individual would be worse off.
   35
      The case of preferences that exhibit substitution effects that lead to an increase in savings as a response of the
increase in risk that the creation of the market for speculative trade implies is presented in Iachan, Nenov, and
Simsek (2015). Diamond and Stiglitz (1974) analyze the conditions under which a mean expected utility preserving
increase in risk leads to more consumption; since individuals voluntary engage in bets, such bets are a mean utility
increasing increase in expected utility.
   36
      Though even then, pseudo-wealth has macroeconomic consequences, depressing consumption in the short run,
and causing a macroeconomic shock upon the resolution of the bets.
   37
      Such behavioral differences may be necessary to reconcile the observed cyclical movements in dispersions in
beliefs with movements in aggregates. Patton and Timmermann (2010) argue that differences in forecaster opinion
move countercyclically, with heterogeneity being strongest during recessions where forecasters appear to place
greater weight on their prior beliefs. Similarly, Dovern, Fritsche, and Slacalek (2012) also find that disagreement
about GDP growth intensifies strongly during recessions, whereas disagreement about prices rises with their level.
In the standard models, these increases in dispersions in beliefs should give rise to an increase in pseudo-wealth,
which would offset at least in part the cyclical downturn: pseudo-wealth would act as a stabilizing force. If, however,
the extreme uncertainty associated with downturns induces a contraction in speculation, then just the opposite

22
     5. Pseudo-wealth and macroeconomics: the amplification of fluctuations
The previous section argued that it is not inevitable that creation of a new betting opportunity in
the presence of disperse beliefs leads to a burst in aggregate demand, to be followed by a decline
when the event on which the bets have been made gets "resolved," though even when it does
not lead to an increase in aggregate demand, it will in general lead to an increase in the volatility
of aggregate consumption. 38


This goes against the prior prevailing presumption, that heterogeneity beliefs might help stabilize
the economy: If cyclical variations were caused by fluctuations in investment, and investment
were driven by equity prices (Tobin's q), and there were no restrictions on short sales, 39 then
counterviews could moderate fluctuations in q and stabilize the economy.


In this section, we explain in greater detail the role of pseudo-wealth in amplifying fluctuations,
a role which is asymmetric both in the channels through which it operates and possibly in
magnitude with respect to large positive and negative shocks.


Consider first negative shocks.            Major events, such as the failure of Long-Term Capital
Management, the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, and the fall of Lehman Brothers, are
associated with increased with increased dispersion in beliefs (Carlin, Longstaff, and Matoba,
2014), but these are also events that make the environment more uncertain. The net effect on
the extent of "betting" is ambiguous; there could be a decrease in "betting".


But while in the context of these adverse shocks, the new dispersion of beliefs may not give rise
to new pseudo-wealth--were it to do so, it would help counter the downward movement of the


could occur; and this is especially so once the possibility of negative pseudo-wealth noted earlier is taken into
account.
   38
      That is, even if the increase in pseudo-wealth that follows from the increased dispersion in beliefs does not
translate into increased consumption in the short run, it is still the case that when the bets get resolved, aggregate
wealth declines, and with the decline, so do aggregate consumption.
   39
      This is an important restriction, as we have already noted.

23
economy--there is still a change in pseudo-wealth associated with pre-existing contractual
arrangements: the adverse shock can give rise to negative pseudo-wealth, as creditors' beliefs
about being repaid diminish more strongly than debtors' beliefs about making repayments.


On the other hand, moments of positive shocks--associated with the discovery of new
technologies or the opening of new markets--may be associated not just with increased
dispersion in beliefs, but also more confidence (and as a host of writers have emphasized,
including Knight, Keynes, and Kindleberger, more confidence than they should have, based on
history), at least on the part of many market participants, leading in turn to significant increases
in pseudo-wealth. Thus, pseudo-wealth may amplify the effects of technology. (So too, when it
is simply "animal spirits" that give rise to a boom in the economy. )


To illustrate this point, suppose that there is an innovation that increases the expected wealth of
the society due to its (expected) effects on the real economy, but that given the different beliefs
of market participants concerning the magnitude of the benefits, it also creates opportunities for
speculative trading ("betting"). Suppose that the permanent income hypothesis holds. The
"betting" opportunities would lead each market participant to believe she is even wealthier,
amplifying the effect of the innovation on the aggregate spending.


Although the effects of variations in pseudo-wealth on spending and savings decisions will likely
be concentrated on the segment of the society that experiences those variations, there may be
aggregate demand effects--for instance, variations in pseudo-wealth could affect the demand
for fixed assets such as land and housing, thus affecting the constraints of other agents that do
not experience a direct variation in the component of their perceived wealth that is pseudo-
wealth. 40




  40
     These are all examples of macroeconomic externalities, the importance of which has recently become widely
recognized (cf. for instance Greenwald and Stiglitz (1986), Aoki (1998), Lorenzoni (2008), Bianchi (2011), Jeanne and
Korinek (2019), Korinek (2018) Dávila and Korinek (2018)), and Farhi and Werning (2016).

24
Thus, not only is pseudo-wealth a potentially important determinant of the macro-economic
state of the economy at each moment of time, but it may also play a role in at least some
macroeconomic fluctuations.


In this section we have shown that heterogeneous beliefs may, or quite plausibly do, amplify
economic fluctuations--a perspective that stands in marked contrast to the prevailing view that
differences in views can play a role in dampening cycles.


       6. Pseudo-wealth as a source of fluctuations
While pseudo-wealth can thus amplify fluctuations arising from other sources, in some
circumstances pseudo-wealth can be the source of the fluctuation, rather than just an amplifier.
That would be so, for instance, if there were a purely financial innovation, which did not affect
the actual wealth capacity of the economy but only provided further opportunities for "betting."


Moreover, we have explained how positive shocks in particular can give rise to pseudo-wealth in
excess of the real wealth of the economy, in which case it is inevitable that plans of individuals
and firms of at least some individuals cannot be realized: in aggregate, for instance, planned
aggregate consumption exceeds the potential of the economy. A sudden realization of this would
itself represent a shock to the economic system, precipitating possibly a crisis or a severe
downturn.


More generally, the dynamics of pseudo-wealth may play an important role in every stage of the
cycle. The fact that increases in pseudo-wealth and hence consumption may track the optimism
of the more optimistic members of society leads to social contagion: those optimistic beliefs,
validated, as it were, by the stronger than expected performance of the economy, lead others to
share in that optimism. The fact to that the increase in pseudo-wealth gets reflected in an
increase in market prices 41 , increasing the ability and willingness to consume, investment,
borrow, and lend, provides further amplification.


  41
       See the analysis of Section 1 or the earlier discussion of Geanakopolis' leverage cycle.

25
When the bubble breaks, there is heightened uncertainty, and while the dispersion of views
about the breaking of the bubble, say, has been eliminated--leading to a sudden decrease in
pseudo-wealth--there are new potential sources of dispersions of beliefs, potentially giving rise
to renewed pseudo-wealth. But at that moment, heightened uncertainty prevails, and hence
that potential is not realized. Rather, the change in pseudo-wealth is associated with existing
contracts: differences in perceptions in the likelihood of repayment of current debts; and the
heightened disparity in those perceptions leads to a marked increase in negative pseudo-wealth,
deepening the economic downturn.


     7. An Empirical agenda
An important question is, how significant is pseudo-wealth in practice either as an amplifier or a
source of cyclical fluctuations? Our claim is not that variations in disparities of beliefs always
gives rise to macroeconomic fluctuations or that all fluctuations are due to variations in pseudo-
wealth; it is only that increases in the disparity of beliefs may be, and sometimes are, both a
source of fluctuations and an amplifier, helping explain both the existence and magnitude of
fluctuations in the economy that are hard to trace to other shocks, such as those related to
technology.


Answering this question requires a careful empirical investigation--a step that we do not take in
this paper. That empirical analysis would require, in the first place, more data on beliefs and the
dispersion in those beliefs, and further empirical studies linking beliefs and behavior, and the
behavior of individual agents and macroeconomic outcomes. We have argued, moreover, that
pseudo-wealth may work differently, through different channels, in booms and in busts, so that
any robust investigation of the relationship between pseudo-wealth and macroeconomic
fluctuations has to investigate separately behavior under these different circumstances. So too,
changes in pseudo-wealth may play a more important role for individuals in some circumstances
than in others, and an empirical research agenda has to identify the circumstances in which it
plays an important role, and whether, even if it plays an important role for some individuals,


26
whether it does so in sufficient magnitude for a sufficiently large number that it has
macroeconomic consequences.


Suppose that a survey was specifically designed to test the implications of the pseudo-wealth
theory. The critical question is what data should be obtained from such a survey. We have
explained that the magnitude of "betting" depends not only on the disparity of beliefs and the
confidence of market participants in their beliefs, but also on their being markets that make
"betting" possible. We have also explained that the consequences of pseudo-wealth and its
variability depend on the effect of pseudo-wealth on spending decisions. That also depends on
the agents' preferences, their degree of risk aversion, and their perceptions of risk. Thus, the
surveys have to be comprehensive enough to enable empirical work showing both the
dependence of consumption on (perceived) wealth and on risk (i.e., the extent to which an
increase in risk gives rise to precautionary savings). Ideally, we would have data from which we
could infer the joint distribution of beliefs, including the confidence in those beliefs, and the
preferences of the market participants that engage in speculative trade. Studies on consumption
would identify separately the effects of an increase in pseudo-wealth and market wealth in
determining individual behavior, and how those effects depend on risk aversion, risk perceptions,
and market (credit and collateral) constraints 42--and by adding up those effects across
individuals, derive empirically an aggregate consumption function.


(Ascertaining the dependence of aggregate consumption on both market and pseudo-wealth are
important to assess sustainability: We have emphasized that even market wealth may not move
in tandem with increases in the economy's productive capacities when there are dispersions in
beliefs, and changes in those disparities. So too, we have noted that the channels through which
changes perceived wealth and market wealth affect macroeconomic activity differ, and that the
relative importance of the two may differ markedly across individuals depending on their
circumstances.)


  42
     As we noted in section 1, the impact of market wealth as opposed to perceived or pseudo-wealth operates
largely through such constraints.

27
       8. Concluding Comments
A key motivation for this paper was explaining the magnitude of the volatility in aggregate
demand--the seeming "excessive volatility." As we noted, by excessive volatility we mean
changes today that cannot be explained by changes in the underlying state variables, such as
technology or capital stock. Not only are there not changes in these variables large enough to
account for observed variations in outcomes, but also, in standard theory, there are strong
automatic stabilizers, buffers (like inventories and price adjustments) that help the economy
absorb shocks.


Earlier research (Greenwald and Stiglitz, 1993, 2003) and Stiglitz (2016) emphasized the role of
capital market imperfections (credit and equity rationing and other financial frictions), which can
amplify shocks and result in their persistence. In Guzman and Stiglitz (2020a), we discuss still
other explanations, related to "trend shocks" (Aguiar and Gopinath, 2007, or "sentiment shocks"
(Angeletos and La'O, 2013). Beaudry and Portier (2004, 2006) and Jaimovich and Rebel (2008)
present models where news of a future real shock delivered today has effects prior to the shock
itself.


Here, we have explored another potential source of excessive macroeconomic volatility--the
volatility in pseudo-wealth, the result in turn of changes over time in the magnitude of dispersion
in beliefs and the ability and opportunities to engage in "effective bets" based on these
differences. 43 Of course, the winning of a bet is simply redistributive in nature--and in standard
macroeconomics, redistributions are of second order importance--here we have argued that
that is not the case, that pseudo-wealth has macroeconomic consequences. Moreover, because
the beliefs and dispersion of beliefs can change quickly 44, and accordingly, with active speculative



  43
      Our analysis focuses on changes in a belief about a future outcome which is redistributive in nature--the
winning of a bet--but the making of the bet has macroeconomic consequences because it increases aggregate
perceived wealth.
   44
      Tsiaplias (2020) uses inflations expectations data from more than 285,000 Australian consumers to argue that
a significant group of consumers update their information set very rapidly, almost every quarter. Baker, McElroy,

28
markets, the aggregate value of pseudo-wealth can change quickly, even though the underlying
state variables do not, pseudo-wealth can easily give rise to volatility.


Economists have long recognized that expectations, beliefs, matter. It is obvious that animal
spirits, untethered to reality, can give rise to marked changes in aggregate demand--irrational
optimism to a boom and irrational pessimism to a bust. Economists in recent decades have
perhaps too easily dismissed such irrationality; even if it is irrational, it may still be predictable,
as the title of Dan Ariely's book suggests (Ariely, 2010). In section 3, we explained that such
irrationality could persist and survive. Moreover, we have argued that the prevailing reaction of
economists to notions of the economy being driven by animal spirits--going to the other extreme
of rational expectations--is flawed: the world is not well described by stationary stochastic
processes; the important events that animate life are rare and fundamentally unpredictable.


While there is an important research agenda explaining movements over time in beliefs about
advances in technology or growth in the economy, from an analytic perspective, the task of
explaining aggregate fluctuations by animal spirits is perhaps too easy: it is almost obvious that
if investors or consumers suddenly believe that they are wealthier (that their future incomes are
higher than they previously thought) they will spend more, and if there is a sudden burst of such
expectations, aggregate demand can increase suddenly. 45


Our focus here is on the macroeconomic implications of dispersion in beliefs. Central to our
argument that dispersion matters--that say the additional consumption of those whose
estimates are more optimistic is not just offset by the additional consumption of those whose
estimates are more pessimistic--is not the usual argument of non-linear relationships, for which
there is indeed ample evidence. The theory of pseudo-behavior provides a further and stronger
argument: that through the creation of pseudo-wealth, an increase in dispersion of beliefs leads


and Sheng (2020) show data about macro forecasts consistent with a model in which visibly large shocks induce
immediate and synchronized updating of information for inattentive agents.
  45
     There is an important literature which structures expectation formation through learning. See Evans and
Honkapohja, 2001, Heymann and Sanguinetti, 1998, and Guzman and Howitt, 2015.

29
to aggregate behavior that is consistent with beliefs that wealth is different from what it is, even
when those beliefs are on average correct.


While we must await further research to quantitatively assess the role of pseudo-wealth in
business fluctuations--and because pseudo-wealth interacts jointly with other variables giving
rise to and amplifying shocks, we will never have a precise parsing of its role--the empirical and
theoretical foundations of the economics of pseudo-wealth and its potential as a driver of
macroeconomic activity have already been laid, with elements of the evidence presented here:
     a) There are large dispersions in beliefs.
     b) Such dispersions can persist, at least for a while; but the magnitude of dispersion can, and
        does, change over time.
     c) Dispersions in beliefs will, under standard preferences, give rise to a variety of economic
        transactions which give rise to pseudo-wealth.
     d) Given the set of financial relations in existence, a shock to the economic system can give
        rise to negative pseudo-wealth.
     e) As the economy evolves, with expected and unexpected shocks and events, and with
        changes in markets and market opportunities, there will be fluctuations in the magnitude
        of pseudo-wealth that may not be closely tethered to changes in the real wealth of the
        economy or to market wealth.
     f) Such changes naturally amplify economic booms, and we have also explained how they
        can also amplify downturns.
     g) The disparity between aggregate pseudo-wealth and true wealth means that plans of
        individuals and firms cannot be realized, necessitating adjustments at times. Those
        adjustments can occur rapidly, and if so, this can precipitate a crisis or severe downturn.
        Thus, pseudo-wealth is not just an amplifier of other disturbances, but a source of
        disturbance itself.
     h) More generally, changes in pseudo-wealth can give rise to large and rapid changes in
        aggregate demand, at a pace beyond the capacity of other price and quantity variables to
        adjust, giving rise, in turn, to unemployment; and the decentralized adjustment processes


30
       of the economy may be disequilibrating, or at least not quickly restore the economy to its
       full employment trajectory.


  The fact that, at least at times, both the magnitude of dispersions in beliefs and of trades in
assets changes with the (business) cycle implies that there is at least a potential, or even a
likelihood, that at times fluctuations in pseudo-wealth play a significant role in at least some
economic fluctuations. Variations in pseudo-wealth cannot just be treated as "noise."


If pseudo-wealth is as potentially important as we suggest, it has policy implications. Expanding
the set of betting opportunities--in the way that financial liberalization and structured finance
has allowed--may well increase the level and volatility of pseudo-wealth. Making short-sales
easier, while it may reduce the volatility of market wealth, may increase that of pseudo-wealth.
We have set forth conditions under which macroeconomic volatility may be more closely linked
with one or the other.


This paper, furthermore, lays out a challenge to the standard models based on rational
expectations and common knowledge. If there are differences in beliefs (a point clearly
established by the evidence presented here), efficient markets will create opportunities for
trades based on those differences in beliefs, and this will necessarily give rise to pseudo-wealth
that can be empirically significant, that is, which has macroeconomic consequences. Observed
trading behavior is consistent with these observations. Macroeconomic modeling based on
micro-foundations needs either to incorporate pseudo-wealth or explain why the seemingly large
discrepancies in beliefs do not give rise to significant pseudo-wealth and why the variations in
the magnitude of pseudo-wealth would not be an important driver of fluctuations. To put it
another way, any micro-founded macroeconomic theory that ignores pseudo-wealth must
explain why beliefs and preferences are such or market constraints are such as not to give rise
to significant pseudo-wealth.    Macroeconomics modeling purporting to be based on micro-
foundations has to accordingly either explain: (a) why the evidence on dispersions in beliefs and
changes in dispersions is wrong; (b) why individuals do not engage in trade based on those


31
differences in beliefs; and/or (c) why there are not macroeconomic consequences to those
trades. So far, the standard literature has ignored all of these aspects of this challenge.


Ultimately, this paper offers a theoretical contribution with testable implications that can be
distinguished from the implications of other related and complementary models for explaining
cyclical fluctuations. In some circumstances the pseudo-wealth can be the source of economic
fluctuations, in others it can amplify fluctuations arising from shocks arising elsewhere in the
economic system. Policies may affect both the extent of differences in beliefs and the magnitude
of trade, and thus the extent to which those differences give rise to pseudo-wealth and to its
fluctuations.


The paper also illustrates that even outside of a rational expectations model, one can identify
regularities in behavior that help account for the nature of economic fluctuations. Even if every
downturn or crisis is different, there are elements of commonality.




32
                                               References

Aguiar, M. and Gopinath G. (2007), `Emerging Market Business Cycles: The Cycle is the Trend', Journal
        of Political Economy, 115(1), 69-102.

Akerlof, A. G. and Shiller R. J. (2015), Phishing for Phools: The Economics of Manipulation and
       Deception. Princeton University Press: Princeton, NJ.

Angeletos, G. M. and La'O J. (2013), `Sentiments', Econometrica, 81(2), 739-779.

Ariely, D. (2010), Predictably Irrational: The Hidden Forces that Shape Our Decisions. Harper Perennial:
        New York.

Aumann, R. (1976), `Agreeing to Disagree', The Annals of Statistics, 4(6), 1236-1239.

Bacchetta, P. and Van Wincoop E. (2006), `Can Information Heterogeneity Explain the Exchange Rate
      Determination Puzzle?' American Economic Review, 96 (3), 552-576.

Baker, S., McElroy T. and Sheng, X. (2020), `Expectation Formation Following Large, Unexpected
       Shocks', Review of Economics and Statistics, 102, 287-303.

Bamber, L., Barron O. and Stober T. (1997), `Trading Volume and Different Aspects of Disagreement
     Coincident with Earnings Announcements', The Accounting Review, 72(4), 575-597.

Banerjee, A. (1992), `A Simple Model of Herd Behavior,' Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107, 797-817.
Beaudry, P. and Portier F. (2004), `An Exploration into Pigou's Theory of Cycles', Journal of Monetary
      Economics, 51, 1183-1216.
Beaudry, P. and Portier F. (2006), `Stock Prices, News and Economic Fluctuations', American Economic
      Review, 96(4), 1993-1307.
Beber, A., Breedon F. and Buraschi, A. (2010), `Differences in Beliefs and Currency Risk Premiums',
       Journal of Financial Economics, 98, 415-438.
Bikhchandani, S., Hirshleifer D. and Welch I. (1992), `A Theory of Fads, Fashion, Custom, and Cultural
       Change as Informational Cascades,' Journal of Political Economy, 100, 992-1026.

Bianchi, J. (2011), `Overborrowing and Systemic Externalities in the Business Cycle,' American Economic
       Review, 101(7), 3400-3426.

Bildersee, J., Radhakrishnan S. and Ronen J. (1996), `Dispersion of Analysts' Forecasts, Precision of
       Earnings, and Trading Volume Reaction,' International Review of Financial Analysis, 5(2), 99-
       111.

Brunnermeier, M. K., Simsek A. and Xiong W. (2014), `A Welfare Criterion for Models With Distorted
      Beliefs,' The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(4), 1753-1797.

       33
Cao, D. (2018), `Speculation and Financial Wealth Distribution under Belief Heterogeneity', The
        Economic Journal, 128(614), 2258­2281.

Caplin, A. and Leahy J. (1993), `Sectoral Shocks, Learning and Aggregate Fluctuations,' Review of
        Economic Studies, 60, 1065-1085.

Carlin, B. I., Longstaff F. A. and Matoba K. (2014), `Disagreement and Asset Prices', Journal of Financial
        Economics 114(2), 226-238.

Chen, J., Hong H. and Stein J. C. (2001), `Forecasting Crashes: Trading Volume, Past Returns, and
       Conditional Skewness in Stock Prices', Journal of Financial Economics 61(3), 345-381.

Clement, M. and Tse S. (2005), `Financial Analyst Characteristics and Herding Behavior in Forecasting',
      Journal of Finance, 60, 307-341.

Dávila, E. and Korinek A. (2018), `Pecuniary Externalities in Economies with Financial Frictions,' Review
        of Economic Studies, Oxford University Press, 85(1), 352-395.

Devenow, A. and Welch I. (1996), `Rational Herding in Financial Economics', European Economic
      Review, 40, 603-615.

Diamond, Peter A., and Joseph E. Stiglitz, 1974. "Increases in risk and in risk aversion." Journal of
      Economic Theory 8, No. 3, 337-360.
Diether, K. B., Malloy C. J. and Scherbina A. (2002), `Differences of Opinion and the Cross Section of
       Stock Returns,' The Journal of Finance, 57(5), 2113-2141.
Dosi, G., Napoletano M., Roventini A., Stiglitz J. E. and Treibich T. (2020) `Rational Heuristics?
        Expectations and Behaviors in Evolving Economies with Heterogeneous Interacting Agents,'
        Economic Inquiry, 58(3), 1487­1516.
Dovern, J., Fritsche U. and Slacalek J. (2012), `Disagreement Among Forecasters in G7 Countries,' The
      Review of Economics and Statistics, 94(4), 1081-1096.
Evans, George W., and Seppo Honkapohja, 2001. Learning and Expectations in Macroeconomics.
       Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey.
Fair, R. (2020), `Some Important Macro Points,' Oxford Review of Economic Policy Volume 36, Issue 3,
         Autumn, pp. 556­578.
Farhi, E. and Werning I. (2016), `A Theory of Macroprudential Policies in the Presence of Nominal
        Rigidities,' Econometrica, 84(5), 645-1704.
Fetzer, T., Hensel L., Hermle J., and Roth C. (2020), `Coronavirus Perceptions and Economic Anxiety,'
        forthcoming, Review of Economics and Statistics.
Fisman, R. and O'Neill M. (2009), `Gender Differences in Beliefs on the Returns to Effort: Evidence from
      the World Values Survey', The Journal of Human Resources, 44(4), 858-870.


       34
Fostel, Ana and John Geanakoplos, 2012. "Tranching, CDS, and asset prices: How financial innovation
        can cause bubbles and crashes." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 4(1), pp.190-
        225.

Fostel, A. and Geanakoplos J. (2013), `Reviewing the Leverage Cycle', Cowles Foundation Discussion
        Paper No. 1918.

Fuhrer, Jeff, 2017, "Expectations as a source of macroeconomic persistence: Evidence from survey
       expectations in a dynamic macro model," Journal of Monetary Economics, Volume 86, Pages 22-
       35, ISSN 0304-3932, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmoneco.2016.12.003.

Gai, P., Haldane A. G. and Kapadia S. (2011), `Complexity, Concentration and Contagion,' Journal of
         Monetary Economics, 58, 453-470.

Geanakoplos, J. (1989), `Game Theory without Partitions, and Applications to Speculation and
      Consensus', Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper No. 914.

Geanakoplos, J. (2003), `Liquidity, Default, and Crashes: Endogenous Contracts in General Equilibrium',
      in M. Dewatripont, L. P. Hansen and S. J. Turnovsky (eds.), Advances in Economics and
      Econometrics: Theory and Applications. Cambridge University Press: Cambridge.

Geanakoplos, J. (2010), `The Leverage Cycle', in D. Acemoglu, K. Rogoff, and M. Woodford (eds.), NBER
      Macroeconomics Annual 2009, Volume 24. University of Chicago Press: Chicago.

Geanakoplos, J., Axtell R., Farmer J. D., Howitt P., Conlee B., Goldstein J., Hendrey M., Palmer N. M. and
      Yang C. (2012), `Getting at Systemic Risk via an Agent-Based Model of the Housing Market',
      American Economic Review, 102(3): 53-58.

Gennaioli, N. and Shleifer A. (2018), A Crisis of Beliefs: Investor Psychology and Financial Fragility.
      Princeton University Press: Princeton, N.J.

Giglio, S., Maggiori M., Stroebel J. and Utkus S. (2019), `Five Facts about Beliefs and Portfolios',
        National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 25744.

Greenwald, B. C. and Stiglitz J. E. (1986), `Externalities in Economies with Imperfect Information and
      Incomplete Markets', Quarterly Journal of Economics, 101(2), 229-264.
Greenwald, B. C. and Stiglitz J. E. (1989), `Toward a Theory of Rigidities', American Economic Review,
      79(2), 364-69.
Greenwald, B. C. and Stiglitz J. E. (1993), `Financial Market Imperfections and Business Cycles',
      Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108(1), 77-114.
Grossman, S. and Stiglitz J. E. (1980),' On the Impossibility of Informationally Efficient Markets',
      American Economic Review, 70(3), 393-408.


       35
Guzman, G. (2010a), `An Inflation Expectations Horserace', in A Collection on the Versatility and
     Predictive Power of Survey Expectations Data, Finance and Economics Doctoral Dissertation,
     Columbia University, unpublished.
Guzman, G. (2010b), `Sexonomics: Gender, Wealth, and Expectations in Financial Markets', in A
     Collection on the Versatility and Predictive Power of Survey Expectations Data, Finance and
     Economics Doctoral Dissertation, Columbia University, unpublished.
Guzman, M. and P. Howitt (2015), "Learning, Expectations, and the Financial Instability Hypothesis," in
     J. E. Stiglitz and M. Guzman (eds.), Contemporary Issues in Macroeconomics: Lessons from The
     Crisis and Beyond. Palgrave: London.

Guzman, M. and Stiglitz J. E. (2015), `A Theory of Pseudo-wealth', in J. E. Stiglitz and M. Guzman (eds.),
     Contemporary Issues in Macroeconomics: Lessons from The Crisis and Beyond. Palgrave:
     London.

Guzman, M. and Stiglitz J. E. (2020a), `Pseudo-Wealth and Consumption Fluctuations', forthcoming,
     The Economic Journal.

Guzman, M. and Stiglitz J. E. (2020b), `Towards a Dynamic Disequilibrium Theory with Noise', Oxford
     Review of Economic Policy, Volume 36, Issue 3, Autumn, pp. 621­674

Hamermesh, D. (1985), `Expectations, Life Expectancy, and Economic Behavior', Quarterly Journal of
     Economics, 100(2), 389-408.
Heymann, Daniel, and Pablo Sanguinetti, 1998. "Business Cycles from Misperceived Trends." Economic
     Notes: 205-232.
Hong, H. and Stein J. C. (1999) `Differences of Opinion, Rational Arbitrage and Market Crashes',
       National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 7376.

Iachan, F., Nenov P. and Simsek A. (2015), `The Choice Channel of Financial Innovation', National
       Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 21686.

Jaimovich, N. and Rebelo S. (2008), `News and Business Cycles in Open Economies', Journal of Money,
       Credit and Banking, 40(8), 1699-1711.

Jeanne, O. and Korinek, A. (2019), `Managing Credit Booms and Busts: A Pigouvian Taxation
       Approach', Journal of Monetary Economics, 107, 2-17.

Jiang, H. and Sun Z. (2014), `Dispersion in Beliefs among Active Mutual Funds and the Cross-Section of
        Stock Returns', Journal of Financial Economics, 114(2), 341-365.
Kaufmann, D., and Scheufele, R, 2017. "Business tendency surveys and macroeconomic fluctuations,"
      International Journal of Forecasting 33(4), pp 878-893.

Kiyotaki, N. and Moore J. (1997), `Credit Cycles', Journal of Political Economy, 105(2): 211-248.

       36
Korinek, A. (2018), `Regulating Capital Flows to Emerging Markets: An Externality View', Journal of
       International Economics, 111: 61-80.

Kreps, D. M. (1979), `A Representation Theorem for "Preference for Flexibility"', Econometrica, 47(3),
       565­577.

Kreps, D. M. (1992), `Static Choice in the Presence of Unforeseen Contingencies', Economic Analysis of
       Markets and Games: Essays in Honor of Frank Hahn. MIT Press: Cambridge.

Kurz, Mordecai, 1994. "On the Structure and Diversity of Rational Beliefs." Economic Theory 4, 877-900.

Kurz, Mordecai, and Maurizio Motolese, 2001. "Endogenous Uncertainty and Market Volatility."
       Economic Theory 17, 497-544.

Li, D. and Li G. (2014), `Are Household Investors Noise Traders: Evidence from Belief Dispersion and
         Stock Trading Volume,' Microeconomics: General Equilibrium & Disequilibrium Models of
         Financial Markets eJournal.

Lorenzoni, G. (2008), `Inefficient Credit Booms', The Review of Economic Studies, 75(3), 809-833.

Manski, C. F. and Straub, J. D. (2000), `Worker Perceptions of Job Insecurity in the Mid-1990s: Evidence
      from the Survey of Economic Expectations', Journal of Human Resources, 35(3), 447-479.
Milgrom, P. (1981), `An Axiomatic Characterization of Common Knowledge', Econometrica, 49(1), 219-
      222.
Milgrom, P. and Stokey N. (1982), `Information, Trade, and Common Knowledge', Journal of Economic
      Theory, 1, 17-27.
Neeman, Z. (1996), `Common Beliefs and the Existence of Speculative Trade', Games and Economic
     Behavior, 16(1), 77-96.
Patton, A. J. and Timmermann A. (2010), `Why do Forecasters Disagree? Lessons from the Term
       Structure of Cross-Sectional Dispersion', Journal of Monetary Economics, 57(7), 803-820.
Phelps, E. (1999), `Behind this Structural Boom: the Role of Asset Valuations', American Economic
       Review, 89(8), 63-68
Pigou, A. C. (1926), Industrial Fluctuations. MacMillan: London.

Scheinkman, J. and Xiong W. (2003), `Overconfidence and Speculative Bubbles', Journal of Political
       Economy, 111(6), 1183-1219.

Shiller, R. J. (2014), `Speculative Asset Prices', American Economic Review, 104(6), 1486-1517.
Sinitskaya, E. and Tesfatsion L. (2015), `Macroeconomies as Constructively Rational Games', Journal of
        Economic Dynamics and Control, 61(C), 152-182.



       37
Stiglitz, J. E. (1982), `Information and Capital Markets', in W.F. Sharpe and C. Cootner (eds.), Financial
         Economics: Essays in Honor of Paul Cootner. Prentice Hall: New Jersey.

Stiglitz, J. E. (2010a), Freefall: America, Free Markets, and the Sinking of the World Economy. W.W.
         Norton: New York.

Stiglitz, J. E. (2010b), `The Financial Crisis of 2007-2008 and its Macroeconomic Consequences', in S.
         Griffith-Jones, J. A. Ocampo, and J. E. Stiglitz (eds.), Time for a Visible Hand: Lessons from the
         2008 World Financial Crisis, Initiative for Policy Dialogue Series. Oxford University Press: Oxford.
Stiglitz J. E. and Greenwald, B. C. (2003), Towards a New Paradigm in Monetary Economics, Cambridge
         University Press: Cambridge.
Stiglitz, J. E. and Weiss, A. (1981), `Credit Rationing in Markets with Imperfect Information', American
         Economic Review, 71(3), 393-410.
Stiglitz, J. E. and Weiss, A. (1986), `Credit Rationing and Collateral', in J. Edwards, J. Franks, C. Mayer,
         and S. Schaefer (eds.), Recent Developments in Corporate Finance. Cambridge University Press:
         New York.
Stiglitz, J. E. and Weiss, A. (1992), `Asymmetric Information in Credit Markets and Its Implications for
         Macroeconomics', Oxford Economic Papers, 44(4), 694-724.
Trueman, B. (1994), `Analyst Forecasts and Herding Behavior', The Review of Financial Studies, 7(1), 97-
      124.
Tsiaplias, S. (2020), `Time-Varying Consumer Disagreement and Future Inflation', Journal of Economic
        Dynamics and Control, 116(C).
Wolf, M. (2014), The Shifts and the Shocks. Allen Lane: London.
Zhang, J. and Liu, P. (2012), `Rational Herding in Microloan Markets', Management Science, 58(5), 892-
       912.




       38
