                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   KINDLEBERGER CYCLES & ECONOMIC GROWTH:
                      METHOD IN THE MADNESS OF CROWDS?

                                         Randall Morck

                                      Working Paper 28411
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28411


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                            January 2021, Revised April 2021




This article summarizes a keynote talk prepared for the Midwestern Finance Association's 2014
annual meeting and also presented as the 2012 Heckscher Lecture at the Stockholm School of
Economics, an event hosted by the Ratio Institute. Thanks to David Cho for superb research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Randall Morck. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Kindleberger Cycles & Economic Growth: Method in the Madness of Crowds?
Randall Morck
NBER Working Paper No. 28411
January 2021, Revised April 2021
JEL No. G01,G02,G4,N2,O16,O3,O33,O4,P1

                                        ABSTRACT

Because positive spillovers give investment in innovation a social rate of return several times
higher than its internal rate of return to innovators, innovation is chronically underfunded.
Recurrent manias, panics and crashes in stock markets inundate "hot" new technologies with
capital. To the extent that manias compensate for chronic underinvestment in innovation,
competition at the economy-level may favor institutions and behavioral norms conducive to
innovation-related bubbles despite ultimately low returns to the hindmost investors.


Randall Morck
Faculty of Business
University of Alberta
Edmonton, AB T6G 2R6
CANADA
and NBER
randall.morck@ualberta.ca
1.        No Bubbles in the USSR
In 2008, US Federal Reserve chair Alan Greenspan told the Financial Times "There were no bubbles in the
Soviet Union".1 Challenging pundits' obituaries for free markets, Greenspan noted stock market manias,
panics and crashes are nothing new, and ruminated they may even contribute to the historically
unprecedentedly broad prosperity of free market economies. Several seemingly unconnected stylized
facts from different corners of economics coalesce into strong supporting evidence for the thesis that
stock markets might support prosperity precisely because they promote innovation-related bubbles.
In the 1970s, Soviet citizens slept on straw-filled mattresses, boiled unsafe tap water, and waited years to
buy expensive but barely functional automobiles. Most of the history of all countries ­ and much of the
world still ­ is set in poverty. In stark contrast, in the past few centuries, large middle classes arose in one
country after another step with their adoptions of free market economics (Rosenberg and Birdzel 1986).
Market economies deliver sustained prosperity that central planning has yet to match.2
Technological progress or innovation explains the greater part of economic growth in high-income market
economies (Solow 1955, 1957). This is because innovation has positive externalities.3 That is, a new
technology provides the innovating firm a profitable internal rate of return (IRR) and also creates new
economic opportunities elsewhere in the economy. For example, innovations in the information
technology sector let Walmart computerize, and radically improve, its inventory management. Large
positive externalities leave the average innovation with a social rate of return (SRR) some four to eight-
fold higher than its IRR (Hall et al. 2010). New general purpose technologies (GPTs), such as electric power
and the internet, which trigger economy-wide waves of follow-on innovation, have especially large
positive externalities across most of the economy (Bresnahan and Trajtenberg 1995).4 All this means free
market economies of profit maximizing firms would underinvest in innovation from a social perspective.
Many innovations also have positive network externalities, which further exacerbates the gap between
their early adopters' IRRs and their far higher SRRs (Liebowitz and Margolis 1994). A telephone is a poor
investment if yours is the only one, but a good investment if many others also get them. Each existing
telephone becomes more useful as the telephone network expands. Likewise, prior active research in
narrow areas of the life sciences makes further research in those areas less costly (Henkel and Maurer
2010). Even economic development itself is a gigantic network externality (Rosenstein-Rodan 1943). A
new venture in a low-income economy is an iffy investment if yours is the only one, but makes more sense
if numerous other new businesses that supply your inputs and pay wages to your potential customers are
also setting up operations there. Positive network externalities deter first movers and can prevent private
firms from undertaking early stage innovations. Again, profit maximizing firms in a free market economy
would underinvest in innovation.
The large positive externalities from innovation cause severe market failures, which severely impair free
market economies:5 society as a whole would better prosper if firms undertook far more innovation than


1
    Quoted in Guha, Krishna. 2008. Greenspan urges focus on banks' capitalization, Financial Times May 26, 2008
2
    China's rise from sub-Saharan poverty to Latin American living standards corresponds across provinces and over
    time to its staged rollout of market reforms. The Communist Party's reassertion of its economic power in the
    most recent Five-year Plan is a bold course change.
3
    Public finance theory describes externalities arising wherever the actions of one individual or firm have
    important repercussions on others. Pollution is a negative externality because one firm's effluents adversely
    affect others. Innovation have positive externalities if they benefit others.
4
    Bekar et al. (2018) review the literature on GPTs and conclude that criticisms of the concept are unpersuasive.
5
    A market failure occurs when free markets fail to deliver socially optimal outcomes

                                                          1
they actually do.6 Public finance provides public policy instruments to counter externality market failures
(Pigou 1949). Governments deploy intellectual property laws and R&D subsidies to lift total investment in
innovation to something closer to the social optimum. However, deeper and more expansive state
intervention increases the profitability of influencing those interventions (Krueger 1976, 1990). The
potential losers from innovation, firms, workers and regions dependent on old-technology firms, invest in
lobbying to block innovation, and successful ex-innovators lobby to block further innovation. A loss
aversion bias in human behavior can bolster the odds of success to lobbying cast as status quo preserving.
All this can leave firms investing more in lobbying and less in innovation. Public policy interventions
designed to boost innovation may well actually reduce it (Wu 2010; Jaffe and Lerner 2011).
Yet market economies prospered by developing wave after wave of new technologies, while Soviet
factories in the 1970s used pre-revolutionary technologies and Soviet central planners deemed innovation
destabilizing and even subversive. Market economies, especially during times of rapid technology-driven
development, rely heavily on stock markets to allocate resources (Rosenberg and Birdzel 1986).7 Financial
development and living standards rise hand-in-hand (King and Levine 1993; Demirgüç-Kunt and Levine
2018).
Stock markets, invented in the early 17th century, may be the mother of all GPTs. Stock markets let
entrepreneurs with innovative ideas found and expand firms by raising potentially vast amounts of risk-
tolerant equity via share issues. Stock markets can put individual investors' microeconomic savings under
the command of entrepreneurs who can oversee the development and deployment of successive new
technologies that keep raising living standards.
Yet severe market failures afflict stock markets. Wherever stock markets rise, investment manias, panics
and crashes soon follow (Kindleberger 1978). Investment manias often center on a Big New Thing (BNT).
The BNT is usually a hot new technology (Goldfarb and Kirsch 2019) such as canals in the 1790s and 1830s,
railroads in the 1840s and 1860s, electric power, radio, and internal combustion engines in the 1920s, or
information technology in the 1990s. Less often, the BNT is a new market, such as newly independent
Latin American republics in the 1820s and newly rich East Asian "tiger economies" in the 1990s.
Each mania ends in a panic and crash, after which pundits scold investors' for greed and economists
bemoan investors' irrationality (MacKay 1841; Cole 1720; Chancellor 1999; Reinhart and Rogoff 2009;
Goldfarb and Kirsch 2019). Regulatory and credit cycles often run alongside. A regulatory cycle has
unsophisticated investors first demanding deregulation to let them into the mania and then demanding
tough new regulations after the crash (Dagher 2018). A credit cycle sees credit expansion pouring
borrowed money into expanding the tech bubble, or into crating and expanding temporally adjacent
bubbles in real estate or other investments. Credit cycles and regulatory cycles worsen the damage when
the inevitable crash finally comes by triggering waves of bankruptcies and financial bailouts.
Moreover, important innovations appear to trigger these investment mania, panic and crash cycles. The
IRR of something new and exciting, such as a new technology, is impossible to quantify. Confronted with
unquantifiable problems, people needing nonetheless to make decisions fall back on behavioral biases
(Simon 1986; Kahneman 2011). Economic selection can shape behavioral biases. Those that lead often
enough to favorable outcomes and rarely to catastrophe attract emulators and spread (Nelson and Winter
1982). Imitating actions that appear to have worked out well for others appears to be a widespread

6
    From a social perspective, profit maximizing firms overinvest in negative externality activities, such as those that
    cause pollution (because others bear the externality costs) and underinvest in positive externality activities, such
    as innovation (because others gain much of the benefits).
7
    Countries whose financial systems are now more reliant on banks, such as Germany and Japan, relied on stock
    markets historically (Fohlin 2005; Morck and Nakamura 2005).

                                                            2
behavioral bias that qualifies as optimal in this evolutionary sense (Welch 1992; Bikhchandani et al. 1998).
Having watched early investors in radio stocks grow rich, unsophisticated investors pour money into
soaring radio stocks in the late 1920s and lost big the Crash of 1929. This obviously ended badly for those
investors. However, enough investors pouring enough money into the mania let firms arise and expand
to fill out multiple new industries. The economy got home radios, radio manufacturing plants, radio
stations, radio program writers and actors, radio advertising, radio air traffic control, ship-to-ship radio,
radar, radio dispatched police and emergency services, and other aftereffects that added up to a
considerable social return (Bresnahan and Trajtenberg 1995; Lipsey et al. 1998). Reginald Fessenden, who
invented the first reliable and mass-producible radio set, did well enough. The global economy got far
more from his invention than he did.
Unlike biology (Wilson and Wilson 2008; Wilson 2012), economics has long accepted simultaneous multi-
level competition (Nelson and Winter 1982). Competition can be between individuals, between firms, and
between economies. A behavioral bias that leads individuals to lose money in investment manias
surrounding "big new things" could persist and spread if the mania boosted overall economic growth
sufficiently. Mania-prone investors lose money; but few lose their lives. If economies conducive to
investment manias amassed enough wealth by accumulating more and better innovations, competition
between economies might favor behavioral biases in individuals along these lines. This would occur, for
example, if individuals living in the United States and losing money in stock market manias nonetheless
ended up better off than individuals protected from stock market manias by living in the Soviet Union.
Economic selection between individuals, between firms, and between economies can conflict if
externalities arise, and investment in innovation has huge positive externalities. The magnitude of an
externality is its social rate of return (), its return to the overall economy, minus its internal rates of
return (), its return to the firm doing the investment. Alexander Graham Bell's patents made Bell
Telephone a very decent ; but this was only a miniscule fraction of the social returns telephone
networks created. Telephones added value by letting people more easily acquire information, issue and
receive instructions, and buy and sell goods and services in distant locations in real time (Fischer 1994).
Telephone also destroyed wealth for some businesses ­ for example, telegraph firms. However, the social
benefits greatly exceeded the social costs, so the  of the telephone turned out to be very high indeed.
Abolishing telephones to restore the jobs of telegraphers now gets few votes.
Financial manias inundate "big new things ­ including "hot" new technologies­ with capital. Manias, like
patent and copyright laws or R&D subsidies, grants and tax credits, increase investment in innovation.
Manias are costly and likely misallocate much capital, but whether they are more or less socially efficient
than intellectual property laws, tax codes, and subsidy policies is at least debatable. Legions of individual
investors lost money in electric home appliance stocks in 1929 and internet stocks in 2000, but economies
came away with electric home appliances and the internet, respectively. Patent law and tax credits likely
could not have managed this, but a stock market mania pulled it off.
Annual inundations of the Nile nurtured Egyptian civilization for millennia, though the floods also caused
much damage each year. Egyptians stayed put and learned to cope with the inundations. Financial manias
inundate high  investment opportunities with capital, but sweep away the small investors' savings;
and high-income economies also stay put. Learning to cope better with the inundations appears to entail
keeping banks out of investment manias and cushioning the losses of those whose wealth is swept away.

2.      Social Returns to Innovation Vastly Exceed Private Returns to Innovators
Schumpeter (1911) explains how innovation sustains economic growth. Solow (1955, 1957) shows that
technological progress underlies most economic growth in developed economies. Romer (1986) models


                                                     3
innovative firms' investments in new technologies boost not only their own productivity, but also the
productivity of other firms that copy, tweak, and elaborate the initial innovative firms' new technologies.
The wealth created by these secondary actions can raise the  of an innovative firms' investment far
above its s to that firm. This section is about how investments in innovation can have an  too low
to be viable to any firm, but a very high  nonetheless.
2.1       Chronic and Pervasive Underinvestment in Innovation
Many corporate investments affect the wealth welfare of others (Pigou 1920). These spillovers do not
contribute to the  that firm earns on its investment, but do contribute to an , which tallies up all
the benefits and costs to the economy as a whole, differs from its IRR, which only considers the benefits
and costs to the firm. Environmental damage can be a major negative spillover from many corporate
investment decisions, and can depress a project's  far below its . A government can discourage
projects with negative spillovers with taxes and regulations to lower their s towards their s and
stop such projects before they start.
The positive spillovers from investments in new technologies are known to have s markedly higher
than their s. Grilliches' (1992, p. 43) summarizes the empirical literature as showing:
          "a significant number of reasonably well done studies all pointing in the same direction: R&D
          spillovers are present, their magnitude may be quite large, and social rates of return remain
          significantly above private rates."
Grilliches (1958) estimates s of innovations in agriculture at 25 to 30 percentage points above his 10%
 benchmark. Subsequent work argues about the magnitudes of the difference, but repeatedly
replicates the basic finding: the  of investment in new technology far exceed its  (Hall et al. 2010).8
For example, Jones and Williams (1998) conservatively put the social return of R&D at 30 percent and its
IRR at 7 to 14%. Bloom et al. (2013) estimate the SRR of R&D to be 59%, identified via U.S. states' changes
in R&D tax policy. In general, the  of corporate R&D falls in the 10 to 20% range; the  of corporate
R&D averages well over 40%.
Figure 1 shows median s on R&D spending varying over time. The  of R&D by listed firms, the
dashed line, rises during the early 1990, as information technology innovations begin attracting attention,
falls from the mid-1990s on, as the dot.com bubble expands and capital flows into innovations, and then
levels off after the dot-come stock price crash in 2000. This is consistent with a capital flood from dot.com
equity financing capitalizing technological innovations with steadily lower s, many of which turned
out ex post to have realized s far below any reasonable hurdle rates for firms and shareholders buying
into the bubble (Moller et al. 2004).
The SRRs for investments in innovation are difficult to estimate, but Figure 1 is nonetheless a useful
illustrative exercise. Table 1 provides a sense of the uncertainties in SRR estimation by consolidating
estimates of the gap between the s firms in various industries earn on their R&D and the s those
same investment generate across high-income (O.E.C.D) economies for different industries.




8
    See Nadiri (1993); Jones and William (1996); Verspagen (1997ab); Frantzen (2002); Grilliches (2000); Keller
    (2002a, 2004); Brynjolfsson and Hitt (2003); Fung (2004); Park (2004); Fraumeni and Okubo (2005); Hall, Jaffe
    and Trajtenberg (2005); Bloom, Sudun, and Van Reenan (2006); Sveikauskas (2007); and Acharya (2008). Scherer
    (1999) goes further, arguing that much R&D has large negative risk-adjusted rates of return to firms undertaking
    it, even if its social rate of return is large. For a comprehensive literature review, see Hall et al. (2009)

                                                          4
Figure 1. Social Rate of Return to Research and Development over Time
Social rate of return on aggregate US R&D (dotted line) and on research and development (R&D) by US listed
(Compustat) firms (dashed line) from 1985 to 2015




Source: Bloom et al. (2020)


Table 1. Ranges in Estimated Excess Social Returns from Research and Development
Excess social net rate of return is the social rate of return, , to research and development (R&D) minus its
internal rate of return, , to the firm undertaking the investment. Figures are minima and maxima among four
different estimation techniques (see Acharya 2008) estimated across all OECD countries from 1973 to 2002.


                                  Sector                                     exceeds  by
                                Aerospace                                           - 11 ­ 18%
                 Chemicals (excluding pharmaceuticals)                               64 ­ 90%
                    Electrical machinery & apparatus                                 34 ­ 48%
                          Machinery & equipment                                     - 58 ­ 16%
                Medical, precision & optical instruments                             12 ­ 24%
                 Motor vehicles, trailers & semi-trailers                            23 ­ 24%
               Office, accounting & computing machinery                              49 ­ 62%
                              Pharmaceuticals                                        90 ­ 101%
             Radio, television & communication equipment                             34 ­ 60%
                  Railroad & transportation equipment                                27 ­ 33%

Source: Acharya (2008).




                                                            5
While the minima for aerospace and for machinery and equipment are negative, indicating private returns
in excess of social returns, the worst-case social returns substantially exceed private returns in all other
sectors. The maximal estimates of the excess net social returns to R&D are large and positive in all sectors.
The econometric takeaway from Table 1 is that estimated gaps between s and s vary substantially
within and across industries and over time, but that s from R&D broadly and consistently exceed s
by substantial margins.
The economically significant takeaway from Figure 1 and Table 1 is strong evidence of a market failure of
major importance. Economics teaches that private-sector firms undertake investments that cover their
costs. A firm that needs its projects to earn an  above 10% undertakes all R&D with an expected risk-
adjusted return above that hurdle rate. However, the economy prospers if all R&D projects with s
above such a hurdle rate are pursued. Figure 1 puts the  of R&D in the 40 to 85% range, some 20 to
75% higher than their typical 10 to 20% s. Many ­ perhaps most ­ R&D projects' s look good from
the economy's point of view, but do not pass any individual firm's  threshold test.
Consequently, free-market economies surely vastly underinvest in R&D and in innovation generally. Jones
and Williams (1998) estimate socially optimal R&D spending as a share of GDP at two to four times actual
R&D spending. This market failure problem motivates two broad classes of government-intervention.
Each makes fundamental sense (Brown et al. 2017), but each also comes with social costs.
2.2     The promise and problem of Intellectual property rights
One such form of state intervention is the strengthened intellectual property rights ­ stronger, longer or
broader patents, copyrights, trademarks, industrial design rights and trade secrets ­ enacted in most
developed economies in recent decades. Empirical studies suggest that important new technologies
typically begin providing positive externalities to innovative firms' rivals within two years (Mansfield 1985;
Caballero and Jaffe 1993), and stronger intellectual property rights let innovators charge higher rents to
subsequent users of their innovations. These boost innovator's IRRs, but also lower their innovations' SSRs
by constraining their diffusion. Strengthened intellectual property rights could also reduce innovators'
incentives to devise yet more innovations.
Unfortunately, intellectual property rights laws can be gamed by interested parties and these abuses
appear to have grown more common in recent decades (Wu 2010; Jaffe and Lerner 2011). Patent
thicketers are firms that lay minefields of vast numbers of largely useless patents on all manner of
processes related to an area of research. Where every move risks intellectual property infringement
lawsuits, potential innovators rationally stay away. If the original thicketers are not successfully
innovative, important areas can remain dormant for decades. Patent trolls are firms that buy huge
numbers of seemingly useless patents in the hope that someone someday will inadvertently infringe one
of them. A US court forced Research in Motion, the maker of the Blackberry, to pay S$612.5 M to NTP
Incorporated, a US-based patent-holding company with a patent on the wireless transmission of e-mail
(Sweeny 2009). Intellectual property squatters can earn rents from strong intellectual property rights,
even as their economies stagnate at the resulting slow pace innovation.
These considerations suggest that overly strong intellectual property laws can be socially costly (Heller
and Eisenberg 1998). Because the optimal strength of intellectual property law is unknown, lobbyists play
a decisive role. Saperstein (1997) details the historical development of U.S. copyright laws and summarizes
the role of lobbyists thus:
        "What drove these changes in [US] federal copyright law? The legislative history demonstrates
        that industry specific interest groups were instrumental in driving the shift from copyright law
        based on misdemeanor penalties to one based on felony sanctions."


                                                      6
Krueger (1974, 1990) argues that lobbying for favorable regulations and laws, called political rent-seeking,
can have a higher return than investing in actual innovation. Intellectual property law reforms throughout
the world are subject to remarkably intensive lobbying (Maurer 2017; Drahos 2003; Wu 2010). Boldrin
and Levine (2002) argue that the costs of intellectual property rights exceed the cost of the market failure
they address. An increasingly accepted academic literature now views intellectual property rights as
potentially social welfare decreasing and rife with rent-seeking devices that enrich insiders and deter
innovation.9
2.3      The promise and problem of government financed innovation
An alternative state intervention has governments subsidizing perceived inputs to technological progress
to lift firms' IRRs upwards towards the new technologies anticipated SRRs. Most governments' tax codes
allow tax credits for research and development (R&D) spending and accelerated depreciation for other
investments, such as information technology, perceived to be innovation-related (Fazio et al. 2019). Many
go further, generously subsidizing businesses that promise to invest in innovation (Lach 2002). University
and research laboratory administrators justify public funding by promising spillovers from ideas generated
on their campuses.
These policies make sense because innovations' SRRs exceed their IRRs. In some ways, government
research grants might be preferable to strengthened intellectual property rights because they do not
discourage subsequent diffusion and avoid problems associated with patent thickets and patent trolls.
However, other downside make subsidies even more problematic a solution.
First, government officials must "pick winners" in allocating necessarily limited subsidies to numerous
applicants. Government officials are notoriously poor at picking winners. Lacking the expertise to evaluate
competing subsidy proposals, they understandably rely on subsidy applicants and third parties for critical
information. Successful applicants must submit winning applications to the officials overseeing the
program, whose decisions can be subject to political pressure or special interests lobbying. This can lead
to the perverse outcome of grants flowing to the best-connected applicants, whose always-perfect
applications yield ever-larger subsidies yet produce few or no commercially viable new technologies.10
Of course, if some positive spillovers do arise from such subsidies and are sufficiently large, these
downsides can be bearable, but Gompers and Lerner (1999), after evaluating various countries' innovation
subsidy programs conclude that few meet this test.11 Competition for subsidies readily degenerates into
competitive rent-seeking.
Second, bureaucrats understandably value meticulousness and punctuality: screening mechanisms whose
effect is uncertain, or even perverse in this context. Government subsidies often thus flow to other large
bureaucratic organizations with similar values - large universities, research laboratories. (Jaffe 1989;
Mansfield 1985). Whether or not universities and research institutes should be able to patent
government-financed innovations their researchers invent becomes a policy problem too. Letting such
institutions profit by holding patents incentivizes their administrators to support useful research, but
restricts access to taxpayer-financed innovation innovations (Mowery et al. 2002; Link and Siegal 2007;
Friedman and Silberman 2003; Lach and Schankermann 2004). University patent offices often sell patents

9
   See Lerner (1995); Lanjouw and Lerner (1996); Heller (1998, 2008); Buchanan and Yoon (2000); Maurer and
   Scotchmer (2002); Menell (2011); Wu (2010) and Maurer (2012).
10
   On innovation subsidies potential downsides in different countries, see Czarnitzki and Fier (2001); Hart 2003;
   Cantner, Uwe and Sarah Koesters (2011). See also Santarelli and Vivarelli (2007) and Fritsch (2008), Czarnitzki et
   al. (2011), Doern et al. (2016), and Fang et al. (2018).
11
   They cite that US Small Business Innovation Research program as one major exception.

                                                          7
to large corporations, rather than letting their researchers develop them. This provides a readier source
of income to universities, but may also facilitate patent thicketing and patent trolling (Watkins 2014; hall
et al. 2015).
The economics literature offers other innovative ways to boost the IRR of investment in new technology
closer to its SRR. Governments might promise prizes for the successful development of important new
technologies (Wright 1983) or purchase socially valuable intellectual property rights from innovators at
taxpayers' expense (Kremer 1998), and then make the innovation freely available. Studies of the design
problems in such tournaments reveal complexities whose administration would tax highly competent and
disinterested government officials (Fullerton and McAfee 1999; Terwiesch and Xu 2008; Ales et al. 2017).
Moreover, cross-country spillovers remain if national governments administer such solutions. Swedish
firms could use innovations made publicly available by U.S. taxpayers, for example.
Overall, the IRR and SRR of government-financed R&D are both consistently lower than for private-sector
R&D (Hall et al. 2010). The purpose of government is to do socially valuable things the private sector
cannot, so lower IRRs for publicly funded R&D are unsurprising. The lower SRRs of publicly funded R&D
raise concerns about these forms of boosting R&D. However, measuring the social contributions of basic
research, such as that at university science departments, or medical research, such as that done at
government labs, is econometrically difficult. However, yet other studies highlight waste and resource
misallocation in research at universities (Sokal and Bricmont 1999; Ionnides 2005; Strevens 2013; Ionnides
et al. 2014), including in economics (Kwak 2017).
In summary, evidence overwhelmingly points to chronic underinvestment in innovation. Intellectual
property rights and state-financed research are both theoretically valid state interventions that could
redress this underinvestment. Both probably do, to an extent. Many countries rolled out innovation
policies amid the 1990s dot.com boom, for example, and these may have helped increase investment in
innovation with high SRRs but low IRRs to private innovators. However, both intellectual property law and
government financing of innovation also have costs of their own that can be large.
2.4     Innovation Drives Prosperity
Solow (1955, 1957) shows increased inputs (resources, capital and labor) explain only a small fraction of
the economic growth in high-income countries. The unexplained greater part of economic growth, called
the Solow Residual, arises from successions of new technologies displacing older ones. Each new
technology permits the production of higher-valued output from familiar inputs or familiar outputs from
lower-cost inputs or some mix of the two. Economic prosperity depends on ongoing technological
progress, and can continue as long as valuable new ideas keep arising. Subsequent work affirming,
formalizing and expanding Solow's insight built the new subdiscipline of endogenous growth theory
(Romer 1986, 1990; Akcigit and Nicholas 2019).
This is good news, in that natural resource availability, aging populations, and fluctuating savings and
capital investment rates, may all well be of secondary importance to sustained prosperity. However, the
dependence of economic growth in high-income economies on innovation makes the cost of socially
insufficient spending on innovation a first-order issue.
Private-sector innovation seems central to sustained prosperity in high-income economies. The Solow
residual and the related concepts of total factor productivity (TFP) and multifactor productivity (MFP)
growth, measuring how much more valuable output the economy's workforce and capital assets produce,
as closely tied to the quantity and quality of R&D spending.




                                                     8
Figure 2. Solow residual versus R&D spending
Economies with higher research and development (R&D) spending have faster economic growth primarily because
they show evidence of greater cumulative productivity growth, as measured by their Solow Residuals. Productivity
growth reflects the faster and more complete adoption of new technologies, which let firms produce ever more
valuable outputs from proportionately ever less costly inputs.

                                120%
                                                                                                      KOR
                                110%


                                100%


                                90%                      IRL


                                80%
 Solow Residual, 1985 to 2017




                                70%


                                60%
                                                                                                FIN
                                50%


                                40%
                                                                                             DEU
                                                                          GBR                          JPN
                                                                                AUT            USA
                                30%
                                                                     NOR
                                                 PRT                                   FRA
                                                                     AUS                                      SWE
                                                                              NLD     DNK
                                20%
                                                        NZL            CAN BEL
                                                                                               CHE
                                10%
                                                   ESP ITA

                                 0%
                                   0.0%   0.5%         1.0%        1.5%             2.0%     2.5%           3.0%    3.5%
                                                               Mean R&D as % of GD, 1981 to 2017

Source: Based on OECD data (available at OECD.org). Solow residual is cumulative multifactor productivity growth.




                                                                          9
The O.E.C.D. (2003) reported that economy-level productivity rises significantly with private-sector R&D
spending, but not public sector R&D spending. Research in academia and government labs often explains,
rather than inspires, innovation in the private sector (Edgerton 2004; Ridley 2020). Historically, steam
engines came first and scientists built theories to explain how they work. "Thermodynamics owes more
to the steam engine than the steam engine owes to science."12
Perhaps because intellectual property rights and government-financed research are growing more
dysfunctional, the pace of new idea generation may be falling (Gordon 2016). Investment in innovation is
socially suboptimal because of a market failure: the typical investment in innovation earns the innovating
firm an internal rate of return far short of the social rates of return to the economy overall. If government
measures to counter this market failure grow less effective, or even counter-effective, overall growth can
slow. Mokyr (2018) argues that the pace of innovation rises and falls in the short-run, but remains the
primary engine of growth in the long-run; and that this long-run relationship is likely to persist. Trajtenberg
(2018) argues that artificial intelligence shows early signs of becoming a GPT on the same scale as
electrification and the internet.

3.         Ideas about Investment in Ideas
All of this reasoning depends on investor and firms behaving in ways economists deem rational. Living up
to economists' standards of rationality can be challenging.
3.1        Rational investment decisions
To calculate the  of an investment project, economics charges corporate managers with forecasting
that projects future cash flow in every future period. This requires forecasting the quantifies and prices of
all the projects outputs and inputs, the wages and employment levels of all the different employees the
project will require, and the taxes the project will encumber the firm with ­ and for every year of the
project's expected lifetime. These forecasts are uncertain, so economists also expect corporate managers
to repeat this exercise for all possible ways the future might unfold and to assign a probability to each
unfolding. Multiplying the number of variables being forecast for each future time period by the number
of future time period by the number of ways the future might unfold by the probabilities of these
alternative futures unfolding charges corporate managers with estimating of thousands of numbers.
Moreover, economics charges corporate managers with doing this for every project under consideration.
Yet this charge seems humble beside the duty economists assign to investors ­ doing all of these things
without any insider information about any firm, to price the stocks of every firm and update all of those
prices in continuous time.
John Maynard Keynes (1936) explains that
           "the social object of skilled investment should be to defeat the dark forces of time and ignorance
           which envelop our future."
This often lies far beyond human capabilities, especially for investment in innovations. Over and above
the uncertainties about owning an idea and the shortcomings of intellectual property law, investments in
innovation are perhaps the longest of long-term investments and have the most uncertain payoffs. The
more profound the innovation, the more distant the time horizon and the deeper our current ignorance.
3.2        An Animal Spirited Urge to Action
That is Keynes' point. Real world investment decisions are "leaps of faith", no matter how intricate the
ex-ante analyses. Keynes' General Theory (1936, esp. c. 12) draws heavily on finance, and on the

12
     Attributed to George Porter, Nobel Prize in Chemistry, 1967 (Manley 1997).

                                                          10
impracticality of actually getting enough information to solve real-world investment problems, to
conclude that investment decisions are
           "not as the outcome of a weighted average of quantitative benefits multiplied by quantitative
           probabilities. Enterprise only pretends to itself to be mainly actuated by the statements in its own
           prospectus, however candid and sincere. Only a little more than an expedition to the South Pole,
           is it based on an exact calculation of benefits to come."
Instead, in a remarkably prescient anticipation of modern Behavioral Finance, Keynes posits (p. 64) that
animal (Lat. "animating") spirits determine the level of capital investment by business corporations:
           Most, probably, of our decisions to do something positive, the full consequences of which will be
           drawn out over many days to come, can only be taken as a result of animal spirits -- of a
           spontaneous urge to action rather than inaction ... Thus if the animal spirits are dimmed and the
           spontaneous optimism falters, leaving us to depend on nothing but a mathematical expectation,
           enterprise will fade and die; -- though fears of loss may have a basis no more reasonable than
           hopes of profit had before."
Appreciating the virtually insurmountable information requirements of our textbook decision-making
rules, he concludes that
           "human decisions affecting the future, whether personal or political or economic, cannot depend
           on strict mathematical expectation, since the basis for making such calculations does not exist."
This failed to catch on in economics departments and business schools, where professors compete to
write down ever more intricate calculations of mathematical expectations.
Keynes is undeniably right in asserting that capital budgeting problems, if solvable in theory, are not
solvable in practice because the costs of the necessary information and calculations are prohibitive, if not
infinite. However, he may overstate the case for irrationality in capital investment.
3.3        Procedurally transcomputational problems
Problems whose solution exist, but that cannot in practice be solved are called transcomputational.13
Grossman and Stiglitz (1980) distinguish substantive rationality, the optimization of standard economics
and finance theory, from procedural rationality, optimization of the decision-making process itself. Rising
marginal costs and falling marginal benefits of increasingly substantively rational decision-making means
that procedural rationality implies a degree of substantive irrationality.
Extending this distinction, a problem can be called procedurally transcomputational if its solution is an
equation, but the numbers to plug into that equation are largely unknowable. Most problems in
economics and finance are procedurally transcomputational: they could be solved by neat equations, but
actually cannot be. Gleaning anything more than a ghost of an idea about what numbers to plug into those
neat equations is prohibitively costly at best, and undoable in many economically important contexts,
such as decision-making about big new technologies.

13
     Bremermann (1962) formally defines a problem as trans-computational if its solution requires processing over
     1093 bits, arguing that the laws of physics and mass of the planet preclude a computer exceeding this capacity.
     Economic theory can assign probabilities to any abstract state space, but does not really answer these issues.
     Theories whose solution are procedurally transcomputational do not, in reality, have solutions. The stark
     limitations of economic theories have long concerned economists. Knight (1921), confusingly, distinguishes risk,
     in which probability distributions are known, from uncertainty, in which they are not. King and Kay (2020)
     expand the latter as radical uncertainty, posit that evolution honed behavioral responses to cope with radical
     uncertainty, and reject "bias" as a valid term for these responses.

                                                           11
Solving for the price of a stock can be procedurally transcomputational. We can write down an equation
for a stock's price, but have little idea what numbers to plug to make use of that equation. The stock prices
of new companies, especially, pop out of neat equations whose variables are all but unknowable.
The price of a stock is the present value of all future dividends and other payouts to investors, such as
takeover premiums, spinoffs, and the like. With (, ) the sum of all such payoffs in future time  if state-
of-the-world s occurs at that time, the price of the stock at time  is
                                          
                                  =            (, ) -(,) (, )
                                         =+

where (, ) is the probability that the world ends up in state  at time time  and (, ) is the discount
rate at which market participants discount future disbursements at time  should state  occur then.
Obviously, almost nothing can be known about almost all of these numbers for a new company bringing
forth a new technology.
Solving for a firm's optimal capital investment policy is likewise procedurally transcomputational. Finance
courses teach that firms should invest in a new project if and only if its expected net present value
                                                                     
() =                  (, ) -(,) (             (, )  (, ) -                (, ) (, ) - (, )) 
               =+                         =1                         =1

is positive. The additional numbers needed for this are the prices  (, ) and quantities  (, ) of each
of the  outputs the project would generate, the prices  (, ) and quantities  (, ) of each of the
 inputs (each raw material, intermediate good, and category of employee, for example) the project
would require, and the taxes (, ) the project would incur at every future time  should state-of-the-
world  occur at that time. As above, (, ) is the probability that the world ends up in state  at time
time  and (, ) is the discount rate at which market participants discount future disbursements at time
 should state  occur then. Multiplying the number of variables by the number of time periods by the
number of possible future states of nature generates an infeasibly large number of values needed to
"solve" this equation. Again, almost nothing can be known about almost all these numbers, especially if
the project involves a new technology.
Experience can fill in some of these unknowns for familiar and repeated investments and the equations
above can sometimes provide helpful guidance, if not precise solutions. But innovations are, by definition,
new. The uncertainty surrounding major new technologies makes stocks and investment projects all but
impossible to value using the equations above.
Confronted with procedurally transcomputational problems, people who must nonetheless make
decisions, resort to rules of thumb. Simon (1957) calls this bounded rationality. Decision-makers adopt
rules-of-thumb that provide sufficiently right decisions sufficiently often that the marginal value of a more
accurate solution falls short of the marginal cost of occasional wrong decisions. Rules of thumb that lead
to better decisions are repeated and emulated. They spread and displace less successful rules of thumb
in a process of economic selection that promotes the survival of the fittest rules of thumb (Nelson and
Winter 1982).
Kahneman (2003) argues that behavioral biases in finance reflect selection for such rules of thumb. One
very simple rule of thumb is to observe what other people are doing, and if they look knowledgeable, do
the same thing ­ a rule of thumb that leads to what Welch (1992) calls an information cascade. Behavioral
economics shows information cascades to occur spontaneously in the laboratory (Anderson and Holt




                                                     12
1996, 1997) and in the real world (Alevy et al. 2007).14 This may reflect an innate propensity to reward
conformity (Hung and Plot 2001). Information cascades occur in complex adaptive systems, such as
financial markets (Hirshleifer and Teoh 2009; Mahdi and Perc 2017).
Information cascades especially arise as people grapple with procedurally transcomputational problems
regarding new technologies because emulating the decisions of other often works out well. For example,
if a new technology has positive network externalities ­ its  rises as others also adopt it (Katz and
Shapiro 1985). Technologies with network externalities include telegraphs, telephones, radios, color
televisions, cell phones, the internet, and computer operating systems, whose value to each user rises as
the number of other users rises.
Financing network externalities can require a Leap of Faith ­ they will be successful only if they succeed.
A tech-related investment bubble can commit an economy to a Leap of Faith by irreversibly committing
capital to a new network that could never have attracted investment from individually rational savers or
business from individually rational consumers.
3.4        Keynesian investment
The social object of investment may be to defeat the dark forces of time and ignorance, but Keynes' (1936)
likens the private objective of a successful investor to judging a beauty contest, in which
           "It is not a case of choosing those [faces, stocks or investment projects] that, to the best of one's
           judgment, are really the prettiest, nor even those that average opinion genuinely thinks the
           prettiest. We have reached the third degree where we devote our intelligences to anticipating
           what average opinion expects the average opinion to be. And there are some, I believe, who
           practice the fourth, fifth and higher degrees."
The trick is to know ahead of time which stocks other investors will think other investors will find most
valuable, to buy them quickly and quietly, and to sell them before other investors think other investors
find something else more attractive.
Kerr et al. (2014) reason that the returns to investment in innovation are especially difficult to analyze in
terms of quantifiable probabilities and payoffs. The median innovation fails, and so has a minus 100%
return, mitigated only by whatever used equipment is salvageable. A mere 10% of innovations provide
75% of the returns to innovation. Venture capital (VC) funds finance early-stage innovation and sell the
few successful ones into public stock. VC funds' initial assessments of the innovations they finance are
uncorrelated with ultimate success, so they appear to do an initial screening and then rely on
diversification to achieve overall returns. Kerr et al. posit that stock market bubbles, into which VC funds
sell successful investments, boost the funds' returns to financing innovation and promote faster
technological progress. Intermittent tech bubbles may thus be important to the long-term viability of VC
funds' business models.
At the economy-level, a Keynesian beauty contest can thus look much less loopy than the quote above
implies. Investors who buy overvalued shares in high tech firms lose money, but those firms' founders and
early stage financiers, including VC funds cashing out may make acceptably high returns. Most
importantly, the Keynesian beauty contest can help the economy as a whole capture the innovation's
often very high s (Angeletos et al. 2010).

4.         Stock Market Bubbles and Economic Growth
In the years around 1600, a revolutionary development was underway in the Low Countries (now Belgium

14
     See also Goeree et al. (2007) on how information cascades end.

                                                         13
and the Netherlands). The middle class, previously an unimportant stratum beneath the ruling aristocracy
and above the vast subsistence agriculture underclass, became larger and more important. Bourgeoisie
expansion and the beginnings of industrialization spread from the Low Countries to England, then to other
parts of Europe, to European colonies, and to parts of East Asia (Rosenberg and Birdzell 1986).
Why this began where and when it did, rather than in Song China, the Islamic Caliphate, the Roman
Empire, or Aztec Mexico is called Needham's Question, in honour of the British biochemist and sinologist
Joseph Needham (2004), who wrote:
           "A continuing general and scientific progress manifested itself in traditional Chinese society but
           this was violently overtaken by the exponential growth of modern science after the Renaissance
           in Europe"
Needham's question remains incompletely answered. The development of corporation and securities law
(Rosenberg and Birdzel 1986), openness to innovation (Landes 1998), and institutional developments
favoring careers in business over government (Baumol 1990) likely all contributed. Natural resources or
their absence are also posited as critical factors (Diamond 1997; Sachs and Warner 2001; Engerman and
Solokoff 2012; Morck and Nakamura 2018). Western prosperity is also linked to imperialism and slavery
(Lenin 1916; Williams 1944; Viner 1948; Engerman 1972; Davis et al. 1986; Eltis and Engerman 2000; Dilley
2011; Baptist 2014). But abundant (or absent) natural resources are not unique to these regions or times,
nor are imperialism and slavery. The first stock markets and stock market bubbles, however, are.
Moreover, these early bubble are much more than episodes of investor madness (Garber 1980, 1990).
4.1        Amsterdam invents the stock market, and the bubble
By the early 1600s, two revolutionary things were happening in the United Provinces of the Netherlands.
Developments in mathematics were revolutionizing navigation (Davids 2015, Levi-Eichel 2015). Key
advances included Gerardus Mercator's 1569 cylindrical projection mapping, Bartholomaeus Pitiscus's
1595 Trigonometria, and Valentinus Otho's 1614 publication of accurate trigonometric tables, Nova et
Aucta Orbis Terrae Descriptio ad Usum Navigantium Emendate Accommodata, which built on work by his
teacher, Georg Joachim Rheticus de Porris, a student of Nicholas Copernicus. John Napier's 1614 invention
of logarithms and Pierre Vernier 1631 invention of the slide-rule made trigonometric calculations
practical. Navigators, especially those trained in these new techniques in the Netherlands, were the era's
high tech workers. Second, the modern world's first stock market formed in 1602 in Amsterdam. The two
are connected.
The stock exchange formed to formalize trading in the shares of the Dutch East Indies Company
(Vereenigde Oost-Indische Compagnie, or VOC, est. 1602), which monopolized trade between East Asia
and the Netherlands, an entrepôt to other parts of Europe. The stock market arose to capitalize the hot
new technology companies of the day, trading companies that used revolutionary new navigation
technologies to transport spices and other high value added goods (including slaves) between
continents.15
Speculation buoyed Amsterdam stock prices, letting trading companies tap abundant capital. However,
the first bubble formed around tulips, a highly sought-after luxury good, more than stocks. In the 1630s,
tulip bulb prices soared to Copernican heights as speculators created derivative contracts to sell notional
tulips in quantities far outstripping their physical numbers until the whole edifice collapsed in 1637. Tulip
speculators were not merely ruined, but scolded by moralists of all subsequent ages. The stock market
and economy were undamaged (Goldgar 2008).

15
     For a more detailed rendition of these developments in the Netherlands and their transplantation to the United
     Kingdom, see Frentrop (2003).

                                                          14
Shares resumed their rise and the Netherlands became the financial center of Europe. Ultimately, a 1688
stock market crash, in which the Dutch West Indies Company played a key role, heralded the end of Dutch
financial pre-eminence. Vega (1688, pf. 81) channels Keynes' beauty contests theory in the gathering
bubble "it is not important that the basic value of the shares be practically nothing as long as there are
other people willing to close their eyes and support those contradictions."
4.2        The first international high-tech boom and stock market crash
In 1688, London merchants invited William of Orange, Stadtholder of the United Provinces of the
Netherlands, and his wife Mary Stewart, to invade Britain and seize the throne from the Catholic King
James II. This Glorious Revolution also brought "Dutch finance" to London (Frentrop 2002; Barone 2007)
and enriched a politically disruptive class of Whigs who had "raised themselves from poverty to great
wealth, despise the advantages of birth" (Davenant 1701).
Late 17th century British shareholders capitalized long-distance trading companies, salvage companies,
and companies organized around patented inventions: the Convex Lights Company to make gas lamps,
the Sucking Worm Engine Company to make fire pumps, and so on. Edmund Halley's development of
actuarial tables revolutionized insurance, and the concept or rewards offsetting risks gained salience. As
stocks rose on increasingly speculative trading, a wave of IPOs floated trading, mining, manufacturing,
mortgage, real estate and pseudo-high-tech firms, including one to sell a "wheel of perpetual motion"
(Mackay 1841).16
Speculative trading associated with the genuinely transformational new navigation and insurance
technologies inflated stock market bubbles and IPO booms in London, Paris and Amsterdam (Frehen et al.
2013). Some IPOs were notorious frauds - John Blunt's South Seas Company in London (Balen 2002) and
John Law's Mississippi Company in Paris (Murphy 1997). Many listed in MacKay (1841), such as elemental
transmutation and perpetual motion machines, look absurd. But others developed the new technologies.
London Assurance and Royal Exchange applied new actuarial mathematics. Puckle's Machine Gun
Company and Sir Richard's Fish Pool Company both featured ultimately viable new technologies. Despite
the frauds and excesses, the stock market bubble, especially that in London, funded genuine technological
progress (Carswell 1993, p. 243).
All three stock markets crashed in 1720 ­ Paris in May, London and Amsterdam in September. The British
parliament responded to furious shareholders with the Bubble Act of 1720, which banned new joint stock
companies. First proposed by the South Seas Company to limit entry by competing bubble companies, the
Bubble Act remained on the books until 1825. By then, it had become a dead letter, as parliament had
grown accustomed to chartering new joint stock companies by granting exemptions (Harris 1994).
4.3        A Pattern
Subsequent bubbles financed successive waves of new technology (Kindleberger 1978; Kindleberger and
Alibur 2017). In the early 1790s, the British parliament took to granting Bubble Act exemptions to canal
building companies. Canal stocks collapsed in 1795, but rose again. A series of booms and busts funded
locks and canals that, by the 1810s, connected inland cities, previously only accessible by often impassible
dirt trails, to trade centers on coasts, navigable rivers or surviving Imperial Roman roads.
A larger canal building bubble burst in 1836 in Britain and 1837 elsewhere, but its investors left Canada
and the United States networks of canals and towpaths. An 1840s railway stock market bubble burst in
1847 in Britain and 1848 elsewhere (Campbell 2012, 2013), but left railways in Britain, Europe, Canada
and the United States. Rail was a major improvement over canals where land was less level. Cotton prices

16
     Some of the more bizarre scam stock offerings Mackay (1841) lists may be fabrications by later pundits.

                                                          15
tracked these episodes in the United States. A European bubble bust in 1857, but left new mills and more
railways. Another stock market bubble ended in the global financial crisis and stock market crash of 1873,
but left more and better railways, many with telegraph lines alongside.
Another general stock market run-up from the mid-1890s into the early 20th century financed the rollouts
of new technologies in cement production, electric light, electric equipment, electric trolleys, petroleum
refining, steel making, telephones, and other sectors (O'Sullivan 2007). US markets crashed in 1903,
recovered, and crashed again in 1907. Markets elsewhere followed similar but not identical trajectories.
For example, the Canadian bull market persisted until 1911.
The roaring twenties stock market was another high-tech boom (Nicolas 2007). High-tech companies of
the era included Radio Corporation of America (RCA), International Business Machines (adding machines),
General Motors (automobiles), Pan Am (airfreight), RKO (motion pictures) and many others. Public utilities
grids vastly expanded access to electric power and telephone networks and all their network externalities.
Telephones, electric lights, and electrical home appliances made the new technologies salient to large
number of people. Shares, especially in high tech sectors, rose through the late 1920s despite many firms
having no earnings. The market crashed in 1929, but left the physical plant of automakers, aviation,
business machines, electric and telephone grids, motion pictures, and other technologies in place. New
owners bought bankrupt firms' assets, but many firms capitalized in the 1920s bubble not only survived
the crash, but continued making major advances into the 1930s, despite the Great Depression (Field
2011).
The 1960s and 1990s also qualify as high-tech booms, and both featured stock market bubbles. Major
high-tech sectors in the "go-go" stock market of the 1960s included aerospace, mainframe computers,
passenger jets, plastics, solid-state electronics, plastics, and synthetic fabrics. The 1990s dot.com bubble
featured cell phones, the internet, microcomputers, and major advances in software that cut costs, even
in many old line industries (Kaplan 2002). The 1960s bull market ended with a large drop in stock prices,
partly obscured by the high inflation of the 1970s. The 1990s dot.com boom ended with the crash of 2000.
4.4     Kindleberger Cycles
Mill (1848), Schumpeter (1939), and many others discern a common pattern in such episodes. The
discussion here follows Kindleberger (1978), whose depiction of a cycle of manias and panics is far clearer
than Schumpeter's and far more complete than Mill's. For brevity, this recurring set of phenomena can
be called a Kindleberger Cycle. Its essential dynamic is summarized in Figure 1.
First there is a dislocation: something changes to put the economy in disequilibrium. This can be changes
in tastes, political developments that distort trade, or any other jolts to the status quo that leave the
economy far enough out of equilibrium for large economic profit opportunities to arise. Most often, the
dislocation is an important new technology. Thus, Schumpeter (1939, p. 250) describes the 1720 bubbles
as like
        "later manias of this kind, induced by a preceding period of innovation which transformed the
        economic structure and upset the pre-existing state of things."
Intercontinental shipping, canals, telegraphy, railroads, electricity, the internet, and many other
technological advances have played this role. The existence of the new technology makes previously
unviable business ventures not just viable, but hugely profitable. Amid many failures, a first generation of
successful innovators learn how to capture these economic profits, and make themselves and their
financial backers immensely wealthy.
However, the rapid development of whole economies also creates dislocations - in both emerging and
developed economies. Australia, Canada, Germany, Japan, Sweden, and the United States all created such

                                                    16
dislocation in the late 19th and early 20th centuries (Kindleberger 1976). So did Hong Kong, Singapore,
South Korea and Taiwan in the post-World War II era. More global investment poured into rapidly
industrializing Canada in 1895-1911 than into the United States, an economy tenfold larger. Investments
in Canada in the 1890s or South Korea in the 1990s, were really bets that Rosenstein-Rodan's (1943)
network externalities would come together, that where new steel mills rose, cement factories would rise
alongside, and that insurance firms and shopping center developers would arise too, creating demand for
steel and concrete. Investment manias in new market economies did not always end as well: Argentina
looked as set as Australia or Canada for rapid industrialization in the 1890s (Tanzi 2007); and the
Philippines and Indonesia seemed as ready for rapid development as Singapore and Korea in the 1960s
(Lim and Morck 2021).
The next phase in Kindleberger's cycle has less well-informed investors seeing attempting to mimic
investment strategies that enriched their former peers. This can be modelled as an information cascade,
wherein costly information can make copying seemingly informed actors rationally preferable to acquiring
information.17 A flood of capital into the firms, sectors, or economies that feature the positive economic
profits ensues, more or less just as introductory microeconomics predicts, and pushes the economy back
to the competitive equilibrium. Private economic profits return to zero.
Nevertheless, zero profits do not stop the capital flood. Uninformed investors continue pouring their
savings into erstwhile positive economic profit ventures and a mania or bubble arises. Demand for shares
in these ventures pushes up their prices, which increases demand, which pushes up prices further in a
positive feedback loop. Smith (1776) describes this positive feedback loop as overtrading.18 Mill (1848, p.
542) summarizes a mania thus:
           "Examples of rapid increases of fortune call forth numerous imitators and speculation not only
           goes much beyond what is justified by the original grounds for expecting a rise of price, but extends
           itself to articles in which there never was any such ground."
Mill adds that "at periods of this kind, a great expansion in credit takes place". This is because bankers are
seldom better informed than shareholders, and elevated financial securities prices make potential
borrowers look more creditworthy than they would be if prices reflected fundamental values. Credit
expansion happen in many cases, but not always. For example, banks had little role in financing the
dot.com bubble of the 1990s.
The next phase begins when the mania ends. Kindleberger (1978) calls this instant of collective insight,
when asset prices' celestial detachment from fundamental values becomes obvious a "Minsky moment",
honoring Minsky's (1986) observation that the end of the bubble and onset of the crash often corresponds
to little or no real new information.
Because no-one, and certainly no-one in government, wants the blame for ending the boom, many
manias' Minsky moments are delayed. Pundits can help with what Shiller (2000) calls "new era stories" to
justify ever more stratospheric share prices. Often-recycled themes include arguments that shares be

17
     See Welch (1992) for essentials, and Alevy et al. (2007), Amihud et al. (2003) and others for elaborations.
18
     Although Adam Smith regarded overtrading as important, economic theory marginalized these idea in the mid-
     20th century, perhaps as the Crash of 1928 faded from living memory, until the Crash of 1987 and Dot.com Crash
     of 2000 reanimated the topic. See Le Roy (2004) for a literature survey. Bubbles can arise and expand if investors
     adhere to heterogeneous predictions, risk assessments or behavioral bias, especially if artificial barriers such as
     lock-ups or short sales prohibitions exclude important investor classes (Ofek and Richardson 2004). Investors
     with false beliefs can survive and even dominate financial markets under plausible conditions (De Long et al.
     1990, 1991; Kyle and Want 1997; Scheinkman and Xiong 2003; Hirshleifer et al 2006; Koganm et al. 2006; Yan
     2008; Coury and Sciubba 2012).

                                                            17
valued based on sales, rather than profits; that huge intangible assets justify cosmological market to book
ratios; and so on. Accountants help with new relaxed or novel rules; and regulators help with abbreviated
listing and reporting requirements. Bankers help perpetuate the mania with the floods of ready loans Mill
(1848) noted, and governments can encourage this. Governments and central bankers help with policies
that encourage banks to lend so as to prolong the good times past the next election. Financial engineers
can help with new investment vehicles that promise high returns from new investment schemes ­ often
highly leveraged real estate transactions.
All of this help tends to create space for fraudsters. Thus, while the ultimate Minsky moment could be
almost anything, it is often the revelation of a fraud. The mania phase ends and the panic phase begins.
Uninformed investors realize the shares they own are overvalued and race to sell. A race to sell is triggered
because everyone wants to sell before the price falls more, so everyone tries to sell at once. Kindleberger
(1978) calls the resulting selling wave a Torschlusspanik (door-closing panic), a German word for people
pushing to get out of room and all becoming stuck in the door, so none gets out.
The switch from mania to panic can require more than one Minsky moment. One mania over, subsidiary
manias can develop. Investors, accustomed to high disequilibrium and mania returns, seek new high
return alternative investments. New ways of investing in debt financed real estate bubbles arise. More
than one Torschlusspanik may be needed to effect the switch.
Tosschlusspanik selling waves can push securities prices far below their fundamental values, so firms avoid
issuing new shares and investors, feeling poor, cut back on consumption, which depresses business
activity. Shell-shocked bankers, their balance sheets suddenly heavy with nonperforming loans, stop
lending to anyone as they try to rebuild their banks' capital or reserves. Politically connected banks and
firms turn to their central banks and governments for bailouts, effectively socializing their losses from
fuelling and prolonging the mania. Ever more newly exposed frauds make forgotten risks again salient to
investors. Investment, consumption, credit and business activity all drop, and the economy goes into
recession or depression.
 As the downturn worsens, angry investors denounce unrestrained free markets and regulators respond
with tough new rules. A mid-1690s exposure of high-profile frauds hammered share prices and, in 1697,
parliament limited the number of stockjobbers to 100 and forbade their trading on their own accounts.19
The Bubble Act of 1722 banned joint stock companies as a public nuisance, though listed were
grandfathered (Harris 1994). After the Crash of 1929, the United States government raised taxes on the
rich, peaking at 90% marginal rates in the 1960s, set the interest rates commercial banks could pay on
checking and savings deposits by decree until 1979, limited the number of branches banks could have,
drastically limited margin (debt-financed) stock purchases, and made stock jobbing a regulated monopoly.
A sometimes long period of near-equilibrium normalcy comes to prevail. Their anger vented, investors
again come to expect normal returns, consistent with the economy's equilibrium growth rate. Hastily
formed regulators are captured (Stigler 1971) by the banks and firms they were intended to regulate.
Regulations are revised, replaced, dropped, or forgotten. Thus, soon after the Bubble Act, the flotation of
new share issues resumed, first subject to case-by-case parliamentary approval and then subject to
successively more limited regulatory oversight regimes.
Successful past innovators earn high cash-flows as their investment costs fade into the past and their
market positions solidify. The freewheeling radio entrepreneurs of the 1920s sold their stations to a
handful of national networks that could better deal with regulators. Local telephone networks, set up in

19
     William III, 1696-7: An Act to restrained the Number and ill Practice of Brokers and Stock-Jobbers. [Chapter
     XXXII. Rot. Parl. 8 & 9 Gul. III. p.11.nu.1].

                                                           18
the US from the later 1800s through the 1920s, organized around a monopoly long-distance telephone
company, AT&T. Over time, regulators set up to oversee these new high technology sectors found second
careers at the companies they regulated. Envisioned as arms of the government reaching down into the
industry, the regulatory agencies slowly morphed into arms of the industry reaching up into government.
Regulators grew increasingly concerned about the health and prosperity of the industry in a
transformation Stigler (1971) calls regulatory capture. Cell phone networks, internet service providers,
and software companies that were dynamic start-ups in the 1990s likewise became accustomed to living
of the cash flows from their past investments and aware of the importance of influencing government
officials to protect those cash flows into the future. Investing in political influence grew increasingly more
profitable than investing in yet more new technology.


Figure 3. Kindleberger Cycle
Kindleberger describes a historical cycle of financial manias, panics, and crashes following a common pattern, each
preparing the way for the next.

                               Baseline                                       Disequiulibrium
               Investors reaccustom to modest returns.
                                                                  An economic dislocation, typically a new
               The economy reverts to conditions more
                                                                    technology or new market, appears.
                 in accord with equilibirum economics
                                                                     Sophisticated early movers capture
                    and these prevail, sometimes for
                                                                  assocaited profit opportunities are grow
                    decades, until a new dislocation
                                                                                     rich




           Clean-up
                                                                                                 Capital Inflow
   Unsophisticated investors lose
 money, default on loans & blame                                                    Uninformed investors see others grown
 regulators. Governments bail out                                                        rich, demand increrased credit,
  banks, some governments then                                                      decrerased regulation. Capital flows into
  default. Tough new regulations                                                     innovative sector or new market, often
                                                                                                financed with credit




                                                                                            Bubble
                 Panic & Crash
                                                                          A positive feedback cycle creates a financial
        Expecting asset prices to fall, each                           bubble - capital inflow raises stcok prices, which
   uninformed trader want to sell first. A "run"                       attracts more capital, which rasies stock prices ...
     to sell first causes stock prices to crash                         Capital floods into into the innovative sector or
                      suddenly.                                                            new market

                                                       Minsky
                                                      Moment
                                                   The bubble bursts

Based on Kindleberger (1978).




                                                            19
The economy adjusts to a slower, more normal pace of innovation or market expansion (Ramey 2020),
but the store of knowledge is permanently increased, as are productivity levels (Scotchmer 1991). At this
point, experts can chime in with dire pronouncements of the end of innovation. In 1875, two years after
the 1973 financial crisis, the young Max Planck's professor warned him away from physics, a field with
no prospect of new ideas (Weinberg 1992. P. 14). Hogan's (1996) announcement of the "end of science"
rang in the information technology revolution. Gordon's (2016) finding that rapid innovation has ended
remains for historians to judge.
Eventually, a new dislocation occurs in some other corner of the economy. Investors, having forgotten the
financial misadventures of their elders, or their former selves, observe informed investors growing
wealthy and demand deregulation to let ordinary people invest in the new technology, newly emerging
markets, or whatever the new source of positive economic profits turns out to be. Financial deregulation
remerges as a top political priority so overtrading can happen again. For example, in January of 1825,
seventy IPOs were floated in London and the Bubble Act, by then perceived as pointless red tape, was
repealed in June ­ just in time for ordinary investors to buy into a stock market bubble that burst in
December (Dagher 2018).
4.5     Big new things other than new technologies
Many of the new technologies developed with funds from the bubbles describe above also created new
markets. The 17th century trading companies used new mathematical discoveries to navigate the high
seas, but also brought access to markets in Asia, Africa, and the Americas. Canals and railways were new
technologies, but both technologies greatly reduced shipping costs to inland markets. In these cases, an
extension of markets was likely a major part of the social return of the new technology produced.
For example, before canals, low-cost long-distance trade connected seaports with each other. Goods and
services readily available in coastal markets were far more expensive inland. River boats were small and,
traveling upstream, required oarsmen (except where prevailing pushed ships upstream as in Egypt).
People not near navigable rivers, or a paved road built in Roman times, relied on the limited and expensive
wares pedlars' wagons carried along bandit-ridden and often near impassible mud trails. Canal building
manias, as in 1770s UK or 1830s Canada, let inland farmers and millers expand production and sell their
surpluses in distant markets where prices were higher. Canals lifted inland land prices and made new
farms and mills profitable. Railways and trucking each had similar market extension effects.
Some bubbles were purely about new markets. For example, many Spanish colonies became independent
republics during the Napoleonic occupation of Spain. By then, the United States seemed an economic
success and investors who gambled on its success grew rich. An 1820s mania in mining and textiles stocks,
both big new technologies at the time, spread into an investment mania in Latin American bonds, touted
as investments in the "next" United States. The first Latin American debt crisis ensued in 1825. Banks
failed and bondholders lost, but the Latin American republics had become established nation states. The
settlement of Argentina renewed the promise of the region and a second Latin American debt crisis in
1890 would have bankrupted Barring Brothers, but for a Bank of England bailout.
The 1997 East Asian economic crisis is another such episode. Investors flooded East Asian "Tiger
Economies" ­ Hong Kong, South Korea, Taiwan and Singapore ­ with capital in the early to mid-1990s.
These economies had invested heavily in education, infrastructure and the legal and regulatory reforms
needed to support a market economy. Their financial systems had developed to channel domestic
investors' savings relatively successfully into value-increasing uses (Allen 2001). Foreign investors, trying
to emulate this success, poured funds into not just the "tiger economies," but also into nearby countries,
such as Indonesia, the Philippines, and Thailand, that seemed similar to them. Stock markets throughout
the region inflated and crashed in 1997. Brief recessions followed in the "tiger economies", but growth

                                                     20
soon resumed and their ascents to First World economy status were successful. Many investors had lost
heavily, but the physical capital ­buildings, machinery, and technology, though sometimes in new hands,
remained where it had been built.
Hirano and Yanagawa (2016) show that country-level bubbles tend to arise around promising middle-
income economies, as in Latin America and parts of Asia. Bubbles rarely develop around low-income
economies and generally need big new technologies to form in high-income economies, though real
estate bubbles fed by credit booms also arise in high-income economies. Allen (2001) argues that a
minimum level of domestic financial development is necessary for a bubble to form. A degree of
meaningful institutional development and early economic success might also be necessary to instill
expectations of rapid continued development.
Like a big new technology, economic development can have a social rate of return far higher than the
internal rates of return individual firms in that economy earn. This is because economic development has
network externalities similar to those surrounding innovations such as the telephone or the internet. Just
as a telephone is of little value if yours is the only one, a lone technologically up-to-date factory can be of
little value if surrounded on all sides by a subsistence agriculture economy. Rosenstein-Rodan (1943)
argues that network externality problems are a major barrier to economic development because every
firm in a developed economy depends of the mere existence of countless other firms, including legions of
firms with which it does no actual business. Each firm requires not just suppliers and customers, but
enough rival potential suppliers and customers to prevent either from dictating prices. Each supplier and
each customer requires the same, and without this entire ecosystem, no firm can flourish or perhaps even
survive. Each firm helps fill out the network and so encourages the further development of existing firms
and new ones.
Rosenstein-Rodan (1943) argued that stock markets, designed to capitalize individual firms, could not
simultaneously capitalize the entire economy-spanning network of firms that made a high-income
economy self-sustaining. They therefore laid out the mission of the World Bank: to provide massive floods
of foreign aid finance a Big Push - the state-financed simultaneous construction of an economy-wide
network of businesses all at once. Big Push policy failed amid endemic corruption wherever it was tried,
including the Asian tiger economies in the immediate post-war decades (Easterly 2006).
South Korea, Hong Kong, Singapore and Taiwan had invested heavily in education public health, basic
transportation and communications infrastructure, and functional government. Each had its own mix of
state intervention, but by the 1980s all were fundamentally free market economies. When local
entrepreneurs built small, and then larger, networks of firms, economic activity could accelerate. When
foreign capital flooded in, these firms could expand and new ones could arise. A bubble of investment
into these economies may well have been helpful on net.
4.6     Self-replicating Bubbles
Bubbles initially form around Big New Things, generally new technologies. Bubbles begin with genuine
abnormally high-return investment opportunities that make early investors rich and both expand as
copycat investors pour money in, hoping for more of the same. In both, this can have high social rates of
return even though the copycat investors all lose money when the bubble bursts.
Bubbles can beget other bubbles. Investors can come to expect more of the same, even as the technology
matures and genuinely high-return investments grow rare. US investors came to accept high returns as
normal during the dot.com boom of the 1990s. After the crash of 2000, a historically ordinary return like
those in the 1970s and early 1980s seemed uninviting. A new set of high-yield investments was wanted,
but the economy had few correspondingly high profit opportunities in which firms could invest.


                                                      21
Financial entrepreneurs can ride to the rescue, offering high return-seeking investors new high-return
investments (Geanakoplos 2010). Suppose investors became accustomed to returns of the order of 25%
during a high tech bubble. Without a genuine big new thing with genuinely high returns, financial
entrepreneurs can goose ordinary returns up into that range using the magic of leverage. Investing
$1,000,000 in a real estate property that sells for $1,050,000 a year later provides a $50,000 profit ­ a 5%
return. However, investing $200,000 plus $800,000 in borrowed money in the same real estate
transaction recasts the same $50,000 profit as a 25% return on the initial $100,000.
The smaller the underlying return on the real investment, the more extreme the leverage needed to
magnify returns up to the levels investors want. Investing $50,000 plus $950,000 in borrowed money to
buy a $1,000,000 property that rises only 1.25% to $1,012,500 provides a $12,500 profit on a $50,000
initial investment ­ which also works out to a 25% return. An adjunctive bubble in real estate forms and
expands. A mania can develop, with real estate prices rising because more investors are borrowing more
to invest in real estate, which boosts real estate prices still more, and so on.
These numbers overstate the investor's returns if investors' borrowing costs are above zero percent, for
the cost of repaying the loan must be subtracted out in each case. For example, if interest costs on the
loan exceed $12,500 the last of the above transactions is unprofitable. Ever thinner real underlying profit
margins also make highly leveraged transactions increasingly risky. For example, if the property fell by
more than 1.25% instead of rising, the first of the above transactions becomes less profitable, but the
second leads to bankruptcy.
As the demand for loans rises, the cost of borrowing rises. The 1920s real estate bubble rose and popped
as banks and mortgage financiers sought to match the high returns of call money and stocks (Nicholas and
Scherbina. 2013). Short-term loans have lower rates than long-term loans, so investors take to borrowing
at shorter and shorter terms and refinancing their loans increasingly frequently. Prior the 1997 East Asian
crisis, banks in the region were borrowing at ever-shorter terms. Real estate investors in the US and parts
of Europe were goosing up returns in these ways prior to the 2008 financial crisis.
Eventually, rising interest rates eventually put a stop to these sorts of leveraged transactions. Investors
borrowing ever more to keep their returns up ultimately find themselves bankrupted if real estate prices
fall even very slightly. Waves of bankruptcies of highly leveraged investors ensue and real estate prices
collapse. The adjunctive bubble bursts.
Central banks often intervene to prolong such credit-fueled bubbles with expansionary monetary policies
to keep interest rates low, putting off the day of reckoning by letting increasingly highly leveraged
investments continue longer. In many cases, banks and other financial institutions grow enmeshed in
these sorts of highly leveraged investments, so prolonging the bubble becomes a way of saving the
banking system. Nobody likes a party pooper, and central bank presidents are rarely popular in any case.
Moreover, banks and financial firms, grown wealthy using debt to goose up returns, can readily hire top
lobbyists to attack any officials who contemplate higher short-term rates.
Credit expansion continues until short-term rates rise enough or real estate values fall enough to bankrupt
the highly leverage investors. Their inability to repay their loans stresses banks and financial institutions.
Some fail, but a complicated political economy calculation generally leads governments and central banks
to bail out the stressed banks and financial institutions (Allen and Gale 2007). The alternative, letting
banks and financial institutions fail, becomes economically damaging if near bankrupt banks curtail
lending to sound borrowers, causing a credit crunch in which healthy businesses fail for want of working
capital so business failures and unemployment rise.
Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999) put bailout costs in the range of 5% to 13% of GDP, with the higher range
relevant if a currency crisis develops in tandem. If the credit crunch looks costlier, bailing out the banks

                                                     22
and financial institutions follows. Knowing this, the CEOs of banks and financial institutions lend
aggressively into the real estate bubble because they rationally expect bailouts when it bursts. Increasingly
aggressive lending makes the bubble bigger and the bailout costs after its collapse greater.
Politicians then deplore free market excesses and enact tough new regulations to make sure nothing like
this can ever happen again. Investors grudgingly accept low sustainable returns on their savings. Normalcy
returns. The economy grows, with minor ups-and-downs, until a new generation of investors sees a new
cohort of early backers of the next big new technology or market. Stiffer regulations often include more
binding short-sale restrictions, which may actually help the next bubble begin when investors' beliefs
about the future next diverge (Harisson and Kreps 1978; Hong et al. 2006, 2008; Hong and Stein 2007).
4.7        Clean-up Costs after the Crash
Stock market bubbles that finance new technologies and newly developed market economies very
plausibly have high social returns and, when they burst, do little overall damage to the economy, save
hurting investors who bought late. In contrast, credit expansions to inflate or reflate bubbles seem far less
socially useful. The credit expansion that collapsed in 2008 left much empty real estate in the US and
Europe. The credit expansion that accompanied and perpetuated Japan's 1980s bubble economy did the
same, and real estate prices in Japan remain depressed a generation later.
Economists' response to stock market bubbles is, with few exceptions, to scold investors for their
irrationality and to propose ways governments might prevent future bubbles. The general reluctance of
economic modellers to cast financial bubbles in a positive light is understandable because the costs of the
credit crunches that often follow can be large. The 1930s Great Depression followed the Roaring `20s stock
market bubble and 1970s stagflation followed the "go-go" 1960s stock market bubble. The recession
following the 2008 real estate credit bubble was the worst since the Great Depression in the US, UK and
several European economies.
Estimates of the cost of the average financial crisis depend starkly on assumptions about utility functions,
production functions and frictions in models calibrated using short runs of auto-correlated
macroeconomic data. In a literature review, Bartlevy (2004, 2005) reports estimates ranging from slightly
below zero to over 20% of GDP. Barlevy's tabulated estimates have a grand mean of 2.4% and a standard
error of 4.2%. The dispersion is substantial. Barro (2001) estimates the 1997 East Asian Crisis cut GDP
growth 3% per year over three years. Hoggarth et al. (2002) and Hutchison and Noy (2005) both put the
cost of a financial crisis at 10% of GDP. Demirguc-Kunt, Detragiache and Gupta (2006) report growth rates
reduced by 4% on average during banking crises. Kroezner et al. (2007) show the negative effects to be
especially concentrated in sectors whose firms depend on external financing. Boyd et al (2005) estimate
the average financial crisis costing, depending on their calibration assumptions, 63% to 302% of current
GDP by trimming about 8% off the present value of all future GDP. Ollivaud and Turner (2014) estimate
the 2008 global financial crisis reduced potential GDP 3% in countries that had a domestic banking crisis
and 2% in those that did not.20
In general, such studies assume that pre-crisis growth was a normal trend that would have continued but
for the crisis. If the crisis followed the rollout of a major new technology or the opening of important new
markets, the pre-crisis growth trend was a temporary abnormally that could not have persisted in any
event. A pioneering study by Lansing (2009, 2013) calibrates models of a representative agent bubble that
finances a new technology and then pops with a cost. Social benefits outweighing the bubble's social costs
if the new technology's SRR is more than 2.5 times its IRR to individual firms, the extreme upper range of

20
     Such problems may be less severe in normal business cycles, but a similarly wide range of welfare loss estimates
     are reported (e.g. Lucas 1987; Wolfers 2003; Alvarez and Jermann 2004; Barlevy 2004; Imrohoroglu 2008).

                                                           23
his macroeconomic calibration assumptions. Section 2.1 above puts the SRR of R&D spending at well over
four times its IRR, and the endogenous growth literature broadly supports such estimates (see Section
2.1), so bubbles fueled by typical R&D investments would generally be social welfare increasing in that
model.
The assumption that there is such a thing as a representative bubble, or a representative crisis, may also
need relaxing. There is considerable heterogeneity in the circumstances surrounding bubbles and in the
damage they do when they pop. The dot.com bubble imploded in 2000 and left only a minor recession in
its wake. Downturns following earlier bubbles range from nothing much, as after the 1637 tulip crash, to
economically important recessions, as after the gilded age bubble surrounding the turn of the 20th
century, to prolonged depressions, as after the crashes of 1873 and 1929.
Using historical evidence, Kindleberger (1978) shows that the aftermath of a stock market mania depends
almost entirely on the extent to which banks and other financial institutions got involved during the
bubble years. Polar opposites illustrate the reasoning.
Banks played a major role in the 1920s stock market bubble, which rang in the Great Depression of the
1930s. Banks lent money to individual investors, direly or through brokers, to buy stocks on razor-thin
margins. When stock prices collapsed, shareholders unable to meet margin calls found their positions
closed and their shares sold the market, further depressing stock prices. Runs on stocks and general selling
erased 90% of the value of the Dow Jones Industrials Average index portfolio from September 1929 to
March 1932. Shareholders' non-performing loans submerged brokers and banks. Banks' panicked
depositors raced to withdraw their life savings before their banks failed, and many were not fast enough
(Diamond and Dybvig 1983). Evaporating stock portfolio values and vanished bank accounts dramatically
reduced people's wealth. The U.S. started a global trade war in 1930 that triggered retaliatory tariffs
cutting US farmers out of foreign markets. Agricultural commodity prices within the US collapsed and
waves of farm mortgage defaults dealt another blow to US banks (Madsen 2001; O'Rourke 2009). The
banking system frozen, trade credit became unavailable even to sound borrowers, who then also failed
(Bernanki 1983). Unemployment rose and still more mortgage defaults hit banks. Inept central bank
governance likely made matters worse (Friedman and Schwartz 1963).
In contrast, bank loans played almost no role in the dot.com bubble of the 1990s. High-tech firms raised
money from venture capital fund that took them public, where the venture capital firms cashed out and
public investors poured still more capital into their technologies. Most of these firms had little debt,
especially to banks and individual investors were not buying high-tech stocks on thin margins. The stock
market bubble inflated, flooding information technology firms with capital, and then exploded with little
adverse impact on the rest of the economy.
These extremes are the endpoints of a pattern across past stock market bubbles. Those accompanied by
a greater expansion of credit did more economic damage when they popped. Those that did not form
around a new technology (or a new market expansion) had relatively little social benefit to offset the
damage they left. The 1920s and 1990s both left important new technologies in place, but the 1920s
bubble had terrible social costs and the 1990s bubble cost the world only a brief recession. The real estate
bubble of the 2000s left increased housing stock, which surely has some social benefits, but not an
economy raised to a higher level by huge technological advances. Its social costs almost surely dominate.
The credit expansion and real estate speculation of Japan's 1980s bubble economy likewise left an over-
expanded housing stock, and real estate prices there remain depressed a generation later.
The social benefits of bubbles appear to arise primarily from elevated stock prices. The social costs of
bubbles appear to flow primarily from the credit expansions that sometimes, though not always, occur
alongside stock market bubbles. If an "optimal bubble" might be conceivable, it would form around new

                                                    24
technologies or new markets, restrict itself to stock markets, and have no place for credit expansion or
bankers.
Olivier (2005) shows technology related stock market bubbles need not precipitate credit crises. And if
stock market bubbles intensify investment new technologies with very high social rate of return, bubbles
would correspond to abnormally high economic growth as those returns are realized, which would not
have occurred without the bubble and would not continue in any case.
The three decades following World War II were an era of rapid growth without financial manias, panics
and crashes in high-income economies (Bordo et al. 2001). The era also featured unusually intense
regulation - Bretton Woods capital controls, Depression era banking and stock market regulations,
industrial policy taxes and subsidies, and very high tax rates. However, these decades followed the Great
Depression and World War II, both having wrought unprecedented economic devastation. Rapid growth
is far easier starting from a low baseline. Rebuilding cities destroyed by war (Vonyó 2008), applying a
reservoir of potential innovations accumulated during the 1930s and 1940s (Gross et al. 2020), and (less
unambiguously) dismantling Depression era trade barriers (Singh 2010) could fuel growth without
renewed investment in innovation. Milionis and Vonyó (2016) attribute 40% of economic growth from
1950 to 1975 to reconstruction, and subtracting that leaves the era's growth rates no higher than in 1975
to 2000. Global devastation may be too steep price to justify repeating.
4.5     Models of Bubbly Economics
In theory, financial bubbles can arise if the growth rate exceeds the interest rate in the steady state
without bubbles, but misallocate capital and slow growth (Tirole 1985; Saint Paul 1992; Grossman, and
Yanagawa 1993; King and Ferguson 1993; Caballero et al. 2006). In these models, bubbles are
unambiguously growth retarding; though Bosi and Pham (2016 ) argue that governments could tax
bubbles to fund innovation subsidies.
Pastor and Veronesi (2009) argue that the risk associated with radical innovations is initially firm-specific,
but becomes systematic as the technology spreads and thus induced market-wide co-movement, which
can be misinterpreted as a bubble. Consistent with this, Chun et al. (2008, 2011, 2016) report elevated
firm-specific risk as the 1990s IT bubble developed and elevated systematic risk in its later stages and after
it bust. They argue that creative destruction elevated firm-specific risk early on, as successful innovators'
stock rose and their destroyed rivals' stocks fell; but that industry-wide and market-wide fluctuations
came to predominate as noise traders came to dominate the market.
Later models have financial bubbles easing underinvestment caused by a friction. In some, the friction is
a collateral constraint on debt-financed investment (Caballero and Krishnamurthy 2006; Farhi and Tirole
2012; Martin and Ventura 2012, 2016; Kikuchi and Thepmongkol 2020; Ventura 2012; Miao and Wang
2014, 2018; Miao et al. 2015; Kunieda and Shibata 2016; Hirano and Yanagawa 2016; Hillebrand et al.
2018). In these studies, firms fail to invest in investment projects with s that exceed what their hurdle
rates would be in a frictionless world, and bubbles ease this underinvestment problem.
This reasoning resonates with empirical findings that the expected link between stock market valuations
and corporate investment decisions is weak for many firms. Fazzari et al. (1988) show that many firms
appear to be financially constrained in this sense. Morck, Shleifer and Vishny (1990) argue that overvalued
stock markets can let such firms access capital by issuing overvalued shares. Baker et al. (2003) report that
firms with limited borrowing capacity are especially likely to be financially constrained, justifying the focus
on collateral limitations in many of the above-mentioned models of bubbles. Polk and Sapienza (2009)
derive a rational manager's optimal investment increasing with the magnitude and duration of a
shareholder value bubble and present supportive evidence. Thus, stock market manias are associated
with unusually high investment (Kindleberger 1978; Martin and Ventura 2012).

                                                      25
Figure 4. Kindleberger Engine
Kindleberger describes a historical cycle of financial manias, panics, and crashes following a common
pattern, each preparing the way for the next, and most rolling out a major new technologies or market
that increases productivity. Each completion of the cycle ratchets productivity up to a higher baseline level
after the economy recovers from the panic and crash.
                            Elevated Baseline                                   Disequiulibrium
                 Investors reaccustom to moderst returns.
                                                                        An economic dislocation, typically a
                 If new wealth from the innovation or new
                                                                          new technology or new market,
                    market > costs of runs and aftermath,
                                                                        appears. Sophisticated early movers
                      economy attains higher baseline
                                                                             capture assocaited profit
                                 prosperity
                                                                            opportunities are grow rich




             Clean-up
                                                                                                   Capital Inflow
  Unsophisticated investors lose
money, default on loans & blame                                                        Uninformed investors see others grown
regulators. Governments bail out                                                     rich, demand increrased credit, decrerased
 banks, some governments then                                                          regulation. Capital flows into innovative
 default. Tough new regulations                                                      sector or new market, often financed with
                                                    High social                                         credit
                                                    rate of
                                                    return
                                                    from
                                                    innovation
                                                                                              Bubble
                  Panic & Crash
                                                                            A positive feedback cycle creates a financial
         Expecting asset prices to fall, each                            bubble - capital inflow raises stcok prices, which
    uninformed trader want to sell first. A "run"                        attracts more capital, which rasies stock prices ...
      to sell first causes stock prices to crash                          Capital floods into into the innovative sector or
                       suddenly.                                                             new market

                                                        Minsky
                                                        Moment
                                                    The bubble bursts


Based on Kindleberger (1978).



R&D-intense firms, which tend to be young, without earnings from established operations, and without
assets for collateralizing debt, rely heavily on stock markets for financing (Brown et al. 2012; Hsu et al.
2014; Acharya and Xu 2017). During periods of high stock market valuations, young and innovation-
intense firms are unusually likely to list on stock markets and to issue additional shares (Brown et al. 2009;
Aghion et al. 2012). Innovations financed by share issues in the 1920s continued coming on line well into
the 1930s (Field 2003, 2011; Nanda and Nicholas 2014; Nicholas 2008). Innovations financed by share
issues in the 1990s bubble also appear to be of unusually high quality (Xu and Dang 2018).
As the stock market bubble inflates, they issue shares to accumulate large cash reserves, which they then



                                                             26
run down over time to pay for R&D (Brown et al. 2009, 2012; Brown and Petersen 2011).21 Stock valuations
elevated by sentiment are especially likely to boost R&D spending, perhaps because the sentiment also
causes corporate insiders to overestimate IRRs (Xi and Dang 2018). This makes larger and deeper stock
markets, and the formal and informal institutions that sustain these markets, important to innovation
(Brown et al. 2013). Stock market bubbles thus may have a fundamental role in speeding up innovation
and faster productivity growth (Brown et al. 2009, 2017; Acharya and Xu 2017).
Stock market bubble tend to culminate in merger waves (Harford 2005; Rhodes-Kropf et al. 2004. 2005;
Maksimovic et al. 2013), in which older firms buy innovative firms. Independent inventors in the early 20th
century's high tech booms cashed in by selling to large firms (Nicholas 2010). The acquirers then lost value
in the crash alongside small investors who bought high (Moeller et al. 2005). This process lets innovators
and their early investors, typically venture capital funds, exit amid the bubble with high private rates of
return (Philips and Zhadanov 2013). Acquirer firms emerge owning important the innovations (Nicholas
2003).
The huge margins by which the s of investments in innovation exceeds their s to the innovating
firms themselves is tangential in much of this literature. The idea that financial bubbles might allow for
something approaching socially optimal investment that is excessive from the perspective of a value
maximizing firm has arisen in popular books (Gross 2007; Janeway 2012). Marketing research has also
made this connection with considerable sophistication (Sorescu et al. 2018). Using historical episodes,
Perez (2002) argues that financial bubbles finance new technologies and, after the ensuing crash fades,
ring in golden ages.
Olivier (2000) explicitly models stock market bubbles elevating technology stocks as productivity
enhancing, and credit bubbles elevating real estate prices as productivity diminishing. Janeway (2012)
agrees regarding technology bubbles, but counters that even real estate credit bubbles might advance
innovation by boosting aggregate demand. Shin and Subramanian (2019) explicitly model technological
spillovers by letting an individual firm's innovations increase the productivity of an intermediate good
used by other firms. Related research explains high tech firms' seemingly bubbly high stock valuations as
an option valuation effect driven by the skewed and fat-tailed payoff distributions of experiments with
new technologies (Nanda and Rhodes-Kropf 2013, 2017; Kerr et al. 2014; Manso 2016). All of this together
suggests that economies with highly developed stock markets and intermittent high-tech bubbles might
be especially prosperous.
What all of this suggests is that the Kindleberger cycle might better be thought of as an engine of economic
growth. Each Kindleberger cycle floods capital into a Big New Thing ­ usually a new technology, sometimes
a market, but usually something with large positive externalities, including network externalities. The
completion of the cycle leaves the economy with those positive externalities minus the cleanup costs of
the panic and crash and the costs of whatever capital misallocation occurred in the mania stage. If
completion of the Kindleberger Cycle elevates aggregate productivity on net, the process might better be
characterized as a Kindleberger engine.
4.5        Blowing Better Bubbles?
Bubbles have more potential to create wealth if they funnel savings into investments with social returns
that are higher multiples of the private returns they pay to their buy and hold investors. Innovation is such


21
     High market valuations associated with sentiment also boost ordinary investment (Loughran and Ritter 1995;
     Baker and Wurgler 2000; Chirinko and Schaller 2001; Baker, Stein, and Wurgler 2003; Sapienza 2004; Gilchrist,
     Himmelberg and Huberman 2005; and others), but boost R&D far more than it boosts via R&D appears to be far
     larger (Xu and Dang 2018).

                                                         27
an investment. R&D qualifies, but this can hardly invite spending on anything and everything under the
rubric of R&D. R&D does have to be targeted at innovations with genuine social returns. Part of the
problem with R&D subsidies and tax credits is that clever form fillers can find ways to present almost any
use of funds as R&D. If bubbles flood sectors with capital, how are they any better?
One possible answer is that bubbles only occur after a credible signal that something new and potentially
great lies just over the horizon. Kindleberger repeatedly shows that bubbles occur after a first set of
entrepreneurs and early investors get very rich from something new that catches people's imagination.
Navigation on the open ocean, canals, railways, telegraphs, steel making, radio, plastics and the internet
all made early movers very conspicuously rich, had a bright aura of novelty, and looked like they could
genuinely change the world. People got excited and, probably motivated by greed or, more likely, envy,
wanted a piece of the action. If a purported innovation without these characteristics can't get a really big
bubble going, bubbles might do a better job selecting promising innovations than can committees of
industrial policy technocrats doling out subsidies.
Bubbles do form around frivolous investments. The Dutch tulip bubble of 1637 (Goldgar 2008) and US
"beany baby" bubble of the 1990s (Bissonnette 2016) elevated the prices of tulip bulbs and a childrens
doll, respectively. Both occurred as genuine new technologies ­ oceanic navigation in the early 1600s and
information technology in the 1990s ­ were enriching entrepreneurs and investors funding genuinely
socially valuable innovations. Economically useless bubbles perhaps form alongside floods of financing
into genuinely socially useful investments.

5.      Economic Selection for Bubbles
Coddington (1976) refers unflatteringly to Neo-Keynesian macroeconomics as "hydraulic". But Irving
Fisher (Brainard and Scarf 2005), William Phillips (Swade 2000), and other prominent economists built
model economies from pipes, reservoirs, pumps, floaters, and valves. In these, water-as-capital flowed
through the system elevating some sectors and sinking others until an equilibrium emerged where each
component of the economy bobbed at its appropriate level. These models, Fisher's especially, provided
the groundwork for general equilibrium microeconomics, in which private investment decisions coalesce
into social welfare optimizing resource allocation according to the fundamental theorems of welfare
economics.
Where there is water, there can be floods. Extending the metaphor, financial manias pour floods of capital
over the economy, lifting all the floaters and spilling over into adjacent reservoirs. This seems sloppy
compared to the tight logic of equilibrium economics; and it is. But rational economic decision-making
leaves private investment in innovation chronically far below its socially optimal level, and intellectual
property rights, subsidies and other "fixes" appear ineffective, perhaps and even perverse. If so, floods of
capital that occasionally inundate hot new technologies with capital might be the lesser evil.
5.1     Escaping Cardwell's Law
The subversion of intellectual property rights law and state-financed innovation programs may reflect a
deeper animosity to innovation. Cardwell (1972, p. 210) documents the historical regularity that societies
become technologically creative only for short periods. Mokyr (1994) calls this Cardwell's Law and argues
it reflects powerful forces that converge to quash rapid technological innovation.
One force is a conservative bias, evident in behavioral economics, associated with prospect theory, which
shows people fear losses more than they value gains of equivalent magnitude. The downsides of change
outweigh the upsides. Thus, Schumpeter (1911) promises innovators "the manifestation of condemnation
[that] may even come to social ostracism and finally to physical prevention" (p. 87) and scorn "as an
upstart, whose ways are readily laughed at." (p89). The conservative bias is not unique to the political

                                                    28
right, but is general feature of human nature. For example, the green (conservationist) movement is
consistent with a conservative bias. Innovation avoidance can be summarized in the so-called
precautionary principle: human survival is precarious and innovations in technologies, economic systems
or ecologies are to be avoided because even a miniscule risk of unforeseen disaster is unacceptable. This
may even have evolutionary roots if more innovation-embracing hominids went extinct because, however
infrequent over the course of many millennia, one such disaster removed them from the gene pool. Of
course, human behavior is complex and the conservative bias can be suppressed by rational decision-
making or by other biases, such as novelty seeking or herding, discussed below.
A second force is vested interests, politically powerful constituencies favored by the status quo and
therefore opposed to change. New technologies that obsolesce large established firms mobilize the
owners of those firms against innovation. New technologies that reduce employee headcounts or require
employees with different skills mobilize organized labor against innovation. New technologies that
devalue natural resources found in specific regions mobilize citizens and governments of those regions
against innovation. All of these constituencies seek to influence government policies to slow or stall
technological progress. The conservative bias embedded in human behavior gives resonance to such
lobbying in the halls of power. Subsidies, taxes, and intellectual property rights are revised, modified and
adapted, often until they actively discourage innovation and subsidize the status quo (Wu 2010; Jaffe and
Lerner 2011).
A third force, actually an extension of the second, is aging innovators avoiding creative self-destruction.
Successful innovation creates huge wealth, so that aging ex-innovators and their heirs become powerful
vested interests opposed to changes to the status quo such as those potentially caused by continued rapid
innovation. IBM, an innovative electronic tabulator company built in the 1920s high-tech boom, came to
dominate mid-20th century computers. But in the 1980s, IBM lost its dominant position when its top
executives, all mainframe computer engineers, opposed personal computers to safeguard their status
within the firm (Betz 1993). Aging ex-innovators and their heirs can become powerful vested interests
lobbying governments for regulatory and financial sector reforms that block further innovation (Rajan and
Zingales 2003).
Mokyr (1994) argues that, because of these forces, Cardwell's Law inexorably moves an economy to
technological stagnation. These forces explain intense antagonism to innovation from 18 th century
Luddites to 21st century anti-vaccination and anti-GMO activists (Mazur 1975; Jones 2013; Juma 2016).
They explain the mobilization of public policy to suppress rapid innovation and the pervasive failure of
state-subsidized innovation programs (Mokyr 1992ab, 1994, 2000; Wu 2007; Jaffe and Lerner 2011).
Mokyr (1994) proposes that competition between economies can break Cardwell's law. This argument
elaborates on an observation of Rosenberg and Birdzell (1986, pp. 136-9)
"In the West, the individual centers of competing political power had a great deal to gain from introducing
technological changes that promised commercial or industrial advantage . . . and much to lose from
allowing others to introduce them first. Once it was clear that one or another of these competing centers
would always let the genie out of the bottle, the possibility of aligning political power with the economic
status quo and against technological change more or less disappeared from the Western mind".
The fragmented politics of the Western World, the power of subnational governments within federal
states thus limited the repression of innovation because new technologies would pop up elsewhere if
suppressed at home, and their positive externalities would spread abroad first. A fortuitous importance
of sequential innovations in communications (printing, telegraphy, telephones, etc.) and communications
(oceanic navigation, canals, railroads, etc.) that let ideas, people, and technologies move increasingly
readily between polities may have factored in too.

                                                    29
For example, the Big New Thing of the 1840s was the telegraph network (Standage 1998). Before the
telegraph, information moved at the speed of a horse or sailing ship. After the telegraph, information
moved at the speed of electricity. A financial mania in the United States financed hosts of telegraphy
ventures that expanded its telegraph network from 40 miles of wire in 1846 to 2,000 miles in 1848 to
23,283 miles 1852; a state-run telegraph rollout left France with 750 miles in 1952 (Gross 2007). Individual
American investors lost vast wealth when their stock market collapse; while French investors, with no
telegraphy investment opportunities, lost nothing. But, America had a vast telegraph system and France
did not. Gross (2007) concludes that America came out on top. France had to scramble to catch up.
Cardwell's Law failed and technological progress lived on.
Taxes on economic prosperity financed military power and industrial technology advances had
externalities in weapons production. Businesses actively sought to steal new technologies from businesses
in other countries as industrialization progressed and governments everywhere aided and abetted this.
Britain sought to prohibit technology exports, but American entrepreneurs grew expert at smuggling
disassembled machines across the Atlantic (Andreas 2013). Technologies seeped across European borders
despite the best efforts of technology exporter governments and will the enthusiastic cooperation of
importer governments (Harris 2017). After the end of its civil war, the United States became a major
importer of pirated European technology as it rapidly industrialized. Canada made foreign patents
unenforceable in its courts to facilitate technological catch up (Bliss 1987). As competition between states
grew global, Japan (Morck and Nakamura 2005), South Korea and other non-Western polities also came
to appreciate the national catastrophe of technological backwardness and actively promoted inward
technology transfer. But continually relying on others to develop innovations leaves a country
permanently behind. After each of these countries `caught up" to the frontier, superior technological and
productivity growth required domestic innovation. Competition between nation states worked to
suppress Cardwell's Law.
This reasoning suggests that economic openness may be of far greater importance than standard
international trade and finance models allow. Openness may well achieve gains from comparative and
absolute advantage; but its more important effect may be to check political pressures that would slow or
halt innovation under autarky. The previous sections combine to suggest that one such institution,
perhaps the most important, is a bubble-prone stock market.
5.2     Bubbles as Exercises in Economic Fitness
Economic selection culls away modes of behavior that are less advantageous to economic growth (Nelson
and Winter 1982; Hayek 1988; Lo 2004; King and Kay 2020). Might economic evolution select for patterns
of behavior that lead to recurrent financial bubbles?
Economic selection is arguably faster and more powerful than natural selection. Natural selection is a
competition for survival between selfish genes and can only operate at higher levels of aggregation (the
survival of the herd) in limited circumstances (Wilson 2012). Economic selection occurs simultaneously at
multiple levels, pitting individuals against each other for goods and employment; firms against each other
for customers, suppliers, capital and labor; and economies compete with each other for capital and skilled
labor. Natural selection is Darwinian: less fit variants of an organism eventually die, leaving more fit
variants to survive and leave descendants. Economic selection is Lamarckian: individuals, firms, and
governments whose policies are working less successfully can imitate what more successful individuals,
firms, and countries are doing. Patterns of economic behavior can spread without individuals, firms or
economies dying.
Cardwell's Law is fortified by loss aversion. Humans have a conservative bias. They prefer the status quo
to change because they fear losses more than they value gains of equivalent magnitude. Any economically

                                                    30
rational hominid who happened to arise in the course of evolutionary history would have accepted small
risks of disaster if its expected gains were positive. Disaster need only occur once for this trait to fall out
of the gene pool. Loss aversion appears deeply embedded by natural selection. Fear of loss comes readily
to mind and evokes instinctive reactions.
However, human behavior is more than loss aversion. Human nature also appears to include a number of
behavioral predispositions conducive to financial bubbles. These include a fascination with novelty, a
propensity to emulate others who seem to know what they're doing, and a comfort in following the herd.
Novelty-seeking is a hard-wired component of human nature arising from the brain's dopamine system,
which seems exceptionally active in serial entrepreneurs (Zald et al. 2008). This suggests deep origins in
natural selection. Novelty-seeking meets the test of group-level natural selection between hunter-
gatherer bands if an urge to nibble on bright-colored berries expands the band's food supply enough to
save more lives than are lost to poison berries (Williams and Taylor 2006). Economies with institutions
that channel novelty-seeking into the discovery and financing of new technologies may likewise
outcompete those that do not, even if individual entrepreneurs and investors lose money often (Bernardo
and Welch 2001; Galor and Michalopoulos 2012).
In Theory of Moral Sentiments, Adam Smith (1759) noted "our disposition to admire, and consequently
to imitate, the rich and the great." Imitative behavior also has plausible roots in natural selection (Gibson
and Hoglund 1992; Blackmore 1999, pp. 74 ­ 81). Most economic problems are procedurally
transcomputational, so economic selection at aggregate levels, such as competition between firms or
economies, can favor the imitation of people who appear more successful if pathological outcomes for
individuals are not too infrequent or catastrophic (Bikhchandani et al. 2005). Investors might buy into
bubbles that have made earlier, seemingly smarter investors rich (Hirschleifer et al. 2003). A propensity
to imitate success that manifests as an innate "fear of missing out" may attract investors to bubbles
(Janeway 2012; McGinnis 2020).
Humans are social animals and may have a hard-wired disposition to move in herds (Trotter, 1916; Hayek
1988, p 17) and emotion is contagious in humans interacting as a group (Barsade 2002). This may reflect
natural selection for hunter-gatherers that moved in bands, in which emotions such as fear spread rapidly.
But contagious emotions are also the basis of Keynes' "animal spirits" lifting or depressing sentiment
across business leaders and investors, a key to the initiation and expansion of stock market bubbles.
5.3     More Selective Bubbles?
All this leaves occasional stock price bubbles seeming oddly sensible, but this does not mean they are
"optimal". Observing something does not make it optimal.
Darwin saw natural selection as having "general tends towards a maximum economy in the use of
resources" (Howard 1982, p. 99). Natural selection can bring a species to a local optimum far inferior to
the global optimum. The vertebrate retina's blood supply is on the wrong side, and the cephalopod eye is
a much superior design (Lents 2018). Evolution, by a blind process of trial and error found a design in
vertebrates that could not be improved with marginal tweaks, and humans live with second best eyes.
Economic evolution is capable of much larger and faster transformations. The institutions that shape
economic behavior can be torn down, as in Mao's Revolution, and rebuilt, as in Deng Xiaoping's reforms.
They can be rebuilt from within, as with America's New Deal of the 1930s, or from without, as by colonial
overloads.
Could better technocratic policies eliminate stock market bubbles? Hayek (1988, p. 22) smiles at great
scientists who "while conceding that everything has hitherto developed by a process of spontaneous
order, call on human reason - now that things have become so complex - to seize the reins and control

                                                      31
future development." He goes on to refute the idea "that reason, itself created in the course of evolution,
should now be in a position to determine its own future evolution [as] inherently contradictory."
Government officials, like CEOs and investors, confront procedurally transcomputational problems and
seek solve them by pursuing shiny new ideas, imitating what others who appear more successful do, and
gain comfort from moving in herds (Boskovi et al. 2013).
Mao's China successfully avoid stock market bubbles, but his social engineering left Chinese among the
poorest people in the world. Deng Xiaoping rescued China from Mao's heroic experiments by reigning in
the planners and letting market forces reenergize economic selection. In the richest and most successful
economies in the world, economic selection has favored institutions that promote occasional stock
market bubbles around new technologies or new markets.
Perhaps reforms might increase the social efficiency of intellectual property rights or government
innovation subsidy programs enough to render economies with institutions that foment stock market
bubbles poorer, rather than richer. In the near-term future, multilevel competition seems to work against
this outcome. Strong competition between firms favors patent thickets and strong competition between
researchers favors those skilled at filling out complex forms. Competition between governments for faster
productivity growth seems too weak to overwhelm these microeconomic forces.
Stock market bubbles, in contrast, may be unstoppable because they resonate so deeply with the novelty
seeking aspects of human nature. Still, some bubbles end far more catastrophically than others. Stock
market bubbles accompanied by a large expansion of credit may also have their blood supplies coming
from the wrong place. Can institutions be redesigned to keep banks and other credit-granting institutions
out of stock market bubbles?
The stock market crash of 1929 and the ensuing Great Depression brought about major banking reforms
that barred banks from having anything to do with stock markets for decades. The New Deal banned
commercial banks from dabbling in financial markets and limited margin buying through brokers. The
technology-driven stock market run-ups of the 1960s and 1990s brought in solid state electronics and the
internet, and then ended with merely unpleasant recessions.
Depression era regulations limiting the scope of bank activities were already in rapid retreat across the
developed world in the 1990s, and banks were deeply enmeshed in speculative financial markets in the
early 2000s. Competition between banks for high returns-on-equity may well have pushed major banks
deeper into real estate speculation, fueled a real estate bubble, and precipitated a credit collapse that
brought in the worst recession since the 1930s in the US and many other countries. Akerlof and Shiller
(2009, p. 154) attribute the deregulation and expansion of U.S. mortgage-backed securities markets prior
to 2008 to "the belief that the opportunities to take part in the housing boom were not being shared
fairly." Deregulation let banks and other credit-granting institutions help unsophisticated investors
participate the growing real estate bubble.
Government officials, like CEOs and investors, confront procedurally transcomputational problems and
seek solve them by pursuing shiny new ideas, imitating what others who appear more successful are
doing, and gain comfort from moving in herds. That rational technocrats might use the neat equations
of economic theory to replace economic selection with technocratic administration is, according to
Hayek (1988, p. 194) a "fatal conceit."
Aspirations to design a regulatory Aswan dam and to engineer fiscal fertilizers seem unlikely to eliminate
our need for capital inundations. Economic selection, though, continues. Institutions might change to
focus financial manias more narrowly on more socially valuable innovations and to mitigate collateral
damage. Economies with better capital dykes and overflow reservoirs might prosper more and invite
imitation.

                                                    32
6.      Less Inefficient Kindleberger Engines
Kindleberger's (1978) historical cycle of manias, panics and crashes often, though not always, arises
around new technologies with large positive externalities, which investors and firms behaving in accord
with conventional economic rationality would drastically underfund relative to their social returns. Free
market economies with active stock markets and their supporting legal and other institutions may well
have grown rich because they stumbled upon a way to overcome chronic underinvestment in innovation.
This sort of reasoning appears in the historical and economics literatures, albeit far less frequently than
condemnations of stock market bubbles as irrational follies. Neal (1996, 155) sees the recurrence of
financial manias as "less a tale about the perpetual folly of mankind and more one about financial markets'
difficulties in adjusting to an array of innovations." Several models cast bubbles as arising when investors
are especially prone to (Harisson and Kreps 1978; Hong et al. 2006, 2008; Hong and Stein 2007), a situation
likely to coincide with the arrival of radical and incompletely understood new technologies.
Ashton (1948, p. 83-4) concludes that the British canal mania of the late 1770s "undoubtedly led to some
waste of national resources," but was a net benefit because "agricultural regions which had been remote
from the centre were brought within the widening circle of exchange; the fear of local famine, of both
food and fuel, was removed; and the closer contact with others, which the new means of communication
afforded, had a civilising influence." Angeletos et al. (2010) model a new technology elevating investors'
uncertainty about stocks' fundamental values inducing a conventional neoclassical economy to resemble
a Keynesian beauty contest that "look like irrational exuberance to an outside observer."
A few insufficiently cited models in which stock market bubbles counteract inefficiently low investment,
such as investment in innovation, resonate with this. Jacques Olivier (2000) models 'growth enhancing'
bubbles as confined to stock markets. These attract capital to productivity-boosting innovation and might
even draw capital away from productivity depressing but individually profitable investments such as
political rent seeking. Tanaka (2011), Lansing (2012), and Takao (2017) also model growth enhancing
bubbles. Xu and Dang (2018) present empirical evidence that bubbly stock markets ease capital
constraints and encourage R&D investment. Eatwell (2004) describes bubbles allocating capital to
individually profitable investments left unfunded by capital rationing or managerial myopia and
individually unprofitable investments whose positive externalities enhance social welfare. Eastwell
concludes (p. 44) that "bubbles are not efficient, nor in any way optimal, nor in any interesting way
rational, But they could be useful." Bubbles do not correspond to economic efficiency in conventional
equilibrium models (e.g. Santos and Woodford 1997), but in real economies, bubbles may usefully
compensate for such other far more socially costly distortions.
The large social costs event in the panic and crash phases understandably provoke condemnations of
bubbles as irrational folly avoidable by better educating people to behave as equilibrium economic
expects them to behave. Failing this, regulations are proposed to force people to behave rationally.
Scheinkman (2014) sees bubbles as inefficient markets and proposes reforms to end this.
Recessions follow most bubbles, but some are far worse than others. The Roaring Twenties bubble, the
Crash of 1929 and the ensuing Great Depression are historically unique. Mid 1930s unemployment rates
surpassed 25% in many developed economies. The high-tech investments of the 1920s in power grids,
electrification, radio, automobiles, cinema, and the other big new things of the era almost surely
misallocated some capital, but the atypical vehemence of Great Depression suggests confounding factors:
misguided interwar gold standard exchange rate policies (Eichengreen 1995); inept central bank policies
(Ahamed 2009), trade wars (Irwin 2017), imprudent banking regulation (Kroesner and Strahan 2014), and
other factors may have been worse follies than the 1920s bubble. Reparations were soon shelved, the
gold standard was replaced, central banking was professionalized, trade barriers were renegotiated down,

                                                    33
and banking regulations were eased. But the electric power grids, radio stations, movie studios and
automobile plants built in the 1920s capital food were not torn down. Electrified homes and businesses
did not rip out their copper wires and revert to kerosene and steam. Nor were canals, railroads, or internet
fibrotic networks ripped out after other high-tech bubbles. The lesson of the 1930s might better be that
public policy can make a Kindleberger cycle very costly indeed.
If stock market manias alleviate, even partially and imperfectly, other more socially costly inefficiencies,
preventing bubbles is not obviously optimal public policy. Rather, a weighing of social costs versus benefits
is justified. Lansing (2009) balances speculation's social costs in magnifying volatility against its social
benefits in countering underinvestment. However, the Great Depression suggests a role for public policy
in minimizing the social costs of the panic and crash. Some 1930s reforms, notably deposit insurance and
universal social welfare programs, did not fall away in subsequent decades.
The thesis that stock market bubbles are a problem may thus need qualification. Bubble might rather
reflect Lo's (2004) concept of adaptive expectations: biases in investor expectations that persist because
economic selection culls alternatives. An abundance of circumstantial evidence suggests that the
Kindleberger Cycle of recurring manias, often causing floods of investment into new technologies, panics
and crashes (often ringing in economic downturns) could be beneficial to long term growth by increasing
chronically socially suboptimal investment in innovation when important new technologies arise.
Intermittent financial manias may solve this underinvestment problem more effectively than intellectual
property rights and state-subsidy programs, both of which attract political rent-seeking that can cause
socially costly distortions.
Rather than condemning Kindleberger's cycles of manias, panics and crashes as manifestations of people's
stubborn irrationality and incurable folly, economists might consider public policy options to render
bubbles more socially useful. Such policies might include measures to keep credit providing institutions,
such as banks, as far from bubbles as possible. Bubbles in stock markets provide abundant capital to Big
New Thing technologies and their crashes, like the 2000 dot.com crash, appear minimally socially costly.
Bubbles in credit markets are less clearly associated with the financing of innovation, and their crashes,
like the 2008 financial crisis, impose broad social costs. Debt-financed investment into stock market
bubbles provides even more capital to Big New Thing technologies, but also renders the crash phase more
socially costly.
The optimal flow of credit financing into stock market bubbles may thus be positive, but might tend to be
socially excessive. Lending at relatively high rates to speculators buying into bubbles and speculating on
their own accounts can look attractive to banks. The upside profits are clear and downside risk is limited
by bailouts, justified as necessary to save the economy during the crash phase of the cycle. Such bank
policies also advantage top bank executives incentivized to maximize bank return on equity, to which bank
executive compensation is conventionally linked. Barring banks and near-banks from bubbles is
conceptually simple, but challenging in practice because banks are politically influential and bank
regulators appear prone to regulatory capture. Public policy-makers might weigh the social benefits of
technology bubbles against the differing social costs of panics and crashes under different regulatory
regimes.
That the Western World developed institutions conducive to periodic financial manias may actually be an
important part of the answer to Needham's (2004) question "Why did the Industrial Revolution happen
in the West, rather than in China?" The West developed stock markets and stock market bubbles that
periodically finance vast waves of innovation, and high-income economies in East Asia have done the
same. The periodic manias and panic have been costly, but may have been worth it.



                                                     34
References
Acemoglu, Daron & Thierry Verdier. 2000. Choice between Market Failures & Corruption. American Economic
          Review 90(1)194-21.
Acharya, Ram. 2008. Private & Social Rates of Returns to R&D In OECD Countries: How Different Are They Across
          Industries? Industry Canada Working Paper 2008-04
Acharya, Viral & Zhaoxia Xu. 2017. Financial dependence & innovation: The case of public versus private firms.
          Journal of Financial Economics 124.2 223-243.
Ades, Alberto & Rafael Di Tella. 1997. National champions & corruption: some unpleasant interventionist
          arithmetic. Economic Journal 107(443)1023-42.
Aghion, P., Askenazy, P., Berman, N., Cette, G., & Eymard, L. 2012. Credit constraints & the cyclicality of R&D
          investment: Evidence from France. Journal of the European Economic Association, 10(5)1001-24.
Aghion, Philippe & Peter Howitt. 1990. A Model of Growth through Creative Destruction. Econometrica 60:323-51.
Ahamed, L. 2009. Lords of Finance: The bankers who broke the world. Random House.
Akcigit, Ufuk & Tom Nicholas. 2019. History, Micro Data & Endogenous Growth. Annual Review of Economics 11
          615-33
Akerlof, George A. & Robert J. Shiller.2010. Animal spirits: How human psychology drives the economy & why it
          matters for global capitalism. Princeton university press.
Ales, Laurence, Soo-Haeng Cho & Ersin Körpeolu. 2017. Optimal award scheme in innovation tournaments."
          Operations Research 65.3 693-702.
Alevy, Jonathan E., Haigh, Michael S., List, John A. 2007. Information Cascades: Evidence from a Field Experiment
          with Financial Market Professionals. Journal of Finance 62(1)151-80
Aliber, Robert Z. & Charles P. Kindleberger. 2017 Manias, panics & crashes: A history of financial crises. Springer
Allen, Franklin & Douglas Gale. 2007. Understanding Financial Crises. Oxford University Press.
Allen, Franklin. 2001. Financial Structure & Financial Crisis. International Review of Finance 2, 1-19
Alvarez, Fernando & Urban J. Jermann. 2004. Using asset prices to measure the cost of business cycles. Journal of
          Political economy 112(6)1223-56.
Amihud, Yakov, Hauser, Shmuel, Kirsh, Amir. 2003. Allocations, Adverse Selection & Cascades in Ipos: Evidence
          from the Tel Aviv Stock Exchange. Journal of Financial Economics 68 1, 137-58
Andreas, Peter. 2013. Smuggler nation: how illicit trade made America. Oxford University Press.
Angeletos, George-Marios & Lorenzoni, Guido & Pavan, Alessandro, Beauty Contests & Irrational Exuberance: A
          Neoclassical Approach (April 2010). NBER Working Paper w15883.
Ashton, Thomas S. 1948. The Industrial Revolution, 1760-1830. Oxford University Press.
Auerswald PE. 2007. The simple economics of technology entrepreneurship: market failure reconsidered. In
          Audretsch D, Grilo I, Thurik A, eds. Handbook of research on entrepreneurship policy. Edward Elgar, 18­35
Baker, Malcolm, Jeremy C. Stein & Jeffrey Wurgler. 2003. When does the market matter? Stock prices & the
          investment of equity-dependent firms. Quarterly Journal of Economics 118.3 969-1005.
Balen, M. 2002. A Very English Deceit: The Secret History of the South Sea Bubble & the First Great Financial
          Scandal. Fourth Estate, London.
Baptist, Edward E. 2014. The Half Has Never Been Told: Slavery & the Making of American Capitalism. Civitas
Barlevy, G. 2004. The cost of business cycles under endogenous growth. American Economic Review 94(4)964-90
Barlevy, Gadi. 2005. The cost of business cycles & the benefits of stabilization. Economic Perspectives-Federal
          Reserve Bank of Chicago 29.1 32.
Barlevy, Gardi. 2005. The cost of business cycles & the benefits of stabilization. Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
          Economic perspectives, 2005 1Q
Barone, Michael. 2007. Our First Revolution: The Remarkable British Uprising That Inspired Americas Founding
          Fathers. Crown Publishers, New York.
Barro, Robert J. 2001. Economic growth in East Asia before & after the financial crisis. NBER w8330.
Barsade, Sigal G.2002. The ripple effect: Emotional contagion & its influence on group behavior. Administrative
          Science Quarterly 47(4)644-75.
Baumol, William & Ralph Gomory. 2004. Global Trade & Conflicting National Interests. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Baumol, William J. 1990. Entrepreneurship: Productive, Unproductive & Destructive." Journal of Political
          Economy 98(5.1)893-921.


                                                        35
Beatty, Warren. 2012. Solar Energy: Popular but Corrupt. American Thinker (on-line edition) March 15, 2012
Bekar, Clifford, Kenneth Carlaw & Richard Lipsey. 2018. General purpose technologies in theory, application &
          controversy: a review. Journal of Evolutionary Economics 28(5)1005-33.
Bernanke, Ben S. 1983. Nonmonetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the Propagation of the Great Depression."
          The American Economic Review 73.3 257-276.
Bernardo, A. & Welch, I., 2001. On the evolution of overconfidence & entrepreneurs. Journal of Economics &
          Management Strategy 10 301­ 30.
Betz, F. 1993. Strategic Technology Management, by Frederick Betz, McGraw Hill, New York
Bikhchandani, Sushil, David Hirshleifer & Ivo Welch. 1998. Learning from the behavior of others: Conformity, fads
          & informational cascades. Journal of economic perspectives 12.3 151-170.
Bikhchandani, Sushil, David Hirshleifer & Ivo Welch. 2005. Information Cascades & Observational Learning. In S. N.
          Durlauf & L. E. Blume, eds. New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, Palgrave Macmillan.
Bissonnette, Zac. 2016. The Great Beanie Baby Bubble: Mass Delusion & the Dark Side of Cute. Portfolio
Blackmore, S. 1999. The Meme Machine. Oxford University Press
Bliss, Michael. 1987. Northern Enterprise.
Bloom, Nicholas, Charles I. Jones, John Van Reenen & Michael Webb. 2020. Are ideas getting harder to find?
          American Economic Review 110(4)1104-44
Bloom, Nick, Mark Schankerman & John Van Reenen. 2006. Technology Spillovers & Product Market Rivalry.
          Discussion Paper no. 675, Centre for Economic Performance, London.
Bloom, N, R Griffith & J Van Reenen. 2002. Do R&D Tax Credits Work? Journal of Public Economics 85:1­31.
Boldrin, M. & D.K. Levine .2002. The Case Against Intellectual Property. American Economic Review 92, 209-212.
Bordo, Michael, Barry Eichengreen, Daniela Klingebiel & Maria Soledad MartinezPeria. 2001. Is the crisis problem
          growing more severe? Economic policy 16(32)32 52-82.
Bosi, Stefano & Ngoc-Sang Pham. 2016. Taxation, bubbles & endogenous growth. Economics Letters 143 73-76.
Boskovi, Branko, David P. Byrne & Arvind Magesan. 2013. Herding Among Bureaucrats. SSRN 2085042
Boyd, John H., Sungkyu Kwak & Bruce Smith. 2005. The real output losses associated with modern banking crises."
          Journal of Money, Credit & Banking 977-999.
Brainard, W & HE Scarf. 2005. How to Compute Equilibrium Prices in 1891 In Robert W. Dimand & John
          Geanakoplos, eds. Celebrating Irving Fisher: The Legacy of a Great Economist. Oxford University Press.
Brander, Jim & Barbara Spencer. 1985. Export Subsidies & International Market Share Rivalry. Journal of
          International Economics 18:83­100.
Bremermann, Hans-Joachim. 1962. Optimization through evolution & recombination In M.C. Yovitts et al., eds.
          Self-Organizing systems. Spartan Books, Washington, D.C. pp. 93­106.
Bresnahan, Timothy F. & Manuel Trajtenberg. 1995. General purpose technologies: Engines of growth? Journal of
          Econometrics 65.1 83-108.
Brown, J R. & BC. Petersen. 2011. Cash holdings & R&D smoothing. Journal of Corporate Finance 17.3 694-709.
Brown, James R., Gustav Martinsson & Bruce C. Petersen. 2012. Do financing constraints matter for R&D?
          European Economic Review 56.8 1512-29.
Brown, JR., G Martinsson & BC. Petersen. 2013. Law, stock markets & innovation. Journal of Finance 68.4 1517-49.
Brown, James R., Gustav Martinsson & Bruce C. Petersen. 2017. What promotes R&D? Comparative evidence from
          around the world. Research Policy 46.2 447-462.
Brown, JR., SM Fazzari & BC Petersen 2012. Do financing constraints matter for R&D? European Economic Review,
          56(8)1512-1529.
Brown, James R., Steven M. Fazzari & Bruce C. Petersen. 2009. Financing innovation & growth: Cash flow, external
          equity & the 1990s R&D boom. Journal of Finance 64.1 151-185.
Brynjolfsson, Eric & Loren Hitt. 2003. Computing Productivity: Firm-Level Evidence. Review of Economics &
          Statistics 793-808.
Buchanan, James & Yong Yoon. 2000. Symmetric Tragedies: Commons & Anticommons. Journal of Law &
          Economics 43(1)1­13
Buchanan, James .M. & Gordon Tullock. 1962. The Calculus of Consent. Ann Arbor:
Caballero, R & A Jaffe. 1993. How High are the Giants Shoulders: An Empirical Assessment of Knowledge Spillovers
          & Creative Destruction in a Model of Economic Growth. NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1993, 15-73.
Caballero, Ricardo J. & Arvind Krishnamurthy. 2006. Bubbles & capital flow volatility: Causes & risk management.

                                                       36
          Journal of monetary Economics 53.1 35-53.
Caballero, Ricardo J., Emmanuel Farhi & Mohamad L. Hammour. 2006. Speculative growth: hints from the US
          economy. American Economic Review 96(4)1159-92.
Cameron, Rondo. 2000. France & the economic development of Europe, 1800-1914: The evolution of international
          business, 1800-1945. New York: Routledge.
Campbell, Gareth. 2012. Myopic rationality in a mania. Explorations in Economic History 49.1 75-91.
Cantner, Uwe & Sarah Koesters. 2011. Picking the winner? Empirical evidence on the targeting of R&D subsidies to
          start-ups. Small Business Economics
Cardwell, D.S.L. 1972. Turning Points in Western Technology. Neale Watson, New York
Carswell, John. 1993. South Sea Bubble. Sutton.
Chancellor, Edward. 1999. Devil Take the Hindmost: A History of Financial Speculation. Farrar, Straus, Giroux, NY.
Chun, Hyunbae, Jung-Wook Kim & Randall Morck. 2011. Varying heterogeneity among US firms: facts &
          implications. Review of economics & statistics 93.3.1034-52.
Chun, Hyunbae, Jung-Wook Kim & Randall Morck. 2016. Productivity growth & stock returns: firm-and aggregate-
          level analyses. Applied Economics 48.38.3644-64.
Chun, Hyunbae, Jung-Wook Kim, Randall Morck & Bernard Yeung. 2008. Creative destruction & firm-specific
          performance heterogeneity. Journal of Financial Economics 89(1)09-35.
Coddington, A. 1976. Keynesian Economics: The Search for First Principles. Journal of Economic Literature 14,
          1263-67
Cole, James. 1720. The Bubblers Bubbld, or, the Devil Take the Hindmost. London & Westminster: London
Coury, T & E Sciubba. 2012. Belief heterogeneity & survival in incomplete markets. Economic Theory 49(1)37-58.
Czarnitzki, D., & Fier, A. 2001. Do R&D subsidies matter? Evidence for the German Service Sector. ZEW Discussion
          Paper 01-19.
Dagher, Jihad. 2018. Regulatory Cycles: Revisiting the Political Economy of Financial Crises. IMF
Davenant, Charles. 1701. The True picture of a Modern Whig.
Davids, Karel. "The Longitude Committee & the Practice of Navigation in the Netherlands, c. 1750­1850."
          Navigational Enterprises in Europe & its Empires, 1730­1850. Palgrave Macmillan, London, 2015. 32-46.
Davis, Lance E., Lance Edwin Davis, Robert A. Huttenback & Susan G. Davis.1986. Mammon & the pursuit of
          Empire: The political economy of British imperialism, 1860-1912. Cambridge University Press
De Fontenay, Catherine C. 2004. The dual role of market power in the Big Push: from evidence to theory. Journal of
          Development Economics 75(1)221-38.
De la Vega, José. 1688. Confusion de Confusiones Antwerp: Digitale Bibliotheek voor de Nederlandse Letterenen
De Long, B., A. Shleifer, L. Summers, R. Waldman. 1990. Noise trader risk in financial markets. Journal of Political
          Economy 98 703­738.
De Long, B., A. Shleifer, L. Summers, R. Waldman. 1991. The survival of noise traders in financial markets. Journal
          of Business 64 1­19
De Soto, Hernando.1989. The other path: The invisible revolution in the third world. New York: Harper,
Demirguc-Kunt, Asli & Ross Levine. 2018. Finance & growth. Edward Elgar
Demirguc-Kunt, Asli, Enrica Detragiache & Poonam Gupta 2006. Inside the Crisis: An Empirical Analysis of Banking
          Systems in Distress. Journal of International Money & Finance 25(5)702-18
Diamond, Douglas W. & Philip H. Dybvig. 1983. Bank runs, deposit insurance & liquidity." Journal of political
          economy 91.3 401-419.
Diamond, Jared M. 1997. Guns, Germs & Steel: The Fates of Human Societies. Norton: New York.
Dilley, Andrew. 2011. Finance, politics & imperialism: Australia, Canada & the city of London, c. 1896-1914.
          Springer
Drahos, Peter. 2003. Global Law Reform & Rent-Seeking: The Case of Intellectual Property. Australian Journal of
          Corporate Law 7 1-17.
Easterly, William. 2006. The Big Push Deja Vu: A Review of Jeffrey Sachs "The End of Poverty: Economic Possibilities
          for Our Time." Journal of Economic Literature 44(1)1-105
Easterly, William. 2006. The White Mans Burden: Why the Wests Efforts to Aid the Rest Have Done So Much Ill &
          So Little Good. Penguin
Easterly, William. 2009. Can the West Save Africa? Journal of Economic Literature 47(2)373-447
Eatwell, John. 2004. Useful bubbles. Contributions to Political Economy 23.1.35-47.

                                                        37
Edgerton, David. 2004. The linear model did not exist: Reflections on the history & historiography of science &
          research in industry in the 20th century. The science-industry nexus: History, policy, implications 31-57.
Eichengreen, BJ. 1995. Golden fetters: the gold standard & the Great Depression, 1919-1939. U of Chicago Press.
Elhanan Helpman. 1998. General purpose technologies & economic growth. MIT Press,
Eltis, David & Stanley L. Engerman. 2000. The importance of slavery & the slave trade to industrializing Britain."
          Journal of Economic History 123-144.
Engerman, Stanley L. 1972. The slave trade & British capital formation in the eighteenth century: A comment on
          the Williams thesis. Business History Review 430-443.
Engerman, Stanley L. & Kenneth L. Sokoloff. 2012. Economic development in the Americas since 1500:
          endowments & institutions. Cambridge University Press
Farhi, Emmanuel & Jean Tirole. 2009. Leverage & the central bankers put. American Economic Review 99(2)589-93
Farhi, Emmanuel & Jean Tirole. 2012. Bubbly liquidity. Review of Economic Studies 79.2 678-706.
Fazio, Catherine, Jorge Guzman & Scott Stern. 2019. The impact of state-level R&D tax credits on the quantity &
          quality of entrepreneurship. No. w26099. National Bureau of Economic Research .
Fazzari, Steven M & R. Glenn Hubbard. 1988. Financing Constraints & Corporate Investment. Brookings Papers on
          Economic Activity 1 141-95
Field, A. 2003. The Most Technologically Progressive Decade of the Century. American Economic Review
          93(4)1399-414
Field, Alexander. 2011. A great leap forward: 1930s depression & U.S. economic growth. Yale University Press,
Fischer, Claude S. 1994. America calling: A social history of the telephone to 1940. Univ of California Press
Foreman-Peck, James. 2003. The Rise & Fall of State-Owned Enterprise in the Western World. Journal of Economic
          Literature 41 (3):931-932.
Frantzen, Dirk. 2002. Intersectoral & International R&D Knowledge Spillovers & Total Factor Productivity. Scottish
          Journal of Political Economy (3)531-545.
Fraumeni, Barbara & Okubo, Sumiye. 2005. R&D in the National Income & Product Accounts: A First Look at its
          Effect on GNP. In Corrado, Carol, Haltiwanger, John & Sichel, Daniel, eds. Measuring Capital in the New
          Economy, 275-316. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Frehen, Rik GP, William N. Goetzmann & K. Geert Rouwenhorst. 2013. New evidence on the first financial bubble.
          Journal of Financial Economics 108(3)585-607.
Frentrop, Paul. A History of Corporate Governance, 1602-2002
Friedman, Joseph & Jonathan Silberman. 2003. University technology transfer: do incentives, management &
          location matter? Journal of technology transfer 28.1 17-30.
Friedman, Milton & Anna J. Schwartz. 1963. A Monetary History of the United States, 1867 ­1960. NBER
Friedman, Milton. 1953. The Methodology of Positive Economics. Essays in Positive Economics.
Fritsch M. 2008. How does new business formation affect regional development? Introduction to the special issue.
          Small Bus Econ 30:1­14
Fullerton, Richard L. & R. Preston McAfee.1999. Auction in entry into tournaments. Journal of Political Economy
          107.3 573-605.
Fung, M. 2004. Technological Opportunity & Productivity of R&D Activities. Journal of Productivity Analysis 167-81
Galor, O. & Michalopoulos, S. 2012. Evolution & the Growth Process: Natural Selection of Entrepreneurial Traits.
          Journal of Economic Theory, 147:759­780.
Garber, Peter M. 1980. Famous first bubbles: The fundamentals of early mania. Cambridge, Ma: MIT Press, 1st ed.
Garber, Peter M. 1990. Famous first bubbles. Journal of Economic perspectives 4.2 35-54.
Geanakoplos, J. 2010. The leverage cycle. NBER Macroeconomics Annual 24 (1):1­66.
Gibson, Robert M. & Jacob Hoglund, 1992. Copying & Sexual Selection. TREE 7-7, 229-232.
Gilbert, Richard & Carl Shapiro. 1990. Optimal patent length & breadth. Rand Journal of Economics 21:106-12.
Goldfarb, B & DA. Kirsch. 2019. Bubbles & crashes: The boom & bust of technological innovation. Stanford U Press.
Goldgar, Anne. 2008. Tulipmania: money, honor & knowledge in the Dutch Golden Age. University of Chicago Press
Gomory, Ralph & William J. Baumol. 2009. Globalization: Country & company interests in conflict
Gompers, Paul A. & Joshua Lerner. 1999. The venture capital cycle. Cambridge Mass.: MIT Press.
Goolsbee, Austan. 1998. Does Government R&D Policy Mainly Benefit Scientists & Engineers? American Economic
          Review Papers & Proceedings 88(May)298­302.
Gordon, Robert J. 2016. The Rise & Fall of American Growth: The U.S. Standard of Living since the Civil War.

                                                        38
          Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Griliches, Zvi. 1992. Search for R&D Spillovers. Scandinavian Journal of Economics 94(S)29-47.
Griliches, Zvi. 1998. R&D & Productivity: The Econometric Evidence. University of Chicago Press.
Griliches, Zvi. 2000. R&D, Education & Productivity: A Retrospective. Harvard University Press
Gross, Daniel P. Daniel P. & Bhaven N. Sampat. 2020. Inventing the Endless Frontier: The Effects of the World War
          II Research Effort on Post-war Innovation. NBER wp
Gross, Daniel. 2007. Pop! Why Bubbles Are Great for the Economy. Collins.
Grossman, J. & N. Yanagawa. 1993. Asset Bubbles & Endogenous growth. Journal of Monetary Economics 31, 3-19.
Grossman, Sanford J. & Joseph E. Stiglitz. 1980. On the impossibility of informationally efficient markets. American
          economic review 70.3 393-408.
Hall, Bronwyn H., Christian Helmers & Georg Von Graevenitz. 2015. Technology entry in the presence of patent
          thickets. No. w21455. National Bureau of Economic Research
Hall, Bronwyn, Adam Jaffe & Manuel Trajtenberg. 2005. Market Value & Patent Citations. Rand Journal of
          Economics 16-38.
Hall, Bronwyn, Jacques Mairesse & Pierre Mohnen 2010. Measuring the returns to R&D. In B. H. Hall & N.
          Rosenberg eds. Elsevier Handbook of the Economics of Innovation. Elsevier.
Harford, Jarrad. 2005. What drives merger waves? Journal of financial economics 77.3 529-560.
Harris, JR.2017. Industrial Espionage & Technology Transfer: Britain & France in the 18th Century. Taylor & Francis
Harris, R. 1994. The Bubble Act: Its Passage & Its Effects on Business Organization. Journal of Economic History
          54(3)610­27.
Harrison, J.M. & D.M. Kreps. 1978. Speculative investor behavior in a stock market with heterogeneous
          expectations. Quarterly Journal of Economics 92 (2):323 ­336. 3
Hart, D. M. 2003. Knowledge, power & entrepreneurs: A first pass at the politics of entrepreneurship policy. In D.
          M. Hart , ed. The emergence of entrepreneurship policy: governance, start-ups & growth in the U.S.
          knowledge economy.227­239. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Hayek, F. 1931. Prices & Production.
Hayek, Friedrich August. 1988. The Fatal Conceit: The Errors of Socialism. Routledge.
Heller, Michael & Rebecca Eisenberg. 1998. Can Patents Deter Innovation? The Anticommons in Biomedical
          Research. Science 280 (5364)698­701.
Heller, Michael. 1998. The Tragedy of the Anticommons. Harvard Law Review.
Heller, Michael. 2008. The Gridlock Economy: How Too Much Ownership Wrecks Markets, Stops Innovation &
          Costs Lives. Basic Books.
Henkel, J. & Stephen Maurer. 2010. Network Effects in Biology R&D. American Economic Review 100:159-64
Hillebrand, Marten, Tomoo Kikuchi & Masaya Sakuragawa. 2018. Bubbles & crowding-in of capital via a savings
          glut. Macroeconomic Dynamics 22.5 1238-1266.
Hirano, Tomohiro & Noriyuki Yanagawa. 2016. Asset bubbles, endogenous growth & financial frictions. Review of
          Economic Studies 84.1 406-443.
Hirshleifer, D., A. Subrahmanyam, S. Titman. 2006. Feedback & the success of irrational investors. Journal of
          Financial Economics 81 311­338.
Hirshleifer, David & Siew Hong Teoh. 2003. Herd behaviour & cascading in capital markets: A review & synthesis.
          European Financial Management 9.1 25-66.
Hoggarth, Glenn, Ricardo Reis & Victoria Saporta. 2002. Costs of banking system instability: some empirical
          evidence. Journal of Banking & Finance 26.5 825-855.
Hong, H. & J.C. Stein. 2007. Disagreement & the stock market. Journal of Economic Perspectives 21 (2):109 ­128.
Hong, H., J. Scheinkman & W. Xiong. 2006. Asset float & speculative bubbles. Journal of Finance 61 (3):1073 ­1117.
Hong, H., J. Scheinkman & W. Xiong. 2008. Advisors & asset prices: A model of the origins of bubbles. Journal of
          Financial Economics 89 (2):268­287.
Horgan, John. 1996. The End of Science: Facing the Limits of Knowledge in the Twilight of the Scientific Age.
Howard, J. H. 1982. Darwin Oxford: Oxford University Press
Hsu, Po-Hsuan, Xuan Tian & Yan Xu. 2014. Financial development & innovation: Cross-country evidence. Journal of
          Financial Economics 112.1 116-135.
Hung, A. & C. R. Plott 2001. ìInformation Cascades: Replication & an Extension to Majority Rule & conformity-
          Rewarding Institutions. American Economic Review 91(5)1508-152

                                                        39
Hutchison, Michael M. & Ilan Noy. 2005. How bad are twins? Output costs of currency & banking crises.Journal of
          Money, credit & Banking 725-752.
Imrohoroglu, Ayse. 2008. Welfare costs of business cycles. New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics
Ioannidis, John PA, Sander Greenland, Mark A. Hlatky, Muin J. Khoury, Malcolm R. Macleod, David Moher, Kenneth
          F. Schulz & Robert Tibshirani. 2014. Increasing value & reducing waste in research design, conduct &
          analysis. Lancet 383(9912)166-175.
Ioannidis, John PA. 2005. Why most published research findings are false. PLoS medicine 2.8 e124.
Irwin, Douglas A. 2017. Peddling protectionism: Smoot-Hawley & the great depression. Princeton University Press
Jaffe, AB. & J Lerner. 2011. Innovation & its discontents: How our broken patent system is endangering innovation
          & progress & what to do about it. Princeton University Press
Jaffe, AB. 1989. Real effects of academic research. American economic review 79(5)957-970.
Jaffe, AB. 1986. Technological Opportunity & Spillovers of R&D: Evidence from Firms Patents, Profits & Market
          Value. American Economic Review 76(5)984-1001.
Jalili, Mahdi & Matjaz Perc. 2017. Information cascades in complex networks. Journ al of Complex Networks 5.5
          665-93
Janeway, WH. 2012. Doing capitalism in the innovation economy: Reconfiguring the three-player game between
          markets, speculators & the state. Cambridge University Press.
Jared, Diamond. 1997. Guns, germs & steel: the fates of human societies. NY: Norton
John Horgan. 1996. The End of Science: Facing the Limits of Knowledge in the Twilight of the Scientific Age.
          Addison-Wesley
Jones, Chad & John Williams. 1998. Measuring the Social Rate of Return to R&D. Quarterly Journal of Economics
          113(4)119­35.
Jones, Steven E. Against technology: From the Luddites to neo-Luddism. Routledge, 2013.
Jovanovic, Boyan & Peter L. Rousseau. 2005. General Purpose Technologies. In Aghion Philippe & N. Durlauf
          Steven, eds. Handbook of Economic Growth ch. 18, pp. 1181-1224. Elsevier
Juma, Calestous. Innovation & its enemies: Why people resist new technologies. Oxford University Press, 2016.
Kahneman, Daniel. 2003. Maps of bounded rationality: psychology for behavioral economics. American Economic
          Review 93 (5) 1449­75
Kahneman, Daniel. 2011. Thinking, fast & slow. Farrar, Straus & Giroux.
Kaminsky, G.L., C.M. 1999. Reinhart The twin crises: The cause of banking & balance of payment problems.
          American Economic Review, 89 473-500
Kaplan, Steve. 2002. Valuation and New Economy Firms. University of Chicago GSB manuscript
Katz, Michael L. & Carl Shapiro. 1985. Network externalities, competition & compatibility. American economic
          review 75.3 424-440.
Keller, Wolfgang. 2002a. Trade & the Transmission of Technology. Journal of Economic Growth 7(1)5-24.
Keller, Wolfgang. 2002b. Geographic Localization of International Technology Diffusion. American Economic
          Review 92(1)120-42.
Keller, Wolfgang. 2004. International Technology Diffusion. Journal of Economic Literature 42,752-782.
Kerr, William R., Ramana Nanda & Matthew Rhodes-Kropf. 2014. Entrepreneurship as experimentation." Journal of
          Economic Perspectives 28.3 25-48.
Keynes JM. 1936. The General Theory of Employment, Interest & Money. London,: Macmillan & co., limited.
Kikuchi, Tomoo & Athakrit Thepmongkol. 2020. Capital Bubbles, Interest Rates & Investment in a Small Open
          Economy." Journal of Money, Credit & Banking
Kindleberger, Charles & Robert Aliber. 2005. Manias, Panics & Crashes a History of Financial Crises. Palgrave
          Macmillan: Basingstoke.
Kindleberger, Charles. 1978. Manias, Panics & Crashes a History of Financial Crises.
King, M & J Kay. 2020. Radical Uncertainty. Norton.
King Robert G. &Levine Ross. 1993. Finance & Growth: Schumpeter Might Be Right. Quarterly Journal of Economics
          108(3)717-37
Frank H. Knight, 1921. Risk, Uncertainty and Profit. New York, Houghton
Kogan, L., S. Ross, J. Wang, M. Westerfield. 2006. The price impact & survival of irrational traders. Journal of
          Finance 61 195­229.
Kremer, Michael. 1998. Patent buyouts: A mechanism for encouraging innovation. Quarterly Journal of Economics

                                                       40
          113.4 1137-1167.
Kroszner, Randall S. & Philip E. Strahan. 2014. Regulation & deregulation of the US banking industry: causes,
          consequences & implications for the future. Economic regulation & its reform: what have we learned?
          University of Chicago Press, 485-543.
Kroszner, Randall, Luc Laeven & Daniela Klingebield. 2007. Banking crises, financial dependence & growth. Journal
          of financial Economics 84 (1)187-228
Krueger AO. 1974. The Political Economy of the Rent-Seeking Society. American Economic Review 64(3)291-303
Krueger, AO. 1990. Government Failures in Development. Journal of Economic Perspectives 4 (3)9.
Krugman, P. 1994a. Competitiveness: a dangerous obsession. Foreign Affairs 73 29­44.
Krugman, P. 1994b. Proving my point. Foreign Affairs 73 198­203.
Kunieda, Takuma & Akihisa Shibata. 2016. Asset bubbles, economic growth & a self-fulfilling financial crisis."
          Journal of Monetary Economics 82 70-84.
Kwak, James. 2017. Economism: bad economics & the rise of inequality. Pantheon
Kyle, A., A. Wang. 1997. Speculation duopoly with agreement to disagree: Can overconfidence survive the market
          test? Journal of Finance 52 2073­90
Lach, Saul & Mark Schankerman. 2004. Royalty sharing & technology licensing in universities. Journal of the
          European Economic Association 2.2-3 252-264.
Lach, Saul. 2002. Do R&D subsidies stimulate or displace private R&D? Evidence from Israel. Journal of industrial
          economics 50(4)369-90.
Laeven, Luc. 2011. Banking crises: A review. Annual. Review of Financial. Economics 33(1)17-40
Lal, Deepak. 1985. The poverty of development economics. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press
Landes, David. 1998. The Wealth & Poverty of Nations London: Abacus
Lansing, Kevin J. 2012. Speculative growth, overreaction & the welfare cost of technology-driven bubbles. Journal
          of Economic Behavior & Organization 83.3 461-483.
Lansing, Kevin. 2009. Speculative bubbles & overreaction to technological innovation. Journal of Financial
          Transformation 26 51-54.
Le Roy, Stephen F. 2004. Rational exuberance. Journal of Economic literature 42.3 783-804.
Lenin, Vladimir. 1916. Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism. Marxist Internet Archive.
Lents, Nathan H. Human errors: A panorama of our glitches, from pointless bones to broken genes. Houghton
          Mifflin Harcourt, 2018.
Levy-Eichel, Mordechai. 2015. Into the Mathematical Ocean: Navigation, Education & the Expansion of Numeracy
          in Early Modern England & the Atlantic World. Yale University press
Liebowitz, Stan J. & Stephen E. Margolis. 1994. Network externality: An uncommon tragedy. Journal of economic
          perspectives 8(2)133-50.
Lim Hwanyuck & Randall Moeck. 2021. The long Shadow of the big Push. Unpublished manuscript
Link, Albert N., Donald S. Siegel & Donald Siegel.2007. Innovation, entrepreneurship & technological change.
          Oxford University Press on Demand
Lipsey, Richard; Bekar, Cliff & Carlaw, Ken. 1998. General Purpose Technologies: What Requires Explanation? In
          Elhanan Helpman, ed., General purpose technologies & economic growth. MIT Press.
Lo, Andrew W. 2004. The adaptive markets hypothesis. Journal of Portfolio Management 30.5 15-29.
ubos, Pástor & Pietro Veronesi. 2009. Technological Revolutions & Stock Prices. American Ec onomic Review
          99(4)1451-83
Lucas, Robert E., Jr. 1987. Models of Business Cycles. New York: Blackwell.
Mackay, Charles. 1841. Extraordinary popular delusions & the madness of crowds 1st ed. London: Richard Bentley.
Mackay, Charles. 1852. Memoirs of extraordinary popular delusions & the madness of crowds 2nd ed. London:
          Office of the National Illustrated Library.
Madsen, Jakob B. 2001. Trade barriers & the collapse of world trade during the Great Depression." Southern
          Economic Journal 848-868.
Maksimovic, Vojislav, Gordon Phillips & Liu Yang. 2013. Private & public merger waves. Journal of Finance
          68(5)2177-17
Manley, Brian. 1997. What is physics for? Physics World 10.6 15.
Mansfield, Edwin. 1985. How Rapidly Does New Industrial Technology Leak Out? Journal of Industrial Economics
          217-23

                                                       41
Manso, Gustavo. "Experimentation & the Returns to Entrepreneurship." The Review of Financial Studies 29.9
          (2016): 2319-2340.
Martin, Alberto & Jaume Ventura. 2010. Economic Growth with Bubbles. American Economic Review 102(3)95-100
Martin, Alberto & Jaume Ventura.2016. Managing credit bubbles. Journal of the European Economic Association
          14(3)753-89
Maurer Stephen M. 2017. Intellectual Property Incentives: Economics & Policy Implications In Oxford Handbook of
          Intellectual Property Law, ed. RPJ Dreyfuss: Oxford University Press iew 64(3)291-303
Maurer, Stephen & Susanne Scotchmer. 2002. The Independent Invention Defense in Intellectual Property.
          Economica 69:535.
Maurer, Stephen. 2012. The Penguin & the Cartel: Rethinking Antitrust & Innovation Policy for the Age of
          Commercial Open Source. Utah Law Review forthcoming.
Maynard, John. 1919. The economic consequences of the peace. Macmillan
Mazur, A.. 1975. Opposition to technological innovation. Minerva, 13(1), 58-81.
McGinnis, By Patrick J. 2020. Fear of Missing Out: Practical Decision-Making in a World of Overwhelming Choice
McLuhan, Marshal. 1964 The Medium is the Message. Mentor Books, New York.
Megginson, William L. & Jeffry M. Netter. 2001. From state to market: A survey of empirical studies on
          privatization. Journal of Economic Literature 39 (2):321-389.
Menell, Peter & Suzanne Scotchmer. 2007. Intellectual Property. In Mitch Polinsky & Steven Shavell, eds.
          Handbook of Law & Economics. Amsterdam: Elsevier
Menell, Peter. 2011. Forty Years of Wondering in the Wilderness & No Closer to the Promised Land: Bilskis
          Superficial Textualism & the Missed Opportunity to Return Patent Law to its Technology Mooring.
          Stanford Law Review 63, 1289.
Miao, Jianjun & Pengfei Wang. 2014. Sectoral bubbles, misallocation & endogenous growth. Journal of
          Mathematical Economics 53, 153-163.
Miao, Jianjun & Pengfei Wang. 2018. Asset bubbles & credit constraints. American Economic Review 108.9 2590-
          628.
Miao, Jianjun, Pengfei Wang & Jing Zhou. 2015. Asset bubbles, collateral & policy analysis. Journal of Monetary
          Economics 76 S57-S70.
Milionis, Petros & Tamás Vonyó. Reconstruction Dynamics: The Impact of World War II on Post% War Economic
          Growth. American Economic Association: 2016 Annual Conference. 2015.
Mill, John Stewart. 1848. Principles of Political Economy.
Minsky, Hyman P. 1986. Stabilizing an Unstable Economy. Yale University Press, New Haven.
Moeller, Sara B., Frederik P. Schlingemann & René M. Stulz. 2005. Wealth destruction on a massive scale? A study
          of acquiringfirm returns in the recent merger wave. Journal of finance 60(2)757-782.
Mokyr, Joel. 2018. The past & the future of innovation: some lessons from economic history. Explorations in
          Economic History 69:13­26
Mokyr, Joel. 1990. The lever of riches: technological creativity & economic progress. Oxford University Press,
Mokyr, Joel. 1992a. Technological inertia in economic history, Journal of Economic History 52, 2, 325-338.
Mokyr, Joel. 1994. Cardwells Law & the political economy of technological progress. Research Policy, 23(5), 561-74
Mokyr, Joel. 2000. Innovation & its enemies: the economic & political roots of technological inertia. A Not-So-
          Dismal Science: A Broader View of Economics, pp. 61-91.
Mokyr, Joel. 1992b, Is economic change optimal? Australian Economic History Review, XxX11, 1, 3-23.
Morck R, Shleifer A & Vishny RW. 1990. The Stock Market & Investment: Is the Market a Sideshow? ; Comments &
          Discussion. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1(2)
Morck, Randall & Masao Nakamura. 2005. A frog in a well knows nothing of the ocean: A history of corporate
          ownership in Japan. In Randall Morck, ed. A history of corporate governance around the world. University
          of Chicago Press, 367-466.
Morck, Randall & Masao Nakamura. 2018. Japans ultimately unaccursed natural resources-financed
          industrialization. Journal of the Japanese & International Economies 47 32-54.
Moser, Petra & Tom Nicholas. 2004. Was electricity a general purpose technology? Evidence from historical patent
          citations. American Economic Review 94.2 388-394.
Mowery, David C., Bhaven N. Sampat & Arvids A. Ziedonis. 2002. Learning to patent: Institutional experience,
          learning & the characteristics of US university patents after the Bayh-Dole Act, 1981-1992. Management

                                                       42
          Science 48(1)73-89.
Murphy, Antoin E. 1997. John Law: Economic Theorist & Policy-Maker. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Myrdal, Gunnar. 1929. The Political Element in the Development of Economic Theory. Trans. Paul Streeten
          (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1954)
Nadiri, Ishaq. 1993. Innovations & Technological Spillovers. NBER Working Paper 4423
Nanda, Ramana & Tom Nicholas. 2014. Did bank distress stifle innovation during the Great Depression? . Journal of
          Financial Economics 114.2 273-292.
Nanda, Ramana & Matthew Rhodes-Kropf. 2013. Investment cycles & startup innovation. Journal of Financial
          Economics 110.2 403-418.
Nanda, Ramana & Matthew Rhodes-Kropf. 2017. Financing risk & innovation. Management Science 63.4 901-918.
Neal, Lary 1996. In E. N. White ed. Stock Market Crashes & Speculative Manias Brookfield VT
Needham, Joseph. 2004. Science & Civilisation in China. 7 part 2. Cambridge University Press
Nelson, R. & Winter, GS. 1982. An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change. Harvard University Press.
Nicholas, Tom & Anna Scherbina. 2013. Real Estate Prices During the Roaring Twenties & the Great Depression.
          Real Estate Economics 41(2)278­309.
Nicholas, Tom. 2003. Why Schumpeter was Right: Innovation, Market Power & Creative Destruction in 1920s
          America. Journal of Economic History, December 2003, 63(4)1023 ­58.
Nicholas, Tom. 2007. Stock market swings & the value of innovation, 1908-1929." Financing of Innovation in the
          United States 1870 to the Present 217-45.
Nicholas, Tom. 2008. Does innovation cause stock market runups? Evidence from the great crash. American
          Economic Review 98.4 1370-96.
Nicholas, Tom. 2010. The Role of Independent Invention in U.S. Technological Development, 1880-1930. Journal of
          Economic History 70(1)
Nicholas, Tom. 2014. Are Patents Creative or Destructive? Antitrust Law Journal 79(2)405­21.
OECD. 2003. Sources of Economic Growth in OECD Countries. OECD: Paris
Ofek, E. & M. Richardson. 2003. Dotcom mania: The rise & fall of internet stock prices. Journal of Finance
          58(3)1113­38
Ohlin, Bertil. 1933. Interregional & International Trade
Olivier, Jacques. 2000. Growth-enhancing bubbles. International Economic Review 41, 133-151.
Ollivaud, Patrice & David Turner. 2014. The effect of the global financial crisis on OECD potential output. OECD:
          Paris.
Olson, M. 1982. The Rise & Decline of Nations: Economic Growth, Stagflation & Social Rigidities. Yale U Press.
ORourke, Kevin H. 2009. Politics & trade: lessons from past globalisations. Bruegel.
Osullivan, Mary. 2007. The Expansion of the US Stock Market, 1885--1930: Historical Facts & Theoretical Fashions.
          Enterprise & Society 489-542.
Parker SC. 2002. Do banks ration credit to new enterprises? & should government intervene? Scottish Journal of
          Political Economy 49:162­195
Parker SC. 2007. Policymakers beware! In: Grilo, Thurik ed. Handbook of research on entrepreneurship policy, Max
          Planck Institute of Economics. Elgar, Cheltenham, pp 54­63
Pástor, ubos & Pietro Veronesi. 2009. Technological revolutions & stock prices. American Economic Review
          99(4)1451-83.
Perez, Carlota. 2002. Technological Revolutions & Financial Capital: The Dynamics of Bubbles & Golden Ages.
          Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Perkins, Dwight. 2013. East Asian Development. Harvard University Press
Phillips GM & Zhdanov A. 2013. R&D & the Incentives from Merger & Acquisition Activity. Review of Financial
          Studies 26(1)34
Phillips, Gordon M. & Alexei Zhdanov. 2013. R&D & the Incentives from Merger & Acquisition Activity. The Review
          of Financial Studies 2691)34-78.
Pigou, Arthur C. 1920. Economics of Welfare. Macmillan & Co.
Pigou, Arthur C. 1949. Study in public finance.
Polk, Christopher & Paola Sapienza. 2008. The stock market & corporate investment: A test of catering theory.
          Review of Financial Studies 22.1 187-217.
Rajan, Raghuram G. & Luigi Zingales. 2003. The great reversals: the politics of financial development in the 20 th

                                                       43
          century. Journal of financial economics 69.1 (5-50.
Rajan, Raghuram. 2009. Rent Preservation & the Persistence of Underdevelopment. American Economic Journal:
          Macroeconomics 1(1)178-218
Ramey, Valerie A. 2020. Secular Stagnation or Technological Lull? Journal of Policy Modeling
Reinhart, Carmen & Kenneth Rogoff. 2009. This Time Is Different. Princeton University Press.
RhodesKropf M &Viswanathan S. 2004. Market Valuation & Merger Waves. Journal of Finance 59(6)2685-718
Rhodes­Kropf M, Robinson DT &Viswanathan S. 2005. Valuation Waves & Merger Activity: The Empirical Evidence.
          Journal of Financial Economics 77(3)561-603
Rhodes­Kropf, Matthew, David T. Robinson & Sean Viswanathan. 2005. Valuation waves & merger activity: The
          empirical evidence. Journal of Financial Economics 77(3)561-603.
Ridley, Matthew. 2020. How Innovation Works & Why It Flourishes in Freedom. Harper.
Rock, David. 2009. Politics in Argentina, 1890-1930: The Rise & Fall of Radicalism. Cambridge University Press
Rodrik, Dani. 1996. Coordination Failures & Government Policy: A Model with Applications to East Asia & Eastern
          Europe. Journal of International Economics 40: 1­22
Romer, Paul. 1986. Increasing returns & long-run growth. Journal of political economy, 94(5)002-37.
Romer, Paul. 1990. Endogenous Technical Change. Journal of Political Economy 98(S)71­102.
Rosenberg, N & LE Birdzell. 1986. How the West grew rich: the economic transformation of the industrial world.
          Basic
Rosenstein-Rodan, P. 1943. Problems of Industrialisation of Eastern & South-Eastern Europe. Economic Journal 53,
          202-11.
Sachs, Jeffery & Andrew M. Warner. 2001. Natural Resources & Economic Development: The curse of natural
          resources. European Economic Review 45, 827-83.
Sachs, Jeffrey. 2005. The End of Poverty: Economic Possibilities for Our Time. Penguin Press: New York.
Saint Paul, G. 1992. Fiscal Policy in an Endogenous Growth Model, Quarterly Journal of Economics 107, 1243-60.
Santarelli E, Vivarelli M. 2007. Entrepreneurship & the process of firms' entry, survival & growth. Industrial
          Corporate Change 16(3)455­88.
Santos, M.S. & M. Woodford. 1997. Rational asset pricing bubbles. Econometrica 19 ­57.
Saperstein, Lanier. 1997. Copyrights, Criminal Sanctions & Economic Rents: Applying the Rent Seeking Model to the
          Criminal Law Formulation Process. Journal of Criminal Law & Criminology 87(4)1470-1510.
Scheinkman, Jose A. 2014. Speculation, Trading & Bubbles, Columbia University Press
Scheinkman, Jose.A. & W. Xiong. 2003. Overconfidence & Speculative Bubbles. Journal of Political Economy 111(6).
Scherer, Frederic. 1999. New Perspectives on Economic Growth & Technological Innovation, Brookings Institution
          Press: Washington.
Schumpeter, J. 1939. Business Cycles
Scotchmer, S. 1991. Standing on the shoulders of giants: cumulative research & the patent law. Journal of
          economic perspectives 5.1 29-41.
Shiller, Robert J. 2000. Irrational Exuberance. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Shiller, Robert. 2012. Finance & the good society. Princeton University Press
Shin, Jong Kook & Chetan Subramanian. 2019. Asset Price Bubbles & Technological Innovation. Economic Inquiry
          57(1)482-97
Shleifer, Andrei. 1998. State versus private ownership. Journal of Economic Perspectives 12 (4):133-150.
Simon, Herbert A. 1982). Models of bounded rationality. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Simon, Herbert A. 1957. A Behavioral Model of Rational Choice, in Models of Man. New York: Wiley.
Singh, Tarlok. 2010. Does international trade cause economic growth? A survey. World Economy 33(11)1517-64.
Smith Adam. 1776. An Inquiry into the Nature & Causes of the Wealth of Nations. London, Kelley.
Smith Adam. 1759. The Theory of Moral Sentiments. London,: A. Millar.
Sokal, Alan & Jean Bricmont. 1999. Fashionable nonsense: Postmodern intellectuals abuse of science.
Solow, R. 1955. The Production Function & the Theory of Capital. Review of Economic Studies 103­107.
Solow, R. 1957. Technical change & the aggregate production function. Review of Economics & Statistics.
          39(3)312­20.
Sorescu, A., Sorescu, S. M., Armstrong, W. J., & Devoldere, B. 2018. Two centuries of innovations & stock market
          bubbles. Marketing Science, 37(4), 507-529.
Standage, Tom. 1998. The Victorian Internet: The Remarkable Story of the Telegraph & the 19 th Centurys on-Line

                                                       44
           Pioneers. Walker: New York.
Stigler, George. 1971. The theory of economic regulation. Bell Journal of Economics & Management Science 2:3-21.
Strevens, Michael. 2013. Herding & the quest for credit. Journal of Economic Methodology 209(1)19-34.
Sveikauskas, L. 2007. R&D & Productivity Growth: A Review of the Literature. U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics wp
           408.
Swade, Dorothy. 2000. The Phillips Machine & the history of computing. In Robert Leeson, ed. A. W. H. Phillips:
           Collected Works in Contemporary Perspective, 120-126. Cambridge University Press.
Sweeny, A. 2009. BlackBerry planet: the story of research in motion & the little device that took the world by
           storm. Wiley.
Takao, K. 2017. Asset bubbles & economic growth under endogenous market structure. Macroeconomic Dynamics
           1­22.
Tanaka, Jumpei. 1991. Social Welfare Analysis of the Stock Price Bubble  46(3)4
Tanzi, Vito. 2007. Argentina: An Economic Chronicle. How One of the Richest Countries in the World Lost Its
           Wealth
Terwiesch, Christian & Yi Xu. "Innovation contests, open innovation & multiagent problem solving." Management
           science 54.9 (2008): 1529-1543.
Tirole, J, 1985.Asset Bubbles & Overlapping Generations. Econometrica 53 1499-1528
Trajtenberg, Manuel. 2018. AI as the next GPT: a Political-Economy Perspective. NBER w24245.
Trotter, Wilfred. 1916. Instincts of the Herd in War & Peace. London: Scientific Book Club
Ventura, Jaume. 2012. Bubbles & capital flows. Journal of Economic Theory 147(2)738-58.
Verspagen, Bart. 1997a. Measuring Intersectoral Technology Spillovers: Estimates from the European & US Patent
           Office Databases. Economic Systems Research 47-65.
Verspagen, Bart. 1997b. Estimating International Technology Spillovers Using Technology Flow Matrices.
           Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv (2)226-248.
Viner, Jacob. 1948. Power versus plenty as objectives of foreign policy in the seventeenth & eighteenth centuries."
           World Politics: A Quarterly Journal of International Relations 1-29.
Vogel, Harold L. 2018. Financial Market Bubbles & Crashes: Features, Causes & Effects. Springer
Vonyó, Tamás. 2008. Post-war reconstruction & the Golden Age of economic growth. European Review of
           Economic History 129(2)221-41.
Watkins, William J. 2014. Patent trolls: Predatory litigation & the smothering of innovation. Independent Institute
Weinberg, Steven. 1992. Dreams of a final theory. New York: Pantheon
Welch, Ivo. 1992. Sequential Sales, Learning & Cascades. Journal of Finance 47(2)695-732
Williams, Eric.1944. Slavery & capitalism Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina
Williams, J. & Taylor, E. 2006. The Evolution of Hyperactivity, Impulsivity & Cognitive Diversity. Journal of the Royal
           Society Interface 3:399­413.
Wilson, David S. & Edward O. Wilson. 2008. Evolution for the good of the group. American Scientist 96(5)380 ­89
Wilson, Edward O. 2012. The Social Conquest of Earth. Liveright: NY.
Wolfers, Justin. 2003. Is business cycle volatility costly? Evidence from surveys of subjective wellbeing.
           International finance 6(1)1-26.
Wright, Brian. 1983. The economics of invention incentives: patents, prizes & research contracts. American
           Economic Review 73, 691­707.
Wu, Tim. 2010. The Master Switch: The Rise & Fall of Information Empires. Alfred A. Knopf, New York.
Xu, Zhaoxia & Tri Vi Dang. 2018. Market sentiment & innovation activities. Journal of Financial & Quantitative
           Analysis
Yan, Hongjun. 2008. Natural Selection in Financial Markets: Does It Work? Management Science 54(11)1935­50.
Zald, D. H., Cowan, R. L., Riccardi, P., Baldwin, R. M., Ansari, M. S., Li, R., Kessler, R. M. 2008. Midbrain dopamine
           receptor availability is inversely associated with novelty-seeking traits in humans. Journal of Neuroscience
           28(53)14372-8.




                                                          45
