                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   FOUNDING TEAMS AND STARTUP PERFORMANCE

                                         Joonkyu Choi
                                       Nathan Goldschlag
                                      John C. Haltiwanger
                                         J. Daniel Kim

                                      Working Paper 28417
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28417


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2021



Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
represent the views of the U.S. Census Bureau, the Federal Reserve Board of Governors, its staff,
or the National Bureau of Economic Research. Disclosure review number DRB-B0043-
CED-20190418, DRB-B0049-CED-20190503, CBDRB-FY19-398, and CBDRB-FY21-
CES007-001. Formerly "The Post Entry Growth and Survival of Business Startups: The Role of
Founding Teams" We thank Emek Basker, Jorge Guzman, Shawn Klimek, Ron Jarmin, Martha
Stinson, and participants at the 2019 Comparative Analysis of Enterprise Data, the 2019 NBER
Summer Institute Entrepreneurship Meeting, the LSE 2019 Entrepreneurship Workshop, LACEA
2019, 2019 Schumpeter Lecture, HEC Paris Entrepreneurship Workshop, 2020 International
Research Conference on Recent Trends in Firm Organization and Firm Dynamics, NYU Stern,
George Mason University, University of Notre Dame, the 2019 RCEA Entrepreneurship
Conference, the 2020 Southern Economic Association Conference, and the 2020 Oxford
University Conference on Firm Heterogeneity and the Macroeconomy for helpful comments.
John Haltiwanger was also a part-time Schedule A employee at the U.S. Census Bureau.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Joonkyu Choi, Nathan Goldschlag, John C. Haltiwanger, and J. Daniel Kim. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Founding Teams and Startup Performance
Joonkyu Choi, Nathan Goldschlag, John C. Haltiwanger, and J. Daniel Kim
NBER Working Paper No. 28417
January 2021
JEL No. J24,L23,L26

                                           ABSTRACT

We explore the role of founding teams in accounting for the post-entry dynamics of startups.
While the entrepreneurship literature has largely focused on business founders, we broaden this
view by considering founding teams as both the founders and early joiners. We investigate the
idea that the success of a startup may derive from the organizational capital that is created at firm
formation and is inalienable from the founding team itself. To test this hypothesis, we exploit
premature deaths to identify the causal impact of losing a founding team member on startup
performance. We find that the exogenous separation of a founding team member due to
premature death has a persistently large, negative, and statistically significant impact on post-
entry size, survival, and productivity of startups. Consistent with our organizational capital
hypothesis, effects are stronger for firms with small founding teams and those operating in
business-to-business (B2B) oriented sectors. Moreover, while we find that the loss of a founder
has an especially large adverse effect, the loss of an early joiner nonetheless exhibits a significant
negative effect, lending support to our inclusive definition of founding teams.

Joonkyu Choi                                      John C. Haltiwanger
Federal Reserve Board                             Department of Economics
joonkyu.choi@frb.gov                              University of Maryland
                                                  College Park, MD 20742
Nathan Goldschlag                                 and NBER
U.S. Census Bureau                                haltiwan@econ.umd.edu
Nathan.Goldschlag@census.gov
                                                  J. Daniel Kim
                                                  University of Pennsylvania
                                                  Wharton School
                                                  3620 Locust Walk
                                                  2029 Steinberg-Dietrich Hall
                                                  Philadelphia, PA 19104
                                                  jdkim@wharton.upenn.edu
1     Introduction

Startups and young firms contribute disproportionately to job creation, innovation and pro-
ductivity growth (Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Miranda, 2013; Alon, Berger, Dent, and Pugsley,
2018; Acemoglu, Akcigit, Bloom, and Kerr, 2018). A hallmark of young firm dynamics is
that most of the contribution by young firms can be attributed to the relatively few that
grow rapidly; in fact, the majority of startups fail in their first five years and typical sur-
viving firms grow only modestly (Decker, Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Miranda, 2014; Pugsley,
Sedlacek, and Sterk, 2018). However, despite its importance, relatively little is known about
the sources of heterogeneity across young firms that generate up-or-out dynamics.
    In this paper, we empirically demonstrate that founding teams are a key driver of the
variation in startup performance. Using administrative data that contains millions of star-
tups in the U.S., we document positive relationships between the human capital of founding
teams and firm outcomes. We also identify the causal contribution of founding teams to
startup performance by using the premature death of a founding team member as an ex-
ogenous separation shock. We find that losing a founding team member has large, negative
effects on the size, productivity, and survival of startups. These negative effects are re-
markably persistent, lasting for at least 10 years after the shock, indicating that disruptions
caused by the loss are not resolved by hiring replacements. These results, further enhanced
by heterogeneous treatment effect analyses, suggest that organizational capital is embodied
in founding teams and those teams cannot be easily replaced.
    Our definition of founding teams includes both founders and early joiners ­ a distinction
based on the individual's timing of association with the firm and earnings. While we find
that the loss of a founder has an especially large adverse effect, the loss of an early joiner
nonetheless exhibits a significant negative effect, lending support to our inclusive definition
of founding teams. We also construct a measure of human capital of each founding team
member and find that the negative effects are larger when losing a member with higher
human capital. Even so, we still find large negative effects for the loss of founding team

                                              1
members at the average of the human capital distribution within the firm. These results
indicate that ordinary founding team members ­ early joiners with relatively low earnings
and those without especially high levels of human capital ­ also play a critical role in startup
performance. Taken together, these findings speak to the benefits to expanding the scope of
analysis beyond the founders traditionally focused in the entrepreneurship literature.
   We use administrative matched employer-employee data combined with business tax in-
formation covering all startups with paid employees established between 1990 and 2015 in
the non-farm business sector. Founding teams are identified as all individuals with positive
earnings in the first year of operation, supplemented by business owners of sole proprietors
whose identities are obtained from income tax filings. Our focus is on startups that organize
themselves as sole proprietors or corporations, as we can measure founding teams of those
firms in a consistent way; we exclude partnerships because their business owners are pro-
hibited from paying themselves wages and thus do not appear in our database. Leveraging
the longitudinal structure of the matched employer-employee data, we use each founding
team member's most recent earnings prior to joining the startup as a proxy for their human
capital.
   We first document that startups launched by founding teams with high human capital
are associated with superior firm performance in survival, employment, revenue, and labor
productivity. These patterns provide a rich portrait of young firm heterogeneity suggesting
the importance of founding teams. Nonetheless, a number of endogeneity issues complicate
the causal link between founding team characteristics and firm outcomes. For example,
high-ability individuals may be more likely to join ventures based on ideas or technology
with greater market potential. Therefore, the positive relationship between founding team
human capital and firm outcomes could be driven by unobserved characteristics (e.g., quality
of underlying business idea) that are endogenously tied to the characteristics of the founding
team.
   This empirical challenge is central to the debate in the entrepreneurship literature regard-


                                               2
ing the relative importance of the firm (horse) versus the founders (jockey), or interpreted
more broadly the founding team. For instance, Kaplan, Sensoy, and Str¨
                                                                     omberg (2009) study
a sample of 50 venture capital-backed firms and document that the core business ideas tend
to be much more stable than the founding team, suggesting the importance of the horse
over the jockey. Consistent with this view, although the founding team may be critical to
the earliest stages of launching a venture, they may not have the appropriate skills to build
and grow the business (Wasserman, 2017; Kulchina and Gjerlov-Juel, 2019). More generally,
founding teams may be less critical after a business idea has been sufficiently developed,
at which point the founding team members could be replaced by outside individuals with
suitable skills. This perspective implies that losing a founding team member would have
little or no persistent effect on the post-entry dynamics of the firm.
    Alternatively, the loss of a founding team member may represent a significant loss for the
firm. In nascent stages of new businesses, the founding team is actively engaged in the for-
mation of organizational capital that may be inalienable from the team itself. This includes
many factors that differentiate businesses including their core vision, customer and supplier
relationships, reputational capital, and norms and culture. Such organizational capital likely
grows as founding teams work together and develop team-specific complementarities. Losing
a founding team member, therefore, results in the loss of accumulated organizational capital.
Under this alternative view, the loss of a founding team member may have profound and
persistent consequences for firm outcomes.
    To address these issues with causal inference, we leverage exogenous separations of found-
ing team members as a result of premature death.1 In a difference-in-differences framework,
we examine roughly 25,000 startups that experience a premature death of a founding team
member relative to a closely matched group of "twin" startups that do not. We find that
relative to their matched counterparts, treated startups experience a roughly 16%, 35%, and
22% decline in employment, revenue, and labor productivity, respectively. While there is a
   1
     As we discuss below, our identification approach builds on a recent literature using premature death as
a treatment that reflects plausibly exogenous variation.


                                                     3
slight recovery following the largest decline in the year immediately after the shock, the neg-
ative effects persist for at least 10 years after the shock. We also find that losing a founding
team member lowers the probability of survival of the firm.
   To further illuminate the role of organizational capital, we explore a number of hetero-
geneous treatment effects in settings in which the importance of organizational capital is
expected to be amplified or attenuated -- namely, (1) the loss of a founder versus an early
joiner of the founding team, (2) business-to-business (B2B) oriented firms that rely more
heavily on relationships with other businesses, and (3) small founding teams in which each
member likely accounts for a greater share of the firm's organizational capital. We find that
the adverse effects of losing a founder are twice as large as those of losing an early joiner.
Moreover, the effects are stronger for firms in B2B-oriented sectors as well as those with
small founding teams. Taken together, these results are consistent with the view of organi-
zational capital -- which accumulates over time and is largely embodied in individuals --
as a key mechanism that explains why startup performance diminishes following the loss of
a founding team member.
   The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we discuss the related literature and
a conceptual framework that describes how organizational capital developed by a founding
team relates to standard models of firm dynamics. We then discuss our data infrastructure in
Section 3. Section 4 describes basic facts about the post-entry dynamics of startups and the
relationship of these dynamics to the characteristics of founding teams. Section 5 presents
our identification methodology using premature deaths, our main results and then analysis
of heterogeneous treatment effects. Section 6 concludes.




                                               4
2        Background

Related Literature

Our work contributes to the entrepreneurship literature studying the determinants of startup
growth heterogeneity. That literature has identified a number of initial characteristics that
correlate with firm outcomes including age of the workers (Ouimet and Zarutskie, 2014),
the outside options for and age of the founders (Choi, 2017; Azoulay, Jones, Kim, and Mi-
randa, 2020), and the name or the incorporation location of the business (Guzman and Stern,
2015). Some studies also stress the importance of the founders' skill set (Lazear, 2004) and
risk tolerance (Iyigun and Owen, 1998) and stable shared leadership of the top management
team (Agarwal, Braguinsky, and Ohyama, 2019).2 We contribute to this literature by pro-
viding new causal evidence for founding teams as an important source of variation in startup
performance.
    Studies of venture capital and private equity have explored the importance of founders
relative to business models and ideas in determining firm success (Kaplan, Sensoy, and
Str¨
   omberg, 2009; Ewens and Marx, 2017). We build upon these studies by establishing new
facts about the importance of founding teams using data that covers startups outside of the
typically studied venture capital-backed firms. We also leverage a unique source of exogenous
variation ­ premature deaths ­ used in a few other contexts (e.g. Jones and Olken, 2005;
Nguyen and Nielsen, 2010; Azoulay, Graff Zivin, and Wang, 2010; Oettl, 2012). In addition,
we document new evidence for the importance of early joiners, broadening the scope of
analysis beyond founders.
    Our work also builds upon the firm dynamics literature. Several empirical studies have
stressed that high growth young firms play a disproportionate role in aggregate job creation
and productivity growth.(Decker, Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Miranda, 2016; Alon, Berger,
Dent, and Pugsley, 2018). Canonical models of firm dynamics attribute growth hetero-
    2
        See Klotz, Hmieleski, Bradley, and Busenitz (2014) for a review.



                                                       5
geneity to initially-drawn productivity or demand (Jovanovic, 1982) and post-entry shocks
(Hopenhayn and Rogerson, 1993). There is growing evidence that the initial difference ­
or ex-ante heterogeneity ­ plays an important role (Pugsley, Sedlacek, and Sterk, 2018),
and we contribute to this literature by identifying founding teams as a salient initial firm
characteristic.
    Perhaps the closest and complementary to our work is a recent study by Smith, Yagan,
Zidar, and Zwick (2019) (henceforth SYZZ), which examines the importance of human capital
vis-`
    a-vis financial capital among the highest earning pass-through businesses in the US. Using
a similar identification strategy leveraging the pre-mature deaths of business owners, SYZZ
find large and persistent negative effects on pass-through profits. A key distinction between
their work and ours is that SYZZ focus on pass-through businesses held by top earners --
many of which are legacy businesses passed down from parents to their children -- through
the lens of growing income inequality where we focus exclusively on young firms due to their
outsized role in job creation and economic growth. Moreover, we consider the importance
of founding teams and not just founders. Relatedly, our analysis of young firms allows us to
focus on the earliest stages in the life cycle of the firm when organizational capital initially
forms and develops.3 Despite the compositional differences in the types of firms studied, the
two studies provide consistent and complementary evidence on the role of human capital in
explaining firm performance of both young firms and pass-through businesses.


Conceptual Framework

In a standard model of entry, selection, and growth (Lucas, 1978; Hopenhayn, 1992), entrants
pay a fixed cost of entry, learn their productivity draw, and then face a profit function with
   3
     A related study by Becker and Hvide (2019) investigates the impact of losing founders on startups
using administrative data for Norway. They find large, adverse and persistent impacts of losing founders on a
number of outcomes including survival, employment, revenue and profits. As with SYZZ, a critical distinction
between our work and theirs (in addition to the distinction between results for the U.S. versus Norway) is
our broader interest in all founding team members. Relatedly, we examine heterogeneous treatment effects
by founding team member characteristics as well as by firm type to draw out the broader implications of all
founding team members in the context of our hypotheses regarding organizational capital being embedded
in the founding team members.

                                                     6
curvature (from either decreasing returns or product differentiation) and a fixed cost of op-
eration. Firms with high productivity draws become large, those with low draws stay small,
and those with sufficiently low draws exit due to their inability to cover fixed costs. Permit-
ting dynamic learning or other adjustment frictions enable interesting post-entry dynamics
(Jovanovic, 1982; Hopenhayn and Rogerson, 1993; Ericson and Pakes, 1995).
   We think a useful way to interpret the fixed cost of entry is that it reflects the time
and resources required to invest in the organizational capital that makes firms distinct. An
illustrative model that formalizes this organizational capital interpretation of the startup
process is presented in Appendix A.1. We show how the founding team of a business can
play a critical role in the development and success of the investment in organizational capital.
Relatedly, we show how the standard assumption of an ex post productivity draw can be
interpreted as a draw from a distribution of founding team match quality. Next we provide an
overview of the issues and implications of such a model, which helps motivate the empirical
analysis that follows.
   Several issues emerge in this interpretation of the business formation period of startup
firms. First, the set of individuals that constitute the founding team needs to be identified.
A narrow view is that the founding team consists solely of the founders. A broader view
is that the founding team reflects the founders along with early joiners. A second question
is the extent to which organizational capital is embodied in the founding team. If the
organizational capital is inalienable, then the loss of a founding team member will have an
adverse impact on firm performance. As shown in the appendix, this negative impact is
likely to manifest in multiple measures of performance including the scale of operations in
terms of revenue and employment, revenue productivity measured as revenue per worker,
and survival. In our empirical analysis, we examine the impact of the loss of a founding
team member on all of these outcomes.




                                               7
3       Data Infrastructure

We construct a longitudinal dataset covering the majority of startups and their founding
teams established between 1990 and 2015 by combining data from the Longitudinal Busi-
ness Database (LBD) and the Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics data (LEHD).
Information on startups is derived from the LBD. The LBD tracks annually all U.S. non-farm
establishments and firms with at least one paid employee. An establishment is identified as a
specific physical location where business activities occur and all establishments under com-
mon operational control are grouped under the same firm identifier. The primary source
of information on operational control is the Company Organization Survey (conducted an-
nually) and the Economic Censuses (conducted every five years). Information in the LBD
includes the number of employees, annual payroll, industry, establishment and firm age, and
entry and exit of establishments and firms. We enhance this data by incorporating revenue
information imported from the Business Register (BR) as in Haltiwanger, Jarmin, Kulick,
and Miranda (2017). Following LBD conventions, we define firm age as the age of the oldest
establishment in the firm's first year with positive employment. Startups are defined as firms
with age zero and firm death occurs when the firm and all associated establishments exit
and are not again observed with employment. This approach avoids classifying exit through
acquisition as a firm death.4 Our outcome variables of interest are employment, revenue,
labor productivity, and survival. Labor productivity is measured as revenue per worker.5 As
our focus is on investigating the heterogeneity in outcomes within narrowly defined sectors,
we control for detailed industry by year effects in all of our analysis.
    Our data contains sole proprietors and corporations where we can consistently measure
    4
      In certain cases, firm identifiers in the LBD are not longitudinally consistent. Firm identifiers may
change for a number of reasons unrelated to a change in common ownership. For example, identifiers may
change over time due to a transition from a single- to a multi-unit firm, reorganization of the legal form,
and acquisitions. In our startup panel, we construct a longitudinally consistent firm identifier by leveraging
information on establishment flows, EINs, and business names. Importantly, our longitudinal firm identifier
will not longitudinally link a firm before and after an acquisition event.
    5
      Employment consists of full and part-time employees, including salaried officers and executives of cor-
porations, who were on the payroll in the pay period including March 12. Revenue is measured total revenue
measured annually.


                                                      8
active business owners. We define the founding team as all individuals with positive un-
employment insurance (UI) covered earnings at the startup within the firms' first year of
operation as well as business owners of sole proprietors. Owners of sole proprietors and
partnerships are prohibited from paying themselves wages and therefore do not appear in
the LEHD. Sole proprietors file self-employment income tax filings, which are captured in
the Business Register. We are therefore able to combine sole proprietor owners with the
founding teams recovered from the LEHD. Active or managing owners of partnerships, on
the other hand, file Schedule K-1 pass-through income that will not be observed in either the
Business Register or the LEHD. We therefore exclude partnerships from our startup sample.
For C or S corporations, the vast majority of active founders/owners are likely to be included
among the individuals with positive UI earnings in the LEHD. The Internal Revenue Service
(IRS) requires that owners of C or S corporations who provide more than minor services to
their corporations receive employment compensation.6 Indeed, using K-1 and W-2 filings
data, Nelson (2016) finds that almost 90% of all S corporations with paid employees have at
least one shareholder-employee.7 Furthermore, Nelson (2016) documents that privately-held
C corporations "appear to pay out a majority of the owners' income in the form of executive
compensation" and virtually all C corporation startups are privately held.8 Therefore, for
the vast majority of the startups in our data, our measurement methodology of founding
teams is likely to capture both active business owners and the earlier joining employees.
    While the existing entrepreneurship literature almost exclusively focuses on founders,
    6
      For example, the IRS states "The definition of an employee under the Internal Revenue Code include
corporate officers. Courts have consistently held S corporation officers/shareholders who provide more than
minor services to their corporation and receive, or are entitled to receive, compensation are subject to fed-
eral employment taxes." See https://www.irs.gov/businesses/small-businesses-self-employed/s-corporation-
employees-shareholders-and-corporate-officers.
    7
      The restriction to businesses with paid employees (our focus) is crucial. There are a large number of
non-employer S-corporations. Nelson (2016) reports about 30% of all S-corporations have no employees. We
exclude non-employers from our analysis.
    8
      Also, see https://www.irs.gov/businesses/small-businesses-self-employed/paying-yourself which states
that the "An officer of a corporation is generally an employee, but an officer who performs no services
or only minor services, and who neither receives nor is entitled to receive any pay, is not considered an
employee." This helps explain why some K-1 owners of S corporations do not show up in W-2 as employees.
We regard such owners as passive owners of less interest to our analysis.



                                                     9
partly due to data limitations, we decompose the founding team into two groups: founders
and early joiners.9 To identify founders, we largely follow the approach used in prior studies
based on workers' earnings and the legal form of the startup (e.g, Kerr and Kerr (2017); Choi
(2017); Azoulay, Jones, Kim, and Miranda (2020)). For corporations, we define founders to
those who earn wages in the first quarter of the firm's operations (i.e., present on "day
one") and are among the three highest-paid workers in the firm during the first year. For
sole proprietorships, because owners are not observed in the LEHD, we define founders as
the business owner and the top two workers with the highest earnings in the first year. In
addition, we define early joiners as the remaining individuals who also appear at the startup
in its first year of operations. A important distinction is that, unlike founders who are
present in the first quarter, early joiners may join in subsequent quarters during the initial
year of the firm.
   Our measurement approach overcomes some of the pitfalls in identifying founders in
the administrative data (Hyatt, Murray, and Sandusky, 2020). First, we abstract from
partnerships that do not earn wage and salary income from their business. Second, we use
auxiliary source information from the Business Register to identify owners of sole proprietors.
For corporations, prior work finds that about 90% of S corporation owners identified by K-
1 filings data also appear as the top three earners during the firms' first year in the W-2
and LEHD data (Azoulay, Jones, Kim, and Miranda, 2020).10 Our definition of founders,
therefore, captures the set of workers that are likely to hold a leadership position within the
firm regardless of whether they have a financial stake in the firm. Concerns around properly
identifying founders are further allayed by our empirical findings. In particular, the negative
impact of losing a founding team member is more pronounced when losing a founder than
when losing an early joiner, though both cases yield negative and significant effects. Our
measure appears to capture the outsized role that founders typically have on their firms
   9
      For a few exceptions studying non-founding employees of startups, see Ouimet and Zarutskie (2014);
Dahl and Klepper (2015); Roach and Sauermann (2015); Kim (2018)
   10
      Note that, unlike (Nelson, 2016), Azoulay, Jones, Kim, and Miranda (2020) is based on employer
startups in the LBD.


                                                  10
relative to early joiners.
     We use the prior earnings of each founding team member as a proxy for human capital,
which captures heterogeneity in skills and experience. Prior earnings are computed as the
individual's most recent full-quarter earnings prior to joining the startup.11 An important
feature of this approach is that prior earnings are an ex-ante characterization of each in-
dividual. Therefore, prior earnings are a useful proxy for human capital and also serve as
a robustness check to our founder definition. In the following section, we establish some
basic facts in the relationship between human capital of the founding team -- separately for
founders and early joiners -- and firm outcomes.
     Our analytical database for basic facts, and the frame from which our causal analysis
is drawn, tracks more than 6 million startups and over 72 million founding team members
from 1990 to 2015. The database includes each LEHD state as the data becomes available
in the LEHD infrastructure. State-level coverage in the LEHD varies over time but by 2000
coverage is nationally representative.



4        Basic Facts about Firm Outcomes and Founding Teams

Before exploring the relationship between human capital and firm performance, we first verify
that our data infrastructure has properties consistent with the findings in the literature.
Consistent with previous studies, we find that the exit rate of young firms is higher than
older firms but that conditional on survival, young firms have higher average growth rates
than older firms. In addition, we find that this heterogeneity in outcomes is tightly linked
to productivity: firms with higher realized productivity are more likely to survive and grow.
These results can be found in Figures A1, A2, A3 and Table A1 in the appendix.
     We also find systematic and statistically significant relationships between the human cap-
ital of founding teams and firm performance. We calculate the average prior earnings of the
    11
     Full-quarter earnings is measured as earnings for a quarter in which the individual also was observed
with earnings in the prior and subsequent quarter. These restrictions ensure the earnings measure captures
an entire quarter of work rather than a partial quarter.

                                                   11
founders and early joiners of each startup and organize the firms into twenty equal-sized bins
by average human capital. Then we regress five-year employment and productivity growth
rates and a binary indicator of firm exit on the bin indicators, controlling for industry by year
fixed effects and initial conditions (initial employment for survival and employment growth
and initial productivity for productivity growth). We find that startups with high-human-
capital founding teams experience faster employment and productivity growth conditional
on survival (panel (a) and (b) of Figure 1) and are less likely to exit (panel (c) of Figure 1).
These patterns hold monotonically in all parts of the human capital distribution except for
the very top for employment growth and exit outcomes.
   Leveraging the longitudinal structure of our data, we examine post-entry attrition pat-
terns among founders and early joiners. Figure 2 shows the average number of founders and
early joiners remaining at the firms in years since startup (left) and their human capital
(right). We find that attrition is significant for both founders and early joiners, while it
is notably higher for the latter. Interestingly, attrition among the founding team generally
stems from the bottom of the human capital distribution. That is, conditional on survival,
the average human capital of founding team members remaining at the startup increases
over time. Finally, we also find evidence of substantial positive assortative matching be-
tween founders and early joiners. As shown in Figure 3, founders with high human capital
tend to associate with early joiners with high human capital.
   In short, we find that the human capital of founding teams is closely linked to the up-
or-out dynamics of young firms. However, we are unable to interpret these correlations as
causal because both the composition and attrition of the founding team are not random.
To identify causal relationships, we use exogenous variation in the founding team due to
premature death, which we turn to next.




                                               12
5        Causal Impact of Founding Teams

We use the premature death of founding team members to approximate an experiment in
which a founding team member is randomly separated from a startup. Our research design
combines a matching strategy with a difference-in-difference analysis. This approach allows
us to estimate changes in startup outcomes for firms that experience the premature death of
a founding team member relative to "twin" startups that do not. For each startup firm that
experiences the death of a founding team member in quarter t, we find a similar control firm
by matching on characteristics measured in the same quarter. One strength of this approach
is that we can empirically test the core assumption that the treated and control firms exhibit
similar trends prior to the death shock. If the pre-treatment trends are not similar, premature
death is not likely to be as good as randomly assigned between the treated and control firms.
To focus on early-stage startup dynamics, we first consider firms that experience the death
of a founding team member within the first five years of operation. We then track firm
outcomes for five years after the event allowing for the possibility that the firm exits.
     Information gathered from the Census NUMIDENT file is used to identify premature
deaths. Following Jaravel, Petkova, and Bell (2018) and a number of other studies that
use premature death as a source of identification (e.g. Jones and Olken, 2005; Nguyen and
Nielsen, 2010; Azoulay, Graff Zivin, and Wang, 2010; Oettl, 2012), we classify premature
death as death at or before 60 years of age. For a founding team member's death to be
considered a shock to the firm, we require that the individual have positive earnings during
the quarter in which the death is observed. For sole proprietor owners, for whom we do
not observe quarterly earnings, we measure their death as a shock to the firm if the firm
has non-zero employees in the death shock quarter and did not change its EIN since its
inception.12 Treated firms are those with only one premature death in the first five years.
     We use coarsened exact matching to identify a single control firm for each treated firm
    12
     If a business experiences a change in ownership it must request a new EIN or file under some other
existing EIN.



                                                  13
(Blackwell, Iacus, King, and Porro, 2009). We require that our treated and control firms
have the same birth year, operate in the same detailed industry (four-digit NAICS), have the
same legal form of organization, and reside in the same state. We also match on the number
of active founding team members prior to the death shock. Whether a firm experiences a
death shock will be related to the number of founding team members at risk of premature
death. A firm with more active founding team members will have a higher probability of
treatment. The probability a firm experiences the death of a founding team member is also
related to the age of its founding team. Therefore, we match on the average age of the active
founding team members in the death shock quarter. Typically, more than one control firm
will matched to each treated firm after the coarsened exact matching procedure. Instead of
using matching weights, we select a single control for each treated firm, choosing the closest
matched control firm based on the absolute differences in the continuous matching variables.
Ties are broken randomly. Control firms are not selected with replacement; we do not use a
matched control firm as a single control for multiple treated firms.
    Selected summary statistics for the treated and control firms, evaluated in the treatment
(death shock) year, are presented in Table 1. The sample contains roughly 52,000 firms with
an equal split between the treated and control groups.13 The sample is reduced for revenue
based measures since only about 80% of firms in the LBD are assigned revenue values.14 In
terms of balance, treated and controls have similar firm age, founding team age, and (log)
levels of employment, revenue, and productivity.


5.1     Main Results

The primary outcome variables of interest include scale in employment and revenue and
labor productivity. Specifically, we consider the inverse hyperbolic sine (ihs) of employment,
revenue, and labor productivity approximated as the difference between the ihs revenue
  13
      In unreported results, we find that the treated-control sample has similar characteristics as the full
founding team database.
   14
      Haltiwanger, Jarmin, Kulick, and Miranda (2017) show that the pattern of missingness for revenue is
approximately random.

                                                    14
and ihs employment.15 By using the ihs measures, we are able to include the impact of
treatment inclusive of the intensive and extensive margins. We also consider log employment,
log revenue, and log labor productivity (revenue per employee), which condition on survival.
We estimate the dynamic impact of a premature death shock among the founding team using
a difference-in-differences specification with leads and lags, as shown in Equation (1).

                            5                     5
                Yi,j,t =          k d[k ]i,t +          k d[k ]i,t × T REATi + i + j,t +   i,j,t         (1)
                           k=-5                  k=-5

    Yi,j,t is the outcome for startup i in industry j in year t. d[k ]i,t are a series of relative year
dummies before and after the death shock. T REATi is the treatment dummy that equals 1
if it experiences a death of a founding team member, zero otherwise. i and j,t are firm and
industry by year fixed effects. Estimates of k are the parameters of interest, representing
the change in outcomes in each year for treated firms relative to the control group. We also
control for firm age fixed effect in our main specifications.
    Figures 4 and 5 show the main results for ihs employment, ihs revenue, and ihs produc-
tivity. We do not find evidence of differential pre-trends for any of the outcome variables,
lending credibility to our research design utilizing premature death shocks. This allows us
to causally interpret the estimated effects following the death shock. The impact of losing a
founding member due to premature death is immediately negative, persistent, and statisti-
cally significant. Startup employment, revenue, and labor productivity sharply diminish in
the year of the founding member death. Though these negative effects are reduced slightly
in the following year, they persist to five years after the death shock.
    In interpreting these results, we note that there might be a mechanical transitory effect on
employment that is a direct result of the death. That is, it might be thought that a premature
death causes at least a transitory decline of one employee until a vacancy is posted and filled.
  15
     The inverse hyperbolic sine approximates the log transformation but permits inclusion of zeroes.
ihs(x) = ln(x + (1 + x2 )0.5 ). Burbidge, Magee, and Robb (1988) and Pence (2006) described the ad-
vantages of the ihs transformation for analysis of distribution of outcomes with extensive zero values (e.g.,
earnings, wealth, employment,etc.) Variation in ihs measures are approximately equivalently to log variation
for x not close to zero.


                                                           15
The results in Figure 4 reject this interpretation on a number of dimensions. First, Davis,
Faberman, and Haltiwanger (2013) show that the average vacancy duration is about 20 days,
and we find effects persistent up to five years after the death shock. Second, we can quantify
how large the initial transitory impact driven by the mechanical effect might be. The average
number of employees of the firms at the time of the death shock is 15.5 and the reduction in
ihs employment implied by the mechanical reduction of one person is -0.07, which is denoted
in the figure. This is less than half of the actual impact in period 1 after the death shock
which is -0.25. Moreover, as emphasized, this mechanical effect should be transitory.
    The persistent reduction in revenue is even greater than the reduction in employment.
For revenue, ihs revenue declines by 0.6 in the first year while ihs employment falls by 0.25.
After period 1, ihs revenue declines by about 0.4 persistently for years 2 through 5 after
the death shock while ihs employment declines by about 0.2. These results imply that ihs
productivity falls by about 0.4 in period 1 and 0.2 in years 2 to 5 after the death shock.
    We also estimate the specifications using log(Emp), log(Rev ), and log(P rod) (revenue
per worker) as dependent variables. These measures, by construction, condition on sur-
vival.16 Results are presented in Figure 6. The patterns for the log based outcomes are
very similar qualitatively to those for the ihs based outcomes. We find evidence of large,
negative, persistent, and statistically significant effects of losing a founding team member.
The magnitude of the effects are less severe relative to Figures 4 and 5 but still quantita-
tively large. log(Rev ) declines by about 10 log points, log(Emp) by 5 log points with an
accompanying decline in log(P rod) by about 5 log points. As with the ihs outcomes the
effects are highly persistent. The evidence is not consistent with a transitory effect deriving
either from a mechanical vacancy creation or from a temporary disruption effect.
    For the log outcome results, there is a concern for potential selection bias since log
transformation requires positive activity in the post-treatment years. Treated firms that
survived after being hit by the founding team death shock may be more resilient than
  16
    Note that treated and control firms exist at the time of the shock. No exit occurs prior to death shock
among either treated or control firms.


                                                    16
surviving control firms that did not experience a such shock. In that case, treated firms
might have grown faster, on average, than their control counterparts in the absence of the
shock, and thus negative effects on log outcomes could be attenuated. If this difference
between treated and controls is quantitatively negligible, then selection bias is not a concern.
While it is impossible to isolate how much faster or slower surviving treated firms would have
grown compared to a counterparts had they not been treated, we can characterize their pre-
treatment differences. The absence of pre-treatment differences in Figure 6 provides evidence
that selection bias is not a substantial concern. In the appendix, we also compare the growth
rate of employment, revenue, and productivity from birth to the year prior to the death
shock year between the treated and controls that survived after the treatment year. The
results of this analysis are shown in Table A2. Conditioning on survival in post-treatment
years, the difference in growth between treated and control firms in the pre-treatment period
is statistically indistinguishable from zero. Taken together, these results suggest that the
selection bias in the estimated effects of log outcomes is small.
   To summarize the main results, we collapse the leads and lags into a binary pre/post
indicator and estimate the average treatment effects as in Equation (2).


                Yi,j,t =  · P OSTi,t +  · P OSTi,t × T REATi + i + j,t +       i,j,t           (2)

Yi,j,t is the outcome for startup i in industry j in year t. P OSTi,t is the time dummy that
equals 1 if 0  t  5 and 0 otherwise with t = 0 being the death shock year. T REATi ,
i and j,t are identically defined as in Equation (1). We also control for firm age fixed
effects.  is the coefficient of interest. This simplified specification facilitates the analysis of
heterogeneous treatment effects below.
   Table 2 shows the average treatment effect estimates. Overall, the findings are consistent
with those seen in Figures 4, 5 and 6. Note that while columns 1-3 use ihs measures, columns
4-6 use log measures which exclude zeroes and therefore condition on survival. Therefore,
the log results in columns 4-6 capture effects at the intensive margin. Though they are

                                                17
negative and statistically significant, these point estimates are lower than those in columns
1-3, suggesting that the treatment effect is operating at both the intensive and extensive
margins.
   We now explore the extensive margin directly by quantifying how the loss of a founding
team member influences the likelihood of exit. We accomplish this by first using a Cox
proportional hazards model to assess the differences in the likelihood of survival in the years
following the death event between treated and control firms. In Figure 7, we find that
treated firms are more likely to exit after experiencing the death shock. To further quantify
the extensive margin, we use a linear probability model to assess the impact of losing a
founding team member on firm death some number of years after the death shock. As Table
3 shows, treated firms are roughly 12 percentage points more likely to exit within one year of
losing a founding team member. The estimates using longer time windows are similarly large
and statistically significant. However, the economic magnitudes considerably vary. Relative
to the baseline death rates of closely matched control firms, treated firms are 160% and 40%
more likely to exit in a one- and five-year window, respectively. These results suggest that
the loss of a founding team member yields a significant negative impact at the extensive
margin -- particularly during the years just after the premature death shock.


5.2    Mechanism

Next, we explore organizational capital as a primary mechanism explaining the decline in
startup performance following the loss of a founding team member. To do so, we revisit our
theory around organizational capital, which we define to be tacit knowledge and resources
developed in the nascent stages of a venture. If at least some organizational capital is
embodied in individuals then we would expect some organization capital to be lost when a
founding team member separates from the firm. However, the degree to which this reduction
in organizational capital lowers firm performance will depend on the context-specific salience
of organizational capital. For instance, a sudden loss of organizational capital can be less


                                              18
detrimental for startups that operate on knowledge more easily codified and communicated
and thus more easily transferred from the founding team members.
    We test this idea empirically by examining settings in which the role of organizational
capital is expected to be amplified or attenuated -- namely, (1) the loss of a founder versus
an early joiner, (2) firms in B2B-intensive sectors which rely more heavily on relationships
with key customers, and (3) firms with small founding teams in which each member likely
accounts for a greater share of the firm's organizational capital. For the analysis of heteroge-
neous effects, we extend our pre-post difference-in-differences approach by including a third
difference as shown in Equation (3).




                             Yi,j,t = · P OSTi,t +  · P OSTi,t × T REATi

                                      +  · P OSTi,t × T REATi × Zi

                                      +  · P OSTi,t × Zi + i + j,t +          i,j,t                          (3)


    Zi is the additional variable,  is the parameter of interest representing the additional
effect when Zi = 1, and  is the baseline treatment effect when Zi = 0.17 For brevity, we
only report the estimates for the coefficients  and  .


5.2.1    Losing a Founder versus an Early Joiner

Given our broad definition of the founding team, which includes both the founders and
early joiners, we first investigate whether the impact is greater when losing a founder. The
primary difference between founders and early joiners, as we have defined them, is that
founders are present at the firm during its first quarter of operations and are among the
highest earning workers in the first year. As a result, founders may account for a greater
share of the underlying organizational capital.
   17
      For these analyses we do not include Zi as a separate control since it is not identified with the inclusion
of firm fixed effects.


                                                       19
    Consistent with this view, Table 4 shows that the impact of losing a founder is signif-
icantly larger than that of losing an early joiner. While the negative effects are roughly
twice as large for ihs employment, they are more than four times as large for ihs revenue,
leading to a significant decline in labor productivity. Furthermore, though the effect sizes
are smaller, we find that losing an early joiner results in a significant and negative impact
on all three measures of firm performance. This implies that our main results are not solely
driven by deaths of founders and that early joiners also play an important role in startup
growth and survival. The impact of early joiners and founders operate through both the
extensive and intensive margins. However, the gap between the ihs and log impact is larger
for founders than early joiners suggesting the adverse impact of losing a founder is relatively
more important on the extensive margin. Together, these results suggest that while organi-
zational capital is embodied in the broader founding team, it disproportionately resides in
the founders.


5.2.2    B2B versus B2C-intensive Sectors

Second, we explore whether the impact of losing a founder is greater for business-facing
(B2B) rather than consumer-facing (B2C) startups. A key distinction is that B2B firms
depend more heavily on relationships with other businesses. Consequently, a greater share
of the organizational capital is likely embedded in founding teams of B2B businesses due to
the importance of managing relationships.
    We test this view by comparing startups in B2B amd B2C-intensive industries. While
we cannot make this categorization at the firm-level, we rely on input-output accounts data
from the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis to characterize each industry at the six-digit
NAICS level. Following Delgado and Mills (2020), we categorize an industry as B2B-oriented
if more than 66% of the total sales in the industry are toward businesses or the government
rather than toward personal consumption, and B2C otherwise.18
   18
      The distribution of sales to businesses versus consumers across industries is highly bimodal. A binary
categorization therefore appears appropriate. Nonetheless, results are robust to using a continuous measure


                                                    20
   Consistent with our theory of organizational capital, Table 5 shows that losing a founding
team member in a B2B-intensive sector leads to a greater decline in startup performance
than in a B2C sector. The economic magnitudes of the interaction term are large and
significant. For instance, the additional impact associated with B2B sectors is -.05 for ihs
employment and -.20 for ihs revenue. Relative to the baseline effect among B2C-intensive
sectors, this represents an increase of 38% and 72% in negative effects on employment and
revenue, respectively. Comparing the ihs and log results shows that the additional impact
associated with B2B sectors operates on both the extensive and intensive margins. These
findings are consistent with the view that the importance of relationships in B2B businesses
amplifies the role of the founding team, reflecting the link between organizational capital
and startup performance.


5.2.3    Small versus Large Founding Teams

Third, we examine whether the negative impact of losing a founding team member is larger
for startups with small founding teams. Intuitively, each founding team member would
possess a greater share of organizational capital in relatively small teams. Therefore, we
expect the impact of a found team member death shock to be larger for smaller teams. For
this purpose, we define small founding teams as those with five or fewer active founding team
members in the year prior to the death shock.
   Table 6 presents the results based on team size. Consistent with our organizational
capital hypothesis, we find that losing a founding team member leads to a larger negative
impact for small teams across all outcomes. The additional treatment effect associated with
small teams for ihs employment is roughly twice as large as the baseline effect among larger
teams. The impact for ihs revenue exhibits an even larger difference. Given the outsized
effects on revenues, small teams also experience a more severe impact on labor productivity.
Again, the greater impact on small teams operates through both the extensive and intensive
of B2B orientation.



                                             21
margins. The gap between the ihs and log results suggests that the adverse impact of losing
a founding team member from a small team is relatively more important on the extensive
margin. These estimates again support the view that the main effects are driven by the
loss of organizational capital associated with the lost founding team member, which will be
greater among smaller founding teams.


5.3     Alternative Explanations and Robustness Analyses

In this section, we posit and test several alternative explanations that could be consistent
with the main results. In doing so, we establish robustness of the organizational capital
hypothesis and verify the validity of our sample construction and measurement.


5.3.1   Founder Definition and Human Capital

As discussed previously, our ability to identify founders among founding team members is
imperfect. As an alternative to a dichotomous distinction between founders and early joiners,
we leverage the granular human capital profile of each member. An individual's level of
human capital is likely positively related to holding key leadership positions in the firm. As
described in Section 3, we measure human capital as the individual's most recent earnings
prior to joining the startup. We examine whether losing a high human capital founding team
member is especially detrimental to startup performance. To focus on within-firm variation
in human capital, we measure the extent to which a founding team's average human capital
changes following the loss of a member as shown in Equation (4).



                                          1
                                  HCi =      (hci - HCiF T )                              (4)
                                          Ni

Where Ni is the number of active founding team members at the firm in the quarter prior to
the death shock, HCiF T is the average human capital of those members, and hci is the human


                                             22
capital of the deceased member. Since hci and HCiF T are measured in logs, HCi measures
the percentage change in the average human capital of the remaining founding team caused
by the death shock.19 If hci < HCiF T , loss of the member will increase the average human
capital of the remaining founding team, and if hci > HCiF T the opposite will occur.
    Table 7 presents interaction effects with the relative human capital variable. For relative
human capital, the loss of a founding team member with the average human capital among
the founding team (P ost × T reated) yields large and statistically significant reductions in
employment, revenue and productivity. For example, the impact on ihs revenue is about -0.3
and the impact on ihs productivity is about -0.2. These effects are similar in magnitude to
the average treatment effects reported in Table 2. These results again support our broader
focus on founding teams, providing further evidence that our main results are not simply
driven by founders. It is still true, however, that the loss of a founding team member with
higher relative human capital yields a larger adverse effect of outcomes. For example, the
loss of a founding team member with 25 log point higher human capital yields a reduction in
ihs revenue that is about 0.18 larger (total effect of -0.48) and a reduction in ihs productivity
that is 0.12 larger (for a total effect of about -0.31). The gap between ihs and log results
is greater for the interaction effect suggesting that losing an especially high human capital
member is relatively more important on the extensive margin.
    Comparing the impact of the loss of an early joiner and a mean relative human capital
founding team member yields further insights. The quantitative impact of the latter is about
twice as the former. This suggests that not all early joiners have the same impact. At the low
end of human capital the impact is substantially smaller.20 Putting the pieces together, our
  19
      This relative change measure has similar properties to to a term in the decomposition method developed
by Foster, Haltiwanger, and Krizan (2001), who break down the change in aggregate productivity into the
components driven by entrants, stayers, and exiters. A founding team member death is analogous to exit
that causes the change in average human capital of the remaining founding team members.
   20
      The results in Table 7 also imply that losing a founding team member with sufficiently low relative
human capital would actually boost scale and productivity. Given the magnitudes of the coefficients, this
would typically require a founding team member with very low relative human capital; for example, for
ihs(Rev ) it would require the deceased member to have relative human capital that is more than 40 log
points below the mean.



                                                    23
results suggest not only that founders are important, but also that the impact of a founding
team member is closely follows the individual's level of human capital.


5.3.2   Persistence of the Effect

While we find that the negative impacts of a founding team member death shock are per-
sistent through five years after the shock, it is instructive to consider how long these effects
last. Long lasting negative effects may indicate that disruptions caused by the founding
team member loss are not easily resolved by replacement hiring. It is possible that catch-up
dynamics occurring outside of the five year window in our baseline analyses result in treated
firms converging with their matched counterparts in size and productivity over a longer
time horizon. To investigate this possibility, we re-estimate the regression Equation (1) and
compare the differences in firms' performance through 10 years after the shock.
   We find, as shown in Figure 8, that the negative effects for all of our ihs measures are
remarkably persistent and do not dissipate even 10 years after the shock. As in our main
results, treated firms appear to partially recover between 1 and 2 years after the shock, but
never fully return to their pre-shock performance. These results reinforce our view that
founding team members are not easily replaceable because organizational capital is largely
inalienable from the founding team members.


5.3.3   Anticipation Effect

To ensure that a founding team member death is unanticipated, we follow the literature and
define premature death as those occurring at age less than 60. Even so, one might question
whether these deaths are truly unanticipated. For example, a critical health condition of a
founder might be known years before their death, allowing the firm to adjust to such news
in advance. We address this concern in our baseline sample by restricting to cases in which
the deceased individuals are active wage earners at the firm in the same quarter the death
is observed. Moreover, parallel pre-trends shown in Figures 4 and 5 demonstrate that there


                                              24
is no statistically identifiable anticipation effect.
    Nonetheless, we test whether our results differ when the death occurs among relatively
younger individuals, for whom death is likely to be more difficult to anticipate. We classify
treated firms based upon whether the founding team member that died was above or below
the median age of all founding team deaths in our sample.21 Table 8 shows the results based
on whether the deceased founding member is relatively older. Generally, we do not find sig-
nificant differences in the effects of deaths of young versus old founding team members. The
only exception to this is the estimate for ihs productivity, which is negative and significant
at the 10% level, but the magnitude is relatively small compared to the main effect size.
Similar results in both the direction and magnitudes for young versus old individuals allay
the concerns about anticipation effects and the exogeneity of our death shock.


5.3.4    Small Business-Intensive Industries

Rather than organizational capital, our main results may be driven by particular industries
where small business owner-operators are particularly important. Hurst and Pugsley (2011)
show that the majority of small businesses are concentrated in a subset of industries such as
skilled craftsmen, lawyers, real estate agents, doctors, small shopkeepers and restaurateurs.
Firms in these industries tend to operate with small natural scale of production and their
operation depends heavily on the human capital and labor supply of business owners. One
might argue that a plumbing business with one owner will necessarily have to exit if the
owner-plumber dies unexpectedly. Since founding teams in these industries are generally
small, the probability of the deceased founding team member being one of the business
owners is relatively high.22
    While closely related, a tight link between owner death and firm exit under small natural
  21
    The median age of founding team members who died in our sample is 45 years old.
  22
    Note that death of a business owner does not necessarily lead to business closure if there are multiple
owners. Kerr and Kerr (2017) document that the average number of owners for new businesses in the U.S. is
around two. In addition, even if the owner of a single-owner business dies, it does not close if another entity
acquires the business and continues its operation.



                                                      25
scale of production is distinct from our organizational capital hypothesis. If the negative
impact of losing a founding team member is predominantly driven by startup firms in these
small business-intensive industries, one may argue that our main results are driven by the
nature of production technology of young firms in these industries rather than the organiza-
tional capital embodied in the deceased founding team member.
   To test this alternative hypothesis we estimate heterogeneous treatment effects using a
small-business intensive industry indicator. Following Hurst and Pugsley (2011), we define
small business-intensive industries as the top 40 four-digit NAICS industries in terms of the
share of small firms (those with less than 20 employees) out of all firms in the same industry.
Results are shown in Table 9. We find that the negative ihs effects are 0.03, 0.11, and 0.07
log points larger for the HP sector. Relative to the effect of 0.16 in ihs employment for
non-HP sectors, the estimated coefficient implies that the negative impact in the HP sector
is about 21 percent larger. Nonetheless, the estimated effects for non-HP sectors are similar
in magnitude to the main effects shown in Table 2, indicating that the main results are not
primarily driven by small-business intensive industries. Consistent with the intuition above,
losing a founding team member in a small-business intensive industries has no statistically
significant impact on log outcomes suggesting that in these industries the primary impact
of losing a founding team member is on the extensive margin.
   When we further explore the heterogeneous effect by the founder status of the deceased
member, as shown in Table 10, we find that death of early joiners in HP sectors ­ who are not
likely business owners ­ causes ihs employment to decline by 0.08. This again is inconsistent
with our main results being driven by deaths occurring in small family-owned businesses or
those of plumbers, or skilled-craftsmen, whose business operations are mostly tied to the
owners' human capital and labor. Even in small-business intensive industries early joiners
play a critical role in startup performance.




                                               26
5.3.5    High Tech Sector

Next we examine whether the negative impact of losing a founding team member is partic-
ularly pronounced in High Tech industries. One may argue that the organizational capital
hypothesis applies to founding teams of innovative, growth-oriented ventures such as those
in High Tech industries. Conversely, organizational capital may be less relevant for the
vast majority of new businesses outside of those High Tech industries. To investigate this
possibility, we compare the impact of the death shock between High Tech and non-High
Tech industries. To identify High Tech industries we use the updated STEM classification
in Goldschlag and Miranda (2016), which uses STEM employment shares following Hecker
(2005).23
   As shown in Table 11, we find no evidence that effects differ between High Tech and
non-High Tech industries. Given that High Tech is a relatively small share of our sample, we
might be worried about statistical power. Table 12 suggests this is not the case. When we
compare treated and control firms within High Tech industries there remains a substantial
adverse impact on scale and productivity of magnitudes comparable to the main effects
reported in Table 2 and the non-High Tech estimates (P ost × T reated in Table 11). The
loss of a founding team member for a firm within the High Tech industries yields an impact
on ihs revenue of -0.47 (compared to the -0.36 impact in Table 2) and an impact on ihs
productivity of -0.31 (compared to the -0.16 impact in Table 2).


5.3.6    Young versus Mature Firms

In early phase of their life cycle, young firms learn about the viability of their business
ideas (Jovanovic, 1982; Kerr, Nanda, and Rhodes-Kropf, 2014) and build a customer base
from the ground up (Foster, Haltiwanger, and Syverson, 2016), often in the face of financial
constraints (Schmalz, Sraer, and Thesmar, 2017). Since young firms are underdeveloped
  23
     This classification has recently been used to study the dynamics of High Tech industries in Decker,
Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Miranda (2018).



                                                  27
along many dimensions, they may be especially sensitive to unanticipated shocks relative
to more mature firms.24 Our results might be driven by the inherent sensitivity of nascent
firms. To test this idea we extend our data to incorporate founding team member deaths that
occur when the firms are older (up to age 11). Then we compare heterogeneous treatment
effects of the shock by maturity of the firms: between age 0 and 5 versus between age 6 and
11.
      The results are presented in Table 13. Surprisingly, we find that the negative impact is
smaller for young startups, which experience an attenunation of 15% and 13% in the decrease
in employment and revenue, respectively, relative to their mature counterparts. This result
could be explained by at least two factors. First, as we show in Figure 2, founding team
members that remain at the firm longer tend to have higher human capital. Second, founding
team members accumulate work experience and firm-specific human capital as the firm ages,
leading to a larger negative impact of their death. Nonetheless, our findings do not appear
to be driven solely by the vulnerability of young firms.


5.3.7     Emotional Distress

Finally, an important alternative explanation of our findings is the emotional distress that
results from the loss of a coworker, which negatively impacts the motivation and productivity
of the surviving members of the startup. Rather than the loss of organizational capital, it
may be the interpersonal shock associated with the death of a colleague that explains the
post-shock decline in firm performance. While we cannot directly observe and control for the
emotional well-being of individuals, our results thus far do not appear to support emotional
distress as the primary mechanism. For instance, we find that the negative impact on firm
performance increases with the human capital of the deceased founding team member (see
Table 7). Insofar as losing a coworker is a traumatizing event in and of itself, it is unlikely
that the severity of the emotional toll is proportional to the prior earnings of the deceased
   24
      Consistent with this argument, Fort, Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Miranda (2013) show that young firms
are disproportionately negatively affected by economic crises, even more so than old and small firms.


                                                  28
individual. The same logic applies to the differential impact by the loss of founders versus
early joiners, and the industry of the startup (e.g., B2B versus B2C-oriented). Furthermore,
one might expect the emotional shock to gradually subside, especially given the substantial
turnover among young firms. Our findings, however, show that that the negative impacts
persist even ten years after the death shock. While we cannot rule out the importance of
psychological stress induced from losing a coworker, our results do not support this as a
primary mechanism underlying the link between the loss of a founding team member and
startup performance.



6     Concluding Remarks

In this paper we investigate the relationship between the founding teams and post-entry out-
comes across scale, growth, productivity, and survival. We combine employee-employer data
with administrative tax information on all new employer startups between 1990 and 2015.
We begin by demonstrating the salience of founding team characteristics for understanding
young firm dynamics. We document that the founding team's human capital, proxied by
prior earnings of each team member, is systematically related to startup performance. Fur-
thermore, we document rich attrition dynamics and assortative matching between founders
and early joiners in the founding team.
    To explain these patterns, we develop a hypothesis that startup performance largely
depends on the organizational capital developed by the founding team in the early stages
of firm formation. Organizational capital consists of tacit knowledge and resources such as
customer relationships and founding vision. In this conceptual framework, we posit that
organizational capital is largely embedded in individuals. Therefore, organizational capital
is (at least partly) lost when a founding team member suddenly separates from the firm.
    To test this hypothesis, we leverage the premature death of founding team members in
a difference-in-difference framework to identify the causal impact of losing a founding team



                                            29
member. We use a matching strategy to create a group of control firms that are observably
similar to our "treated" firms that experience death of its founding team member. Our
estimates imply that exogenously separating a founding team member from a startup has a
negative, significant, and persistent impact on employment, revenue, and labor productivity.
   To further whether organizational capital is a primary mechanism underlying our main
results, we explore a series of heterogeneous treatment effects in settings where the role
of organizational capital is expected to be more or less salient. First, we show that the
impact of losing a founding team member is especially large for founders, though the effect
is significant and economically important for early joiners as well. We also show that the
negative effects are larger in B2B intensive industries, where firms are more dependent on
relationships with other businesses. In addition, the adverse impact of losing a founding team
member is significantly greater for firms with small founding teams. All of these results are
consistent with our hypothesis that organizational capital is an important mechanism by
which founding teams contribute to firm performance.
   We show the robustness of our results and measurement with additional heterogeneous
treatments. Founders are difficult to precisely identify in our data, but our founder estimates
are confirmed by our finding that that the loss of higher human capital founding team
members is particularly damaging to the firm. Analogous to the early joiner estimates, we
find that the typical founding team member with the average level of human capital still
has an important impact on firm outcomes. To ensure that our premature death shocks are
unanticipated we show that the effects of losing a younger founding team member, for whom
death is more difficult to anticipate, are not significantly different than those for the loss of
an older founding team member. Moreover, our results are remarkably persistent, unabated
up to ten years after the shock. We also find that our results are similar for High Tech
and non-High Tech industries, suggesting the importance of founding teams even outside of
innovation-intensive industries.
   Finally, though consistent with our organizational capital hypothesis, our estimates could


                                               30
be explained by several other factors. These alternative mechanisms include the main effects
being driven by: small business intensive industries where firms are more reliant on owner-
operator provided labor, the inherent fragility of young businesses, and the emotional trauma
associated the the loss of colleague. Testing each in turn, the findings continue to support
our organizational capital hypothesis. Though effects are larger in small-business intensive
industries, our main effects do not appear to be driven by those larger effects ­ early joiners in
these industries appear to matter for firm performance as well. We also find that the negative
effects are larger for more mature startups, cutting against the argument that our findings
reflect the inherent fragility of young businesses. Finally, taken together, our findings that
losing founders and higher human capital founding team member has a larger effect suggest
that, though emotional distress may play a role, it is unlikely to be the primary mechanism
at work.25
    We explore both the extensive and intensive margins of losing a founding team member.
Losing a founding team member reduces the probability of survival but also has a significant
and persistent adverse impact on intensive margin outcomes. Our results suggest that the
extensive margin is relatively more important for founders, high human capital founding
team members, and for founding team members from small teams and in small business
intensive industries.
    Our findings demonstrate that the founding team, inclusive of but also beyond the
founders themselves, is important in accounting for post-entry dynamics of firms. One
concern about this interpretation is whether our results are being driven by the impact of
losing a worker whether or not they are members of the founding team. The evidence in
Jager and Heining (2019) argues against this view. They find that small (but not necessarily
  25
     Relatedly, Jaravel, Petkova, and Bell (2018) provide evidence against this mechanism of emotional
distress among surviving co-inventors by turning to the fact that the treatment effect is long-lasting and also
larger when losing a high-achieving collaborator. It is also worth noting that SYZZ find that the retirement
of founders yields about the same adverse impact as a premature death of a founder. Retirements are a
less plausibly exogenous separation but it is instructive that the effects of retirements are similar to those
for premature deaths in their setting. It would be interesting to explore alternative forms of exogenous
separations in future work.



                                                      31
young) businesses that lose a worker due to premature death suffer only a relatively small,
temporary reduction in employment while we find a large, persistent impact.
   Taken together, our results demonstrate the critical role of founding teams in shaping
the growth dynamics and survival of young firms. Consistent with the large and persistent
adverse impact of losing a founding team member, organizational capital formed during the
early stages of a firms life-cycle appears to be embodied in the founding teams. Though
it raises many questions for future research, this study sheds light on founding teams as a
central piece to understanding the sources of the enormous variation in startup performance.




                                            32
References
Acemoglu, D., U. Akcigit, N. Bloom, and W. R. Kerr (2018) "Innovation, Reallocation and
  Growth," American Economic Review, 108, 3450­3491.

Agarwal, R., S. Braguinsky, and A. Ohyama (2019) "Centers of gravity: The effect of stable
  shared leadership in top management teams on firm growth and industry evolution,"
  Strategic Management Journal, pp. 1­32.

Alon, T., D. Berger, R. Dent, and B. Pugsley (2018) "Older and slower: The startup deficit's
  lasting effects on aggregate productivity growth," Journal of Monetary Economics, 93, 68­
  85.

Azoulay, P., J. S. Graff Zivin, and J. Wang (2010) "Superstar extinction," The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 125(2), 549­589.

Azoulay, P., B. Jones, J. D. Kim, and J. Miranda (2020) "Age and High-Growth En-
  trepreneurship," Discussion Paper 1.

Becker, S., and H. Hvide (2019) "Entrepreneurship and Startup Performance," Discussion
  paper, SSRN Working Paper No. 2199645.

Blackwell, M., S. Iacus, G. King, and G. Porro (2009) "cem: Coarsened exact matching in
  Stata," The Stata Journal, 9(4), 524­546.

Burbidge, J., L. Magee, and A. L. Robb (1988) "Alternative transformations to handle
  extreme values of the dependent variable," Journal of the American Statistical Association,
  83(401), 123--27.

Choi, J. (2017) "Entrepreneurial Risk-Taking, Young Firm Dynamics, and Aggregate Impli-
 cations," Discussion paper, University of Maryland.

Dahl, M. S., and S. Klepper (2015) "Whom do new firms hire?," Industrial and Corporate
 Change, 24(4), 819­836.

Davis, S., J. Faberman, and J. Haltiwanger (2013) "The Establishment-Level Behavior of
  Vacancies and Hiring," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(2), 581­622.

Decker, R., J. Haltiwanger, R. Jarmin, and J. Miranda (2014) "The role of entrepreneurship
  in US job creation and economic dynamism," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 28(3),
  3­24.

Decker, R. A., J. Haltiwanger, R. S. Jarmin, and J. Miranda (2016) "Where has all the
  skewness gone? The decline in high-growth (young) firms in the US," European Economic
  Review, 86, 4­23.

         (2018) "Changing Business Dynamism and Productivity: Shocks vs. Responsive-
  ness," American Economic Review, 110, 3952­3990.



                                             33
Delgado, M., and K. G. Mills (2020) "The supply chain economy: A new industry catego-
  rization for understanding innovation in services," Research Policy, 49(8), 104039.

Ericson, R., and A. Pakes (1995) "Markov-Perfect Industry Dynamics: A Framework for
  Empirical Work," Review of Economic Studies, 62, 53­82.

Ewens, M., and M. Marx (2017) "Founder replacement and startup performance," The Re-
 view of Financial Studies, 31(4), 1532­1565.

Fort, T. C., J. Haltiwanger, R. S. Jarmin, and J. Miranda (2013) "How firms respond to
  business cycles: The role of firm age and firm size," IMF Economic Review, 61(3), 520­
  559.

Foster, L., J. Haltiwanger, and C. Krizan (2001) "Aggregate Productivity Growth: Lessons
  from Microeconomic Evidence," in New Developments in Productivty Analysis.

Foster, L., J. Haltiwanger, and C. Syverson (2016) "The slow growth of new plants: Learning
  about demand?," Economica, 83(329), 91­129.

Goldschlag, N., and J. Miranda (2016) "Business Dynamics Statistics of High Tech Indus-
 tries," Discussion paper, Census Bureau Center for Economic Studies.

Guzman, J., and S. Stern (2015) "Nowcasting and placecasting entrepreneurial quality and
 performance," Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Haltiwanger, J., R. S. Jarmin, R. Kulick, and J. Miranda (2017) "High Growth Young Firms:
  Contribution to Job, Output and Productivity Growth," in Measuring Entrepreneurial
  Businesses: Current Knowledge and Challenges.

Haltiwanger, J., R. S. Jarmin, and J. Miranda (2013) "Who creates jobs? Small versus large
  versus young," Review of Economics and Statistics, 95(2), 347­361.

Hecker, D. E. (2005) "High-Technology Employment: a NAICS-Based Update," Monthly
  Lab. Rev., 128, 57.

Hopenhayn, H. (1992) "Entry, Exit and Firm Dynamics in Long Run Equilibrium," Econo-
  metrica, 60(5), 1127­1150.

Hopenhayn, H., and R. Rogerson (1993) "Job turnover and policy evaluation: A general
  equilibrium approach," Journal of Political Economy, 101, 915­938.

Hurst, E., and B. Pugsley (2011) "What Do Small Businesses Do?," Brookings Papers on
 Economic Activity.

Hyatt, H., S. Murray, and K. Sandusky (2020) "Business Income Dynamics and Labor Market
  Fluidity," Discussion paper, US Census Bureau.

Iyigun, M. F., and A. L. Owen (1998) "Risk, entrepreneurship, and human-capital accumu-
  lation," The American Economic Review, 88(2), 454­457.


                                            34
Jager, S., and J. Heining (2019) "How Substitutible Are Workers? Evidence from Worker
  Deaths," Discussion paper, MIT and IAB.

Jaravel, X., N. Petkova, and A. Bell (2018) "Team-specific capital and innovation," American
  Economic Review, 108(4-5), 1034­73.

Jones, B. F., and B. A. Olken (2005) "Do leaders matter? National leadership and growth
  since World War II," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(3), 835­864.

Jovanovic, B. (1982) "Selection and the Evolution of Industry," Econometrica: Journal of
  the Econometric Society, pp. 649­670.

Kaplan, S. N., B. A. Sensoy, and P. Str¨
                                       omberg (2009) "Should investors bet on the jockey
 or the horse? Evidence from the evolution of firms from early business plans to public
 companies," The Journal of Finance, 64(1), 75­115.

Kerr, S. P., and W. R. Kerr (2017) "Immigrant entrepreneurship," in Measuring en-
  trepreneurial businesses: Current knowledge and challenges, pp. 187­249. University of
  Chicago Press.

Kerr, W. R., R. Nanda, and M. Rhodes-Kropf (2014) "Entrepreneurship as experimentation,"
  Journal of Economic Perspectives, 28(3), 25­48.

Kim, J. D. (2018) "Is There a Startup Wage Premium? Evidence from MIT Graduates,"
  Research Policy, 47(3), 637­649.

Klotz, A. C., K. M. Hmieleski, B. H. Bradley, and L. W. Busenitz (2014) "New venture teams:
  A review of the literature and roadmap for future research," Journal of management, 40(1),
  226­255.

Kulchina, E., and P. Gjerlov-Juel (2019) "Entrepreneur - a Jockey or a Horse Owner?,"
 Working Paper.

Lazear, E. P. (2004) "Balanced skills and entrepreneurship," American Economic Review,
  94(2), 208­211.

Lucas, R. (1978) "On the Size Distribution of Business Firms," Bell Journal of Economics,
  9, 508­523.

Nelson, S. C. (2016) "Paying Themselves: S Corporation Owners and Trends in S Cor-
  poration Income, 1980-2013," Discussion paper, Department of Treasury, Office of Tax
  Analysis Paper.

Nguyen, B. D., and K. M. Nielsen (2010) "The value of independent directors: Evidence
  from sudden deaths," Journal of Financial Economics, 98(3), 550­567.

Oettl, A. (2012) "Reconceptualizing Stars: Scientist Helpfulness and Peer Performance,"
 Management Science, 58(6), 1122­1140.



                                            35
Ouimet, P., and R. Zarutskie (2014) "Who works for startups? The relation between firm
 age, employee age, and growth," Journal of financial Economics, 112(3), 386­407.

Pence, K. (2006) "The role of wealth transformations: An application to estimating the
  effect of tax incentives on savings," Contributions to Economic Analysis and Policy, 5(1),
  1­20.

Pugsley, B. W., P. Sedlacek, and V. Sterk (2018) "The Nature of Firm Growth," Discussion
  paper, CEPR Discussion Paper No. DP12670.

Roach, M., and H. Sauermann (2015) "Founder or Joiner? The Role of Preferences and Con-
  text in Shaping Different Entrepreneurial Interests," Management Science, 61(9), 2160­
  2184.

Schmalz, M. C., D. A. Sraer, and D. Thesmar (2017) "Housing collateral and entrepreneur-
  ship," The Journal of Finance, 72(1), 99­132.

Smith, M., D. Yagan, O. Zidar, and E. Zwick (2019) "Capitalists in the 21st Century,"
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 134, 1675­1745.

Wasserman, N. (2017) "The throne vs. the kingdom: Founder control and value creation in
 startups," Strategic Management Journal, 38, 255­277.




                                            36
Figures

         Figure 1: Founder and Early Joiner Human Capital and Startup Outcomes




     (a) Emp Growth and Human Capital                    (b) Productivity Growth and Human Capital




                                     (c) Exit and Human Capital

Source: Founding Team Database (LBD, LEHD), author's calculations.
Notes: Controlling for industry-year effects and initial employment in employment growth and exit
regressions and initial labor productivity for labor productivity growth regressions. Shown are 95%
confidence interval estimates for each HC bin. Estimates are relative to reference group HC bin 1.




                                                    37
              Figure 2: Founder and Early Joiner Attrition and Human Capital




                                                         (b) Human Capital of Active Founders, Early
    (a) Attrition of Founders, Early Joiners             Joiners

Source: Founding Team Database (LBD, LEHD), author's calculations.
Notes: Mean count of active (earnings positive) founders and early joiners each year after startup (a) and
mean active founder and early joiner log human capital (prior earnings) (b).




            Figure 3: Human Capital Composition of Founders and Early Joiners




Source: Founding Team Database (LBD, LEHD), author's calculations.
Notes: Mean early joiner human capital quantile bin for each founder human capital quantile bin. 45
shown to emphasis when founder human capital position is equal to early joiner human capital position.




                                                    38
                    Figure 4: Founding Teams Death Shocks and ihs(Emp)




Source: Founding Team Database (LBD, LEHD), author's calculations.
Notes: Controlling for firm effects, firm age and industry-year effects. Hollow points  p > 0.05. Reference
group t - 1. Mean mechanical effect shown is the implied reduction in ihs(Emp) given a one-person
reduction in firm size induced by the founding team member death given the average number of employees
of the firms at the time of the death shock is 15.5, the mean size at death shock in our sample.




              Figure 5: Founding Teams Death Shocks, ihs(Rev ) and ihs(P rod)




        (a) Death Shocks and ihs(Rev )                         (b) Death Shocks and ihs(P rod)

Source: Founding Team Database (LBD, LEHD), author's calculations.
Notes: Controlling for firm effects, firm age and industry-year effects. Hollow points  p > 0.05. Reference
group t - 1.




                                                    39
                                 Figure 6: Founding Teams Death Shocks, log (Emp), log (Rev ), and log (P rod)




                   (a) Death Shocks and log (Emp)                                                       (b) Death Shocks and log (Rev )
40




                                                             (c) Death Shocks and log (P rod)

     Source: Founding Team Database (LBD, LEHD), author's calculations.
     Notes: Controlling for firm effects, firm age and industry-year effects. Hollow points  p > 0.05. Reference group t - 1.
                      Figure 7: Founding Teams Death Shocks and Survival




Source: Founding Team Database (LBD, LEHD), author's calculations.
Notes: Cox estimate 0.35 (0.013). Controlling for firm age, industry, state, and year.




                                                     41
                                      Figure 8: Persistence of Effects, ihs(Emp), ihs(Rev ), and ihs(P rod)




                   (a) Death Shocks and ihs(Emp)                                                        (b) Death Shocks and ihs(Rev )
42




                                                             (c) Death Shocks and ihs(P rod)

     Source: Founding Team Database (LBD, LEHD), author's calculations.
     Notes: Controlling for firm effects, firm age and industry-year effects. Hollow points  p > 0.05. Reference group t - 1.
Tables

         Table 1: Summary Statistics on Treated and Controls in Death Shock Year

                                                         Treated Control
                               Firm Age                    2.463   2.464
                               Log(Employment)             1.968   1.891
                               Log(Revenue)                7.166   7.161
                               Log(Productivity)           4.409   4.539
                               Avg Age of FT               42.05   41.98

Source: Founding Team Database (LBD, LEHD), author's calculations.
Notes: Means of key variables for the treated (death shock cases) and controls in the death shock year.
Observation counts rounded to avoid the disclosure of sensitive information.




                         Table 2: Premature Death Shock, Main Effects

                      ihs(Emp) ihs(Rev ) ihs(P rod) log (Emp) log (Rev ) log (P rod)
 Post                   .2477*** .3578***  .1627*** .07332*** .04057*** -.02588***
                       (.006371) (.01294) (.009183)   (.005002) (.006311)  (.006088)
 Post × Treated        -.1682*** -.375*** -.2428*** -.05137*** -.1059*** -.05579***
                       (.008284) (.01836)   (.01318)  (.006822) (.009083)  (.008237)

 R2                       .7159         .6012         .6022          .8766         .8917          .8153
 N                       316000        224000        224000         290000        210000         210000

Source: Founding Team Database (LBD, LEHD), author's calculations.
Notes: Controlling for industry-year, firm, and firm age effects. Robust standard errors in parentheses. 
p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01. ihs(P rod) indicates ihs(Rev ) - ihs(Emp). Observation counts rounded
to avoid the disclosure of sensitive information.




                                                    43
                           Table 3: Firm Death Linear Probability Model

                     Firm Dth t + 1 Firm Dth t + 2              Firm Dth t + 3         Firm Dth t + 4 Firm Dth t + 5
 Treated                    .123***      .1337***                    .1321***               .1294***         .124***
                           (.01154)       (.01135)                    (.01099)               (.01092)       (.01086)

 R2                              .1511                .1389                    .1392              .1466                 .1529
 N                               52500                52500                    52500              52500                 52500
 Control Mean                   .07667                .1644                    .2329              .2841                 .3258

Source: Founding Team Database (LBD, LEHD), author's calculations.
Notes: Controlling for industry-year, state, and firm age effects. Robust standard errors in parentheses. 
p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01. ihs(P rod) indicates ihs(Rev ) - ihs(Emp). Each column shows estimates
where the LHS variable is a binary indicator equal to 1 if the firm exits some number of years after the
premature death shock. Observation counts rounded to avoid the disclosure of sensitive information. The
mean of the LHS variable among control firms, which captures the firm death rate some number of years
after the premature death shock is shown at the bottom of the table.


                     Table 4: Founder vs. Early Joiner Heterogeneous Effects

                                    ihs(Emp)       ihs(Rev )     ihs(P rod)      log (Emp)       log (Rev )    log (P rod)
 Post × Treated                    -.08331***     -.1265***     -.05837***      -.03583***     -.05057***         -.01611
                                       (.01218)     (.02323)        (.01585)      (.009717)       (.01207)       (.01072)
 Post × Treated × Founder            -.1742***    -.5479***       -.4069***       -.03397**       -.126***    -.08915***
                                       (.01649)     (.03686)        (.02657)        (.01362)      (.01829)       (.01661)

 R2                                     .7161         .6024          .6036           .8767          .8918            .8154
 N                                     316000        224000         224000          290000         210000           210000

Source: Founding Team Database (LBD, LEHD), author's calculations.
Notes: Controlling for industry-year, firm, and firm age effects. Robust standard errors in parentheses. 
p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01. ihs(P rod) indicates ihs(Rev ) - ihs(Emp). Observation counts rounded to
avoid the disclosure of sensitive information. Regression specifications also include P ost and P ost × F ounder,
the estimates for which are excluded for simplicity.




                                                       44
                                  Table 5: B2B Heterogeneous Effects

                              ihs(Emp)        ihs(Rev )     ihs(P rod)     log (Emp)       log (Rev )    log (P rod)
 Post × Treated                -.1429***     -.2798***       -.1809***    -.03528***     -.07002***     -.03661***
                                 (.01078)      (.02378)        (.01687)     (.008396)       (.01085)       (.01033)
 Post × Treated × B2B          -.05432**     -.2007***       -.1304***      -.03441**    -.07597***        -.0408**
                                 (.01671)      (.03698)        (.02658)       (.01387)      (.01845)       (.01666)

 R2                                .7159         .6013          .6023          .8767          .8917          .8153
 N                                316000        224000         224000         290000         210000         210000

Source: Founding Team Database (LBD, LEHD), author's calculations.
Notes: Controlling for industry-year, firm, and firm age effects. Robust standard errors in parentheses. 
p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01. ihs(P rod) indicates ihs(Rev ) - ihs(Emp). Observation counts rounded
to avoid the disclosure of sensitive information. Regression specifications also include P ost and P ost × B 2B ,
the estimates for which are excluded for simplicity.


                              Table 6: Small vs. Large Founding Teams

                         ihs(Emp) ihs(Rev ) ihs(P rod) log (Emp)   log (Rev ) log (P rod)
 Post × Treated         -.07172*** -.1001*** -.04023** -.02642** -.04537***      -.01632
                           (.01513)  (.02667)  (.01726)   (.0114)   (.01339)    (.01176)
 Post × Treated × Small -.1499*** -.4512*** -.3346*** -.03971** -.1003*** -.06637***
                           (.01802)  (.03623)  (.02512)  (.01426)   (.01809)    (.01623)

 R2                                      .716         .6021           .6034          .8767           .8918           .8154
 N                                     316000        224000          224000         290000          210000          210000

Source: Founding Team Database (LBD, LEHD), author's calculations.
Notes: Controlling for industry-year, firm, and firm age effects. Robust standard errors in parentheses. 
p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01. Observation counts rounded to avoid the disclosure of sensitive
information. Regressions specifications also include P ost and P ost × Small, the estimates for which are
excluded for simplicity. A firm is classified as small (Small = 1) if it has five or fewer active founding team
members in the year of the death shock (treatment).




                                                       45
                           Table 7: Human Capital Heterogeneous Effects

                     ihs(Emp) ihs(Rev )                     ihs(P rod) log (Emp)    log (Rev )             log (P rod)
 Post × Treated       -.1499*** -.3133***                    -.2006*** -.04482*** -.08924***                 -.048***
                      (.009483)    (.0201)                     (.01434)  (.007754)   (.01011)                (.00913)
 Post × Treated × HC -.2166*** -.6607***                     -.4711***       -.0357  -.1757**                -.1479**
                        (.04875)   (.1194)                     (.08587)   (.04191)     (.0597)                 (.0534)

 R2                                  .715         .6037          .6086           .8775             .89          .8168
 N                                 242000        176000         176000          223000          166000         166000

Source: Founding Team Database (LBD, LEHD), author's calculations.
Notes: Controlling for industry-year, firm, and firm age effects. Robust standard errors in parentheses. 
p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01. ihs(P rod) indicates ihs(Rev ) - ihs(Emp). Observation counts rounded
to avoid the disclosure of sensitive information. Regressions specifications also include P ost and P ost × HC ,
the estimates for which are excluded for simplicity.


                          Table 8: Older Founding Team Member Deaths

                                    ihs(Emp) ihs(Rev ) ihs(P rod) log (Emp) log (Rev ) log (P rod)
 Post × Treated                      -.1629*** -.3502*** -.2179*** -.05402*** -.1126*** -.05382***
                                       (.01255)  (.02713)  (.01938)     (.0103) (.01329)   (.01219)
 Post × Treated × Old FT               -.009963   -.04557  -.04514*    .004404    .01129   -.003685
                                       (.01669)   (.0368)  (.02641)   (.01374)  (.01823)     (.0166)

 R2                                      .7159         .6013           .6023          .8767          .8917          .8153
 N                                      316000        224000          224000         290000         210000         210000

Source: Founding Team Database (LBD, LEHD), author's calculations.
Notes: Controlling for industry-year, firm, and firm age effects. Robust standard errors in parentheses. 
p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01. Observation counts rounded to avoid the disclosure of sensitive
information. Regressions specifications also include P ost and P ost × OldF T , the estimates for which are
excluded for simplicity. OldF T is equal to 1 if the founding team member that died was above the median
age (45 years old) of all founding team member deaths.




                                                      46
                              Table 9: HP Sector Heterogeneous Effects

                             ihs(Emp)       ihs(Rev )    ihs(P rod)     log (Emp)       log (Rev )    log (P rod)
 Post × Treated               -.1576***    -.3416***      -.2221***    -.04757***     -.09898***     -.05705***
                                 (.0104)     (.02227)       (.01565)     (.008383)       (.01101)      (.009752)
 Post × Treated × HP          -.03372**      -.1087**     -.06724**         -.01217       -.02257        .003983
                                  (.017)     (.03932)       (.02898)      (.01438)       (.01947)       (.01817)

 R2                              .7159         .6013          .6023         .8766          .8917          .8153
 N                              316000        224000         224000        290000         210000         210000

Source: Founding Team Database (LBD, LEHD), author's calculations.
Notes: Controlling for industry-year, firm, and firm age effects. Robust standard errors in parentheses. 
p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01. ihs(P rod) indicates ihs(Rev ) - ihs(Emp). Observation counts rounded
to avoid the disclosure of sensitive information. Regressions specifications also include P ost and P ost × HP ,
the estimates for which are excluded for simplicity. HP is equal to 1 if the firm is in a HP sector and zero
otherwise.


                      Table 10: HP Sector by Founder Heterogeneous Effects

                                             ihs(Emp) ihs(Rev ) ihs(P rod)
            Post   × Treated                -.08338*** -.1258*** -.05914**
                                                (.01461)  (.02744)  (.01839)
            Post   × Treated × Founder        -.1659*** -.5173*** -.3906***
                                                (.02063)  (.04556)  (.03233)
            Post   × Treated × HP             -.0003677 -.002745      .00297
                                                (.02613)   (.0514)  (.03631)
            Post   × Treated × HP × Founder      -.02113   -.08341   -.04607
                                                (.03439)  (.07814)  (.05742)

            R2                                                .7162         .6024          .6036
            N                                                316000        224000         224000

Source: Founding Team Database (LBD, LEHD), author's calculations.
Notes: Controlling for industry-year, firm, and firm age effects. Robust standard errors in parentheses. 
p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01. ihs(P rod) indicates ihs(Rev ) - ihs(Emp). Observation counts rounded
to avoid the disclosure of sensitive information. Regressions specifications also include P ost and P ost × HP ,
the estimates for which are excluded for simplicity. HP is equal to 1 if the firm is in a HP sector and zero
otherwise.




                                                        47
                            Table 11: High Tech Heterogeneous Effects

                     ihs(Emp) ihs(Rev ) ihs(P rod) log (Emp) log (Rev ) log (P rod)
 Post × Treated       -.1674*** -.3715*** -.2402*** -.05163*** -.1053*** -.05488***
                      (.008391)   (.01858)  (.01335)  (.006889) (.009112)  (.008345)
 Post × Treated × HT     -.02319      -.093  -.06966     .00735    -.01521    -.02497
                        (.05039)   (.1114)  (.07982)   (.04413)  (.06385)   (.04951)

 R2                                .7159         .6012         .6022            .8766         .8917            .8153
 N                                316000        224000        224000           290000        210000           210000

Source: Founding Team Database (LBD, LEHD), author's calculations.
                                                                                                           
Notes: Controlling for industry-year, firm, and firm age effects. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01. Observation counts rounded to avoid the disclosure of sensitive
information. Regressions specifications also include P ost and P ost × HT , the estimates for which are
excluded for simplicity. HT is equal to 1 if the firm is in a High Tech industry and zero otherwise.




                                  Table 12: High Tech Main Effects

                       ihs(Emp) ihs(Rev ) ihs(P rod)              log (Emp) log (Rev ) log (P rod)
  Post                   .2454*** .3059***    .1307**              .08483**    .02456     -.03747
                          (.03853) (.07574)  (.05472)               (.03153) (.04672)    (.03975)
  Post × Treated        -.1976*** -.468*** -.3103***                 -.04937    -.123*    -.08034
                          (.05049)  (.1111)    (.0792)              (.04386) (.06362)    (.04916)

  R2                        .6909          .5805         .4925         .8435         .8469         .6865
  N                         10000           7700          7700          9400          7300          7300

Source: Founding Team Database (LBD, LEHD), author's calculations.
                                                                                                           
Notes: Controlling for industry-year, firm, and firm age effects. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01. Observation counts rounded to avoid the disclosure of sensitive
information. Includes only firms in High Tech industries.




                                                    48
                       Table 13: Young vs. Mature Heterogeneous Effects

                                    ihs(Emp) ihs(Rev ) ihs(P rod) log (Emp) log (Rev ) log (P rod)
 Post × Treated                      -.2007*** -.4267***  -.283*** -.05279*** -.1304*** -.07603***
                                       (.01152)  (.02546) (.01825)   (.009227)  (.01224)   (.01057)
 Post × Treated × Yg Firm             .03328**    .05351*  .04148*       .0019   .02505*     .02011
                                       (.01414)  (.03123) (.02243)    (.01147)  (.01522)    (.0134)

 R2                                      .7349         .6133          .6043           .883         .8962        .8152
 N                                      411000        300000         300000         382000        285000       285000

Source: Founding Team Database (LBD, LEHD), author's calculations.
Notes: Controlling for industry-year, firm, and firm age effects. Robust standard errors in parentheses. 
p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01. Observation counts rounded to avoid the disclosure of sensitive
information. Regressions specifications also include P ost and P ost × Y gF irm, the estimates for which are
excluded for simplicity. Y gF irm is equal to 1 if the firm is five years old or younger in the year of
treatment.




                                                    49
                                Not intended for publication.


Appendix
A.1     Model
In this appendix, we develop an illustrative two period model of selection and size based on
the formation of organizational capital by founding teams. To start a business, an entrant
pays a fixed entry fee in a formation period with a founding team devoting time and resources
to develop organizational capital. Let the number of founding team members be given by N .
Founding team members are ex ante homogeneous but are heterogeneous in terms of their
ex post match quality for developing organizational capital. We intentionally focus initially
on a specification without ex ante differences among founding team matters to highlight the
potential role of the founding team even without such effects. We discuss extensions with
ex ante heterogeneity below.
    This setting provides a novel way to interpret the ex ante fixed cost of entry in standard
models. Here it is given by w0 N where w0 is the market wage paid to the founding team in
the formation phase. That is, decisions about the founding team play a role of the fixed entry
fee. In period 0, the formation phase, the founding team invests in organizational capital
that a firm in turn obtains a draw Mi1 from a distribution of founding team match quality.
The founding team is also subject to exogenous idiosyncratic attrition before the production
period at a rate (1 - i1 ). This attrition impacts the available founding team members as
well as the productivity for period 1. Productivity in period 1 is given by Mi1 (1 - i1 ) . The
parameter  captures the knowledge decay from the (exogenous) attrition of founding team
members. If  = 0 then there is no decay so the organization capital created in the formation
period is not embodied in the founding team. However, as  increases there is positive decay.
Given the exogenous idiosyncratic attrition the maximum number of founding team members
available as employees in the production phase period 1 is LF      T
                                                                 i1  (1 - i1 ) N . Thus, the
maximum share of founding team members available in period 1 is 1 - i1 .
    In period 1, the firms decide whether to produce or exit, and then if they produce how
many workers to employ. The revenue function is given by:

                           Ri1 = Mi1 (1 - i1 ) (LF T   NT
                                                 i1 + Li1 - f )
                                                                
                                                                                           (5)

where LN   T
         i1 is the number of non-founding team members,  < 1 representing curvature in the
revenue function (from product differentiation or DRS),   1 is a parameter reflecting the
assumption that non-founding team members may be less productive in implementing the
organizational capital and f reflects fixed costs of production captured by overhead labor.
With this revenue function, the marginal revenue product of founding team members always
exceeds that of non-founding team members as long as  < 1. This formulation does not have
any knowledge capital decay from endogenous attrition of founding team members. Adding
this feature enhances the results discussed below but yields less transparent decision rules.
In this more general case, founding team members have higher marginal revenue products
than non-founding team members from this extra effect on productivity.
    The profit function is given by:

                 i1 = Mi1 (1 - i1 ) (LF T   NT              FT    NT
                                      i1 + Li1 - f ) - w1 (Li1 + Li1 )                     (6)


                                              50
                                  Not intended for publication.


where w1 is the market wage paid to the workers in the production period.26
    The first order conditions for founding team and non-founding team employment if the
firm produces are given by:
                                                     -1
                       Mi1 (1 - i1 ) (LF T   NT
                                       i1 + Li1 - f )   - w1 -  = 0                               (7)


                                                       -1
                        Mi1 (1 - i1 )  (LF T   NT
                                         i1 + Li1 - f )   - w1 = 0                                (8)
where  is the multiplier for the constraint LF T
                                             i1  (1 - i1 )N . It is apparent that for  < 1,
  NT
Li1 > 0 only if  > 0. This implies we can simplify these first order conditions for the
ranges where only founding team are employed and when non-founding team members are
employed. The optimal employment, revenue and revenue productivity are presented in the
main text.
   If only founding team members are employed and the constraint is not binding the optimal
number of founding team members to employ is given by:
                                                        1/(1-)
                              LF T                
                               i1 = (Mi1 (1 - i1 ) /w1 )       +f                                 (9)

   Revenues are given by:

                        Ri1 = (Mi1 (1 - i1 ) (Mi1 (1 - i1 ) /w1 )/(1-)                           (10)

   Observe that as either Mi1 declines or i1 increase then employment and revenue declines.
Also, revenue productivity Ri1 /LF T
                                 i1 in this range is given by:

                                 Ri1 /LF T                  FT
                                       i1 = (w1 / )(1 - f /Li1 )                                 (11)

   This implies that as Mi1 declines or i1 increases that productivity declines. In addition,
profits are given by:
                             i1 = LF   T
                                     i1 (w1 (1/ - 1)) - f w1 /                           (12)
    Thus for sufficiently low Mi1 or sufficiently high i1 profits will become negative and the
firm will exit. That is, either shock will lower employment and at sufficiently low employment
the firm cannot cover its fixed costs.
    For the range where the constraint is binding (i.e., LF  T
                                                           i1 = (1 - i1 ) N ) then the decision
rules depend on whether it is profitable to produce using non-founding team members. The
optimal number of non-founding team members, conditional on producing, is given by:
                            1
                   LN T
                    i1 =      [(Mi1 (1 - i1 ) /w1 )1/(1-) + f - (1 - i1 )N ]                     (13)
                            
   Revenue is given by:

                        Ri1 = (Mi1 (1 - i1 ) (Mi1 (1 - i1 ) /w1 )/(1-)                           (14)
  26
    Since F T members are more productive, it might be that the surplus is shared between the firm and
founding team members. We assume for simplicity that the firm gets all the surplus.



                                                 51
                                 Not intended for publication.


   Revenue labor productivity is given by:

                                Rit /Ltot                  tot
                                      i1 = (w1 / )(1 - f /Li1 )                            (15)

   where Ltot      FT      NT
            i1 = Li1 + Li1 . In this range, a decrease in Mi1 or increase in i1 yields a
decrease in employment, revenue and revenue labor productivity. That is, either will lower
employment and the overhead costs will be spread over a smaller number of workers yielding
lower productivity. Profits are given by:

                               i1 = Ltot
                                     i1 (w1 (1/ - 1)) - f w1 /                             (16)

    With sufficiently low Mi1 or sufficiently high i1 , profits will become negative and the
firm will exit. Observe as well that as i1 rises that the constraint on the number of founding
team members will be more likely to bind, which provides some incentive to replace them
in production with non-founding team members. However, an offsetting factor is that as
i1 increases the marginal product of workers declines. It is important to observe that all
of these implications for i1 depends on  > 0. Attrition of the founding team matters for
employment, revenue, productivity and exit only if the organizational capital knowledge is
embodied in the founding team members.
    Entry is determined as in the standard model by a free entry condition. Firms enter until
the present discounted value of future profits equals the fixed cost of entry:

                           max(i1 , 0)g (Mi1 )h(i1 )dMi1 di1 - w0 N = 0                    (17)

where for simplicity no discounting is assumed. This free entry condition helps make clear
that our modified model is in many ways a re-interpretation of the standard model. The fixed
entry fee is paying for the time and resources of the formation period when organizational
capital is developed by the founding team. The ex post productivity realizations depend
on the stochastic success of the founding team and the exogenous attrition of the founding
team.
   The model collapses to the standard model if  = 0 and  = 1. In this case the model
becomes a minor re-interpretation of what is involved in paying the fixed cost of entry in order
to obtain the ex post productivity draw. The novel feature of the model is the hypothesis
that the organizational capital developed in the formation phase is embodied in (at least
some) of the founding team members.
   We now consider extensions of the model to allow heterogeneous ex ante workers and
the more skilled playing a larger role in organizational capital. Suppose that the founding
team is still of size N with  the fraction of the founding team that is high skilled and 1 - 
the fraction low skilled. To make things simple, the knowledge capital is embedded only in
the skilled so the productivity in period 1 is given by Mi1 (1 - i1 ) but where i1 is now
the fraction of the skilled workers who are subject to exogenous attrition. The fixed cost of
the formation period is now w0,S + (1 -  )w0,N S where w0S is the wage of the skilled etc.
Revenue is given by:
                                                                             1-
            Ri1 = M i1 (1 - i1 ) ((LF T       NT       FT            NT
                                    i1,S + S Li1,S ) (Li1,N S + N S Li1,N S )   - f )      (18)


                                               52
                               Not intended for publication.


    In this formulation, both skilled and unskilled founding team members are preferred to
non-founding team members but this permits the possibility that for example S < N S = 1.
That is, there is nothing special about the founding team unskilled. They might be necessary
as an input during the formation period but they are perfect substitutes with non-founding
team members thereafter. One could enrich this further by embedding some knowledge in
unskilled founding team members but then assuming (or testing) S > N S . The formulation
above implicitly assumes N S = 0.




                                            53
                                  Not intended for publication.


A.2     Additional Figures and Tables

                     Table A1: Labor Productivity, Survival, and Growth

                                                      Exit EmpGrowth
                         ln(P rod)t-1           -.06402***    .2255***
                                                (.0000855)   (.000191)
                         Cons                     .3993***   -1.234***
                                                (.0004215)  (.0009191)

                         Industry-Year FE               Y                Y
                         R2                        .05387            .1021
                         N                       22200000         22200000

Source: Founding Team Database (LBD, LEHD), author's calculations.
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses.  p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01. Observation counts
rounded to avoid the disclosure of sensitive information.




                     Table A2: Pre-treatment Growth of Surviving Firms

                                     Employment        Revenue Productivity
                    Treated              .007251         .00189      .00189
                                       (.006282)      (.006259)   (.006259)

                    NAICS4 FE                    Y            Y                Y
                    Birth Yr FE                  Y            Y                Y
                    Firm Age FE                  Y            Y                Y
                    R2                      .07916         .102             .102
                    N                        20500        14000            14000

Source: Founding Team Database (LBD, LEHD), author's calculations.
Notes: Controlling for industry, cohort, and firm age effects. Robust standard errors in parentheses. 
p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01. ihs(P rod) indicates ihs(Rev ) - ihs(Emp). Observation counts rounded
to avoid the disclosure of sensitive information.




                                                 54
                                 Not intended for publication.




                          Figure A1: Firm Exit Rates and Firm Age




Source: Founding Team Database (LBD, LEHD), author's calculations.




                       Figure A2: Firm Age and Employment Growth




Source: Founding Team Database (LBD, LEHD), author's calculations.
Notes: Employment-weighted distribution.




                                                55
                                 Not intended for publication.




             Figure A3: Firm Age and Mean and Median Employment Growth




Source: Founding Team Database (LBD, LEHD), author's calculations.
Notes: Employment-weighted distribution.




                                                56
