                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 POLITICAL VIOLENCE, RISK AVERSION, AND NON-LOCALIZED DISEASE SPREAD:
                 EVIDENCE FROM THE U.S. CAPITOL RIOT

                                        Dhaval M. Dave
                                        Drew McNichols
                                         Joseph J. Sabia

                                      Working Paper 28410
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28410


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2021




We thank Kyutaro Matsuzawa and Samuel Safford for excellent research assistance on this paper.
This research was supported by the Center for Health Economics & Policy Studies (CHEPS),
which has received grant funding from the Charles Koch Foundation and the Troesh Family
Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Dhaval M. Dave, Drew McNichols, and Joseph J. Sabia. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Political Violence, Risk Aversion, and Non-Localized Disease Spread: Evidence from the
U.S. Capitol Riot
Dhaval M. Dave, Drew McNichols, and Joseph J. Sabia
NBER Working Paper No. 28410
February 2021
JEL No. D8,H75,I1

                                          ABSTRACT

On January 6, 2021, the U.S. Capitol was sieged by rioters protesting certification of Joseph R.
Biden's election as the 46th president of the United States. The Director of the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) quickly predicted that the Riot would be a COVID-19
"surge event." This study is the first to estimate the impact of the Capitol Riot on risk-averting
behavior and community-level spread of the novel coronavirus. First, using anonymized
smartphone data from SafeGraph, Inc. and an event-study approach, we document that on
January 6th there was a substantial increase in non-resident smartphone pings in the census block
groups including the Ellipse, the National Mall, and the U.S. Capitol Building, consistent with a
large protest that day. Next, using data from the same source and a synthetic control approach, we
find that the Capitol Riot increased stay-at-home behavior among District of Columbia residents,
indicative of risk averting behaviors in response to violence and health risks. Finally, turning to
COVID-19 case data, we find no evidence that the Capitol Riot substantially increased
community spread of COVID-19 in the District of Columbia in the month-long period following
the event. This may be due to increases in social distancing and a "virtual lockdown" of the
Capitol prior to the inauguration of the new president. However, exploiting variation in non-
resident smartphone inflows into the January 6 Capitol protest, we find that counties with the
highest protester inflows experienced a significant increase in the rate of daily cumulative
COVID-19 case growth in the month following the protest. We conclude that the Capitol Riot
may have contributed to non-localized COVID-19 spread.

Dhaval M. Dave                                   Joseph J. Sabia
Bentley University                               San Diego State University
Department of Economics                          Department of Economics
175 Forest Street, AAC 195                       Center for Health Economics
Waltham, MA 02452-4705                           & Policy Studies
and IZA                                          5500 Campanile Drive
and also NBER                                    San Diego, CA 92182
ddave@bentley.edu                                and IZA & ESSPRI
                                                 jsabia@sdsu.edu
Drew McNichols
San Diego State University
Center for Health Economics
& Policy Studies
5500 Campanile Drive
San Diego, CA 92182
dmcnichols@ucsd.edu
                                            1. Motivation

       "I do think you have to anticipate that this is another [COVID-19] surge event...You had
       largely unmasked individuals in a non-distanced fashion, who were all through the
       Capitol. Then these individuals all are going in cars and trains and planes going home
       all across the country. So this is an event that is going to have public health
       consequences."
                                             - Center for Disease Control and Prevention
                                               Director Robert Redfield, January 11, 2021



       On January 6, 2021, thousands of supporters of President Donald J. Trump gathered in

Washington, D.C. to protest the U.S. Congress's certification of Joseph R. Biden's election as

the 46th president of the United States. The protest was part of a series of so-called Stop the Steal

events held throughout the country following the November 4, 2020 elections. Organized by

right-wing populist activists, the January rally was designed to delegitimize President Biden's

election with claims -- largely unsubstantiated in state and Federal courts -- of widespread voter

fraud (Sardarizadeh and Lussenhop 2021).

       During the early afternoon hours, President Trump delivered a speech on the Ellipse near

the White House in which he urged protesters to "take back our country":



       "We fight like Hell and if you don't fight like Hell, you're not going to have a country
       anymore... So we're going to, we're going to walk down Pennsylvania Avenue, I love
       Pennsylvania Avenue, and we're going to the Capitol and we're going to try and
       give...our Republicans, the weak ones, because the strong ones don't need any of our
       help, we're going to try and give them the kind of pride and boldness that they need to
       take back our country. So let's walk down Pennsylvania Avenue." (Donald J. Trump,
       January 6, 2021)


                                                 1
       While President Trump never joined the crowd of protesters, and some media reports

suggest that the Capitol attack was planned by some days in advance (Hsu, Jackman, and Barrett

2021), thousands did heed his call and marched to the Capitol Building. There, the violent

intentions of many rioters became known through their physical assaults on Capitol police,

penetration of multiple police barricades, and destruction of property in the U.S. Capitol

Building (Peñaloza 2021). During what the U.S. House of Representatives deemed an

"insurrection" (Fandos and Cochrane 2021), five individuals, including a Capitol police officer,

were killed (Safdar, Ailworth and Seetharaman 2021). In addition, it was learned that domestic

terrorists connected to the Rally planted pipe bombs around locations throughout the District of

Columbia, including at headquarters of the Republican and Democrat National Committees

(Balsamo 2021).

       By the afternoon of the Rally, rioters gained access to the Senate and House chambers

and successfully (albeit temporarily) stopped the certification of President Biden's election

(Shear 2021). By evening the Capitol Police had gained control of the U.S. Capitol and

President Biden's election was certified (Fandos and Cochrane 2021). In the wake of the Riot,

nearly 20,000 National Guard troops were deployed to restore order for President Biden's

inauguration (Booker 2021). The near lockdown of the Capitol area continued for many weeks.

As of February 11, 188 individuals involved in the Riot were charged with Federal crimes

(United States Department of Justice 2021).

       Denunciation of the Capitol Riot was swift and bipartisan, as was criticism of President

Trump, in not only failing to quell the violence, but also for fanning the flames of political

discord (Leary 2021). As a result, on January 13, 2021, President Trump became the first U.S.



                                                  2
president to be impeached twice. Article 1 of the House of Representatives' articles of

impeachment was titled "Incitement of Insurrection":



           "[I]ncited by President Trump, members of the crowd he had addressed, in an attempt to,
           among other objectives, interfere with the Joint Session's solemn constitutional duty to
           certify the results of the 2020 Presidential election, unlawfully breached and vandalized
           the Capitol, injured and killed law enforcement personnel, menaced Members of
           Congress, the Vice President, and Congressional personnel, and engaged in other
           violent, deadly, destructive and seditious acts." (U.S. House of Representatives, Article of
           Impeachment Against President Donald J. Trump, January 13, 2021)



           While much of the public discussion surrounding the Capitol Riot concerns its effects on

democracy and national unity during the peaceful transition of executive power, public health

officials have warned of another threat from the Riot: a surge of COVID-19 infections (Ellis

2021). In early January, the United States was in the midst of one of the worst periods of

contagion since the onset of the pandemic (Zraick and Robbins 2021). While the 7-day average

of U.S. coronavirus cases during the summer of 2020 was below 100,000, the COVID-19 daily

case rate more than doubled to 200,000 per week by early 2021, with over 25 million confirmed

COVID-19 cases and nearly 420,000 COVID-19-related deaths by January 25 (Centers for

Disease Control and Prevention 2021). In Washington, D.C., the rate of confirmed COVID-19

cases increased by 40 percent during the week of January 14th, while COVID-19 cases spiked by

nearly 20 percent over the same period in nearby Maryland and Virginia (Wines and Bosman

2021). 1




1
  By late January, the U.S. began showing signs that the worst of the late 2020/early 2021 surge had crested (Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention 2021).

                                                         3
           In the midst of this national surge, there was justifiable public health concern that the

January 6 Capitol protest could be a "superspreader" for COVID-19. COVID-19 is spread via

droplets from respiratory expulsion such as breathing, speaking, coughing or sneezing (Centers

for Disease Control and Prevention 2020a, Fineberg 2020). With widespread distribution of an

effective vaccine not yet a reality, public health experts continue to recommend (i) social

distancing from non-household members, and (ii) mask-wearing in public, as the most effective

strategies to mitigate spread of the novel coronavirus (Centers for Disease Control and

Prevention 2020b). According to media reports, very few Capitol protesters wore masks at the

event (Ellis 2021), and fewer still socially distanced from non-household members while

protesting (Mandavilli 2021). Moreover, the victims of those who broke Federal law by

violently entering the Capitol Building often were sometimes forced to choose between their

immediate physical safety and their health. Lawmakers, congressional staff members, and law

enforcement officials stationed at the Capitol were forced to break social distancing and mask-

wearing rules as they (i) attempted to flee violent attack by rioters, and (ii) sought cover together

in small locked rooms in the Capitol (Cochrane 2021). 2

           In an interview with McClatchy, Dr. Robert Redfield, Director of the Centers for Disease

Control and Prevention, predicted that the Capitol Riot would spur a surge of COVID-19. He

predicted this surge would not only be caused by increased risk posed to local residents of

Washington, D.C., but also for those who have traveled long distances to attend the event and



2
    The New York Times reports:

          "[Normal precautions -- already haphazardly enforced -- collapsed as pro-Trump supporters stormed the
          Capitol. Did six feet of distance matter when lawmakers huddled on the ground as a mob tried to break
          through the door? Or as they tried to rush through tight corridors and into a cramped elevator to a secure
          space? Or as they sought to comfort a traumatized colleague? On both sides of the Capitol, lawmakers,
          aides, police officers and reporters who had fled to secure locations have been warned that they might have
          been exposed to the coronavirus while hiding from the mob." (Cochrane 2021)

                                                          4
then returned back to their homes (Redfield 2021). Moreover, leading public health experts

argued that the conditions for COVID-19 superspread were nearly ideal (Ellis 2021). 3

           While epidemiologists have nearly uniformly predicted that large gatherings during the

COVID-19 pandemic would lead to community-level spread, the actual public health impacts of

such events have been far more heterogeneous (Dave et al. 2020a,b,c; Ahammer et al. 2020;

Wing et al. 2020). This is, in part, because narrow epidemiological arguments often fail to

consider (i) health- or violence-related risk avoidance behaviors of non-participants (Dave et al.

2020a) 4, (ii) the impact of increased congestion on stay-at-home-behavior, or (iii) the relative

risk of counterfactual behaviors in which participants and non-participants would have been

engaged in the absence of the gathering (Dave et al. 2020a).

           Specifically, public health experts predicted that large social/political rallies from each

end of the political spectrum -- for example, (i) the Summer 2020 Black Lives Matter protests

(Dave et al. 2020a), and (ii) President Trump's May 2020 Presidential campaign rally in Tulsa,

Oklahoma (Dave et al. 2020b) -- would cause COVID-19 superspread. However, none of these

gatherings did. Empirical analyses of each event produced evidence that local residents

increased stay-at-home behavior and reduced foot traffic at restaurants and bars in response to

perceived increases in the risks of violence and infectious disease contagion associated with the

events. These offsetting risk avoidance behaviors, in conjunction with risk avoidance behaviors




3
    Dr. Jonathan Fielding at UCLA told the Washington Post:

           "If you wanted to organize an event to maximize the spread of COVID it would be difficult to find one
           better than the one we witnessed." (Fielding 2021)

4
 See also, Cronin and Evans (2020) and Gupta et al. 2020) for other examples of health-related risk-avoidance
behavior. There is also a wide literature on violence-related risk avoidance (Bennett et al. 2007; Stafford et al. 2007;
Roman and Chalfin 2008; Janke, Propper and Shields 2016; Yu and Lippert 2016; Stolzenberg, D'Alessio and
Flexon 2019; Fe and Sanfelice 2020).

                                                           5
by gatherers themselves (i.e., temperature taking upon entrance into the Bank of Oklahoma

Arena in Tulsa, OK, and mask-wearing among BLM protesters) resulted in no discernible net

change in community-level COVID-19 cases.

       On the other hand, in the case of the Sturgis Motorcycle Rally in South Dakota, public

health experts proved largely correct. In this case, there was evidence of COVID-19 superspread

both locally and nationally because (i) there was no offsetting risk avoidance by the local

community (Sturgis residents were active participants in the event), and (ii) the event attracted a

uniquely large gathering (nearly 500,000 individuals) from all corners of the United States with

almost no mitigation. Participants largely did not wear masks, did not socially distance, and

were permitted to dine and congregate in indoor venues. These conditions, coupled with the

scope of the event, facilitated superspread. Similar evidence of COVID-19 spread has been

found with gatherings such as local sporting events (Ahammer et al. 2020; Wing et al. 2020) and

in-person primary voting (Cotti et al. forthcoming), for which there is also little evidence of

offsetting mitigation.

       How does the Capitol Riot compare to these prior events under study? The Capitol Riot

is unique in a number of ways. On the one hand, like BLM protests, the Stop the Steal rally and

subsequent riot was largely an outdoor event, which would tend to mitigate COVID-19

contagion (Wei and Li 2016). Moreover, as was seen with President Trump's Tulsa campaign

rally -- as well as with BLM protests -- violence- and health-related risk avoidance associated

with the Capitol Riot (which included heavy media coverage of these threats) could lead to (i)

increases in stay-at-home behavior by local District of Columbia residents, and (ii) less mixing

of local residents with non-household members, which would tend to mute community-level

COVID-19 spread. And while media reports suggest that thousands of individuals may have



                                                 6
attended the January 6 Capitol protests (Doig 2021), the upper bound estimates of the crowd size

(approximately 10,000) was nearly 50 times less than the crowd seen at Sturgis and much closer

to the crowd size at President Trump's May 2020 Tulsa Rally, an event that produced little

evidence of COVID-19 superspread. Finally, many areas in the District of Columbia near the

Capitol were essentially locked down following the Capitol Rally, as local police and the

National Guard sought to restore order and protect elected officials from further attack in the

weeks leading to President Biden's inauguration.

        On the other hand, some features of the Capitol Riot could lead to a greater risk of

spread. First, because some rioters breached the U.S. Capitol Building -- leading to crowds

gathering indoors -- and most protesters did not wear masks, greater COVID-19 spread may be

observed with the Riot than was seen for prior events. Second, those who were trapped in the

Capitol Building fleeing the "insurrection" were unable to socially distance as they sought refuge

from physical violence (Chappell 2021). Third, while the events in Tulsa and in cities that held

BLM protests appeared to supplant riskier indoor restaurant and bar-going, during the Capitol

Riot in early January, the District of Columbia had closed all restaurants and bars for indoor

dining, limiting food service to take-out and outdoor dining only (Office of the Mayor,

Washington D.C. 2021). 5 Entertainment venues and museums were also closed via the Mayor's

Order 2020-127. Thus, activities supplanted by the protests may not necessarily have been riskier

than the protests themselves. 6 In summary, whether the Capitol Riot's effects on risk averting




5
  Motivated by the surge in COVID-19 cases in D.C. since Thanksgiving, the Order became effective and paused
these activities from 10:00 pm December 23 onwards. Initially scheduled to be lifted at on Jan. 15, the moratorium
was further extended, in the aftermath of the Capitol Riot, to January 22, two days after the inauguration.
6
  Along the same lines, with regard to nationwide superspread, stay-at-home orders and restrictions on restaurants
and bars were far more prevalent in early January throughout the United States than in June during the president's
Tulsa campaign rally or during the Sturgis Motorcycle Rally.

                                                         7
behavior and COVID-19 spread were larger or smaller than prior prominent large gatherings

remain open questions.

       This study is the first to estimate the impact of the January 6 Capitol Riot on mobility and

community-level COVID-19 spread. First, using data on anonymized smartphone pings from

SafeGraph, Inc. from January 1 through January 11, and an event-study framework, we

document that the January 6 events increased total and non-resident cellphone pings by almost

500 percent in the census block groups (CBGs) that contained the Ellipse, the National Mall, and

the U.S. Capitol Building. While some of this increase in pings may be explained by the

gathering of representatives (Congresspersons and Senators) for the presidential election

certification, the size of protesting crowds (numbered in the thousands) vastly dwarfs the number

of Federal representatives and staffers, and, as America learned, the number of Capitol police.

When we examine the home resident counties from which January 6 protesters came, we find

that 2.4 percent of total smartphone "pings" came from Washington, DC residents, 21.9 percent

came from bordering Maryland and Virginia, and 75.7 percent came from outside of these

judications.

       Turning to stay-at-home behavior through January 16, we detect some evidence of risk

aversion in response to the Capitol Riot, as local residents increased full-time stay-at-home

behavior and percent of time spent at home in the period surrounding and following the Riot.

This finding is consistent with violence- or health-related risk averting behavior. Moreover,

some of the increase in stay at home behavior appeared to continue beyond the days surrounding

the protest, consistent with "lockdown conditions" in many quarters of the District in the period

leading up to the inauguration of President Biden.




                                                 8
         Finally, we explore community-level spread of COVID-19 following the Capitol Riot.

To explore local spread in Washington, D.C., we use a synthetic control design, creating a

"synthetic Washington" using counties with similar urbanicity rates, COVID-19 policy (and

testing) environments, and pre-treatment rates of COVID-19 cases and growth rates. We omit

from the donor pool those counties with residents whose smartphones were detected at the

Capitol Riot on January 6 to avoid spillovers. 7 Our results provide no evidence of community-

level COVID-19 spread in Washington, D.C. in the month following the Capitol Riot. This may

be explained, in part, by risk averting behavior by local residents and the partial District

lockdown.

         Turning to counties outside of the District, we use a dose-response "difference-in-

differences" approach to explore whether county-level COVID-19 cases spread faster in non-

localized areas that drew larger shares of residents to the protest relative to counties without

attendees represented in Washington, D.C. Our results provide evidence that the Capitol Riot

may have contributed to COVID-19 spread in resident counties with relatively higher inflows of

Capitol protest participants. For the highest inflow counties, we find that counties with the

highest protester inflows experienced a significant increase in the rate of daily cumulative

COVID-19 case growth in the month following the protest. We conclude that the Capitol Riot

may have led to non-localized community-level COVID-19 spread.



                                                       2. Data

2.1 SafeGraph Data




7
 In addition, we omit from the donor pool those counties with a state Capitol to ensure that smaller local January 6
protests in state Capitols did not contaminate our estimates.

                                                          9
           Our empirical analyses of the effect of the January 6th Capitol Riot on mobility and

COVID-19 spread makes use of two central datasets. The first is the social distancing metrics

(SDM) dataset provided by SafeGraph, Inc. These anonymized smartphone data permit us to

measure (i) mobility into the areas in which the Capitol protests took place (the Ellipse near the

White House, the National Mall, and the U.S. Capitol Building), (ii) the home resident counties

of those whose smartphones pinged in the jurisdictions where the protests took place, and (iii)

stay-at-home behavior among residents of the District of Columbia.

           We begin our analysis using anonymized cellphone data for the period December 26,

2021 through January 16, 2021, a period that envelopes the Capitol protests. 8 SafeGraph

provides data at the census-block-group (CBG)-level from 45 million anonymized cell phones.

These data, which have been widely used by economists examining the impacts of stay-at-home

orders (Abouk and Heydari 2020; Lasry et al. 2020; Friedson et al. 2020; Dave et al. 2020a,b,c)

and large gatherings (Dave et al. 2020d,e,f) on stay-at-home behavior, allow researchers to

examine mobility behavior tied to home residences. 9

           In the SafeGraph data, an individual's "home" is defined as the 153-by-153-meter area in

which his/her smartphone "pinged" most often between the hours of 6:00PM and 7:00AM during

a six-week baseline period. Mobility is measured by documenting when (and for how long) an

individual smartphone pings outside of their home residence location. While these data can

measure stay-at-home behavior at the extensive (i.e., stay-at-home full-time) and intensive (i.e.,




8
    To obtain SafeGraph data, see: https://www.safegraph.com/covid-19-data-consortium
9
    These data have been used commonly by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

                                                        10
hours at home or percent of time at home) margins, these data do not permit us to measure other

dimensions of social distancing, including social distancing outside of the residence. 10

        Our first purpose in using the SafeGraph data is to explore whether there was an increase

in foot traffic in the census block group (CBG) where the Capitol Riot took place, namely the

CBG containing the Ellipse, White House, National Mall, and U.S. Capitol Building. This is our

definition of the "core protest CBG." In addition, we also explore the "protest CBG cluster,"

which includes border census block groups to the core protest CBG.

        In Figure 1, we show the natural log of total pings (panel a) and non-resident pings (panel

b) in the core protest CBG, the protest CBG cluster, and all other CBGs in Washington D.C.

during the period from January 1 through January 11. Relative to the period prior to the Riot

(January 1 through 4), the total number of pings (panel a) in the "core protest CBG" rose by 73

percent on January 5 (a day when many traveled to the rally) and by about 743 percent on

January 6 when the protest took place. Following the 6th, we see a sharp decline in smartphone

pings. This pattern of smartphone pings is largely driven by non-resident pings (panel b).

        A similar pattern is observed when we examine the "protest CBG cluster:" However, in

CBGs outside of the protest areas, the increase in smartphone foot traffic is much smaller,

though we do note that some protesters undoubtedly traveled in these jurisdictions, accounting

for some increases in movement on January 6.

        In Figure 2, we present a map of home counties of individuals who visited the core

protest CBG on January 4 (panel a), January 6 (panel b), and January 8 (panel c), capturing the

periods before, during, and after the Capitol Riot. The heat map reflects the intensity of inflows



10
  In addition, we would have difficulty measuring mobility for those who work non-standard night shifts. However,
any cross-spatial measurement error should not affect our results because we primarily focus on changes within
jurisdictions over time.

                                                       11
into the protests. Following Dave et al. (2020f), we explore five categories of inflows: High,

Moderate-High, Moderate, Low, and None. 11 As illustrated, the events of January 6 (including

the protest and certification vote) garnered attendees from all over the United States. While most

High inflow counties were in the neighboring jurisdictions (i.e., Prince George's County, MD;

Fairfax County, VA), Harris County, Texas and Wake County, North Carolina also contributed

significant attendees. Moreover, in the Moderate-High category, counties in Pennsylvania,

California, New York, New Jersey, and Illinois were represented. Attendees at the January 6

events at the Ellipse, National Mall, and Capitol Building were largely not residents of the

District of Columbia. Only 2.4 percent of non-resident pings at the core protest CBG were

residents of the District. A full 97.6 percent came from outside of D.C., with 75.7 percent

coming from outside of D.C., Maryland, and Virginia.

        A similar pattern of findings emerges in Figure 3 where we measure inflows to the core

protest CBG by the ratio of total smartphone pings at the protest to total county resident pings

overall. As noted in Dave et al. (2020f), this measure is designed to (i) control for county

population size (to ensure high inflows do not simply capture large populations), and (ii) account

for resident smartphone coverage in the SafeGraph data. In the main, the pattern of high and low

inflow counties is relatively similar in Figure 3 as compared to Figure 2. 12,13

        The SafeGraph data also permit us to measure stay-at-home behavior among residents of

the District of Columbia. Given insights of prior research on risk-averting behavior in response


11
   High absolute inflows correspond to 30 or more pings (13 counties), moderate-high absolute inflows correspond
to 15 to 29 pings (44 counties), moderate inflows correspond to 5 to 14 pings (203 counties), low inflows correspond
to 1-4 pings (813 counties), and zero inflows correspond to 0 pings (2,059 counties).
12
   High relative inflows correspond to more than 0.0025 relative pings (43 counties), moderate-high relative inflows
correspond to [0.0005 to 0.0025), relative pings (417 counties), moderate relative inflows correspond to [0.00025 to
0.0005)] relative pings (313 counties), low relative inflows correspond to (0 to 0.00025) relative pings (302
counties), and zero relative inflows correspond to 0 pings (2,061 counties).
13
   In Appendix Figure 1, we show a very similar pattern as Figure 2 if we use smartphone pings in the CBG protest
cluster.

                                                        12
to violence and health risks (Dave et al. 2020a), we measure stay-at-home behavior of residents

of the District of Columbia to capture potential compensatory or avoidance behaviors on the part

of the local residents.

        Our stay-at-home analysis covers a longer window than our "ping" analysis given that the

impacts on stay-at-home behavior in the period leading up to President Biden's inauguration may

have been longer-lasting. We use daily data between December 26, 2020 and January 16, 2021

(using two-day rolling averages) on two measures of stay-at-home behavior from the SafeGraph

data: (i) Full-Time Stay-at-Home, which measures the mean percent of smartphones that ping

exclusively at the home residence for the entire day, and (ii) Percent of Time Spent at Home,

which measures the percent of time that the smartphone pings at the home residence. In

Washington, D.C., we find that in the days leading up to the protest/certification of President

Biden's victory (January 1 through 4), 39.0 percent of District residents remained at home full-

time. During the period from January 5 (an important arrival day for protesters, as reported in

the D.C. media 14) through 7, 42.8 percent of D.C. residents stayed at home full-time. The

median percent of time rose by 7.5 percentage-points during the same windows. These pre-post

trends are consistent with some risk averting behaviors in response to the Capitol protests.



2.2 COVID-19 Case Data

        We measure county-level cumulative COVID-19 cases using county-level data collected

from state and local health agencies by the New York Times. 15 COVID-19 cases are analyzed

over the period from December 26, 2020 through February 3, 2020, which includes



14
  See Carless (2021).
15
  To obtain county- and state-level COVID-19 case and mortality data, see: https://github.com/nytimes/covid-19-
data

                                                       13
approximately one month of post-protest COVID-19 data. During this time frame, the mean

number of cumulative COVID-19 cases per 100,000 population in the District of Columbia was

4,669.9 cases. An over-four-week post-Riot period, while clearly only capturing shorter-run

effects, is well beyond the median incubation period for COVID-19 symptoms to emerge (5

days). Thus, during this window, we expect to be able to detect COVID-19 case growth in

response to the Capitol Riot for the period under study (Lauer et al. 2020). Indeed, studies on the

COVID-19 community-spread effects of the Sturgis Motorcycle Rally (Dave et al. 2020c) and

spring break travel (Mangrum and Niekamp 2020) have detected differential growth in COVID-

19 after two weeks following the end of a large event.

        In panel (a) of Figure 4, we show trends in weighted cumulative COVID-19 cases per

100,000 population from December 26, 2020 through February 3, 2021 in High, Moderate-High,

Moderate, Low, and No Inflow counties, as measured by absolute inflows. And in panel (b) of

Figure 4, we show smoothed trends in daily cumulative COVID-19 case growth across these

same inflow counties. 16 In the pre-Riot period, the average cumulative COVID-19 case rate per

100,000 population was 5332.3 in high absolute inflow counties and the daily cumulative case

growth rate was 0.0101; this compares to 6943.6 cases per 100,000 population and a daily

cumulative COVID-19 case growth rate of 0.0087 in non-inflow counties. 17 The patterns across

these figures provide some descriptive evidence that, in the post-January 6 period, average

COVID-19 cumulative case growth was faster in higher inflow as compared to lower or no

inflow counties.




16
   The data in Figure 5B are "smoothed" using a six-day moving average for ease of optics. We use "raw"
individual day COVID-19 case growth for our regression analysis.
17
   In the pre-Riot period, the average cumulative COVID-19 case rate per 100,000 population was 5332.3 in high
relative inflow counties and the daily cumulative COVID-19 case growth rate was 0.0095.

                                                       14
                                              3. Methods

3.1 Effect of January 6 Capitol Protest on Non-Resident Travel to Event

       We begin by estimating the effect of the January 6 Capitol Events on total and non-

resident cell phone pings in the CBG including the Ellipse, the National Mall, and the U.S.

Capitol Building, where the day's protests as well as the election certification took place. We

pool 449 CBGs available in the SafeGraph data in Washington, D.C. over a 12-day period and

begin by estimating the following simple difference-in-differences specification:


                  Ygt = 0 + 1 Capitol Protestgt + g + t + gt                                     (1)



where Ygt measures the natural log of (i) the total number of smartphones that pinged in census

block group g in the District of Columbia on day t, and (ii) the total number of non-resident

smartphones that pinged in census block group g in the District of Columbia on day t, g is a

time-invariant CBG fixed effect and t is a CBG-invariant day effect that controls for intra-day

cyclicality in travel behavior in addition to secular trends. Capitol Protestgt is a set of dummies

encompassing the post-treatment period, including a single day dummy for January 6th..

Moreover, given that the Capitol was cleared rapidly following the riots and resumption of the

Congressional session to certify the Electoral College Results, we expect that the lagged effect of

the protest to fall to zero in the period following January 6th. With regard to statistical inference,

because we have a single treated CBG in our sample, we conduct permutation-based tests

wherein we randomly assign the treatment to each control CBG and estimate the number of

times we would expect a treatment effect as large as the "true" treatment effect (Buchmueller et

al 2011; Cunningham and Shah 2018).



                                                  15
        The fact that our sample is restricted to the District of Columbia creates both advantages

and disadvantages. For instance, in terms of unobserved heterogeneity bias, we avoid the

possibility that unmeasured District-wide policy shocks could contaminate our estimates. In

terms of disadvantages, our control CBGs may see spillover effects on mobility to the extent that

non-resident travelers to the January 6 events ping across other CBGs as they travel to the U.S.

Capitol, biasing our estimates toward zero. To mitigate some of these behavioral effects, we

explore the robustness of our findings to omitting "border" CBGs from the analysis sample. We

also explore the sensitivity of our estimates to defining the treatment jurisdictions as the CBG

protest cluster.

        In addition, to guard against estimates being biased by unmeasured CBG-specific time

trends, we augment the right-hand side variables to include CBG-specific time trends:



                   Ygt = 0 + 1 Capitol Protestgt + g + t + g*t + gt                 (2)



where g*t is a CBG-specific linear time trend.

        Finally, we conduct event study analyses to explore whether mobility patterns were

common in the period leading up to the January 6 Capitol events. A pattern of common pre-

trends provides at least descriptive evidence in support of the common trends assumption.



3.2 Effect of Capitol Protest on Stay-at-Home Behavior & COVID-19

        To examine the impact of the January 6 Capitol events on stay-at-home behavior and

COVID-19 cases among the District of Columbia's resident population, we undertake a synthetic

control approach (Abadie et al. 2010). Our local COVID-19 spread analysis focuses on the


                                                  16
District of Columbia, where the event took place and the location of the largest number of

smartphone pings in the SafeGraph data, and covers the period from December 26, 2020 to

January 16, 2021. 18

         To conduct our synthetic control analysis, it is necessary to choose a donor pool and

"match" observables to generate our "synthetic Washington D.C." The District of Columbia

includes approximately 700,000 residents within the jurisdiction (U.S. Census Bureau 2019) and

according to the U.S. Census has an urbanicity rate of 100 percent (U.S. Census Bureau 2010).

Our donor pool is comprised of similar counties that meet the following criteria:



    ·    counties are not located in Virginia or Maryland, where spillovers are most likely given
         the distribution of smartphone pings shown in Figure 2;
    ·    counties have no residents whose smartphone pings in the core treatment CBG in
         Washington, D.C. on January 6, 2021;
    ·    the county urbanicity rate was at least 80 percent; and
    ·    counties do not include a state capitol, where local protests may have taken place on
         January 6 (sensitivity checks)


These restrictions help to select on factors that may be important to COVID-19 spread (Friedson

et al. 2020; Dave et al. 2020b,c). 19 We also explored the sensitivity of results to alternate

urbanicity cutoffs as well as the use of a measure of county population density, but our findings

were not sensitive to these choices.

         In addition to the construction of our donor pool, to further ensure that "synthetic D.C." is



18
   This method has been used by several recent studies to investigate how shelter-in-place orders (Friedson et al.
2020; Dave et al. 2020d,e) and large gatherings (Dave et al. 2020a,b,c) have affected stay-at-home behavior, foot
traffic, and community-level COVID-19 growth.
19
   The imposition of each of these restrictions yields 105 donor counties. The inclusion of counties that include state
Capitols yields a donor pool of 108 counties.

                                                          17
a credible counterfactual to the District of Columbia, our primary estimation strategy matches on

outcomes (stay-at-home behaviors, COVID-19 cases per capita) on each day prior to the January

6 event. We also explore the sensitivity of our synthetic control estimates to use of an alternative

matching strategy of matching on five days of pre-treatment COVID-19 case rates 20 and adding

observable matching characteristics that could affect COVID-19 case growth (or stay-at-home

behavior): the county urbanicity rate, county weighted population density, the number of days a

mask-wearing policy was in effect, whether the state had a stay-at-home advisory 21, whether the

state had imposed restrictions on indoor dining/drinking at restaurants and bars, and in the case

of COVID-19 cases, a COVID-19 testing rate trend. 22 Our synthetic control estimate is then

calculated as the difference in average post-treatment COVID-19 cases between the treated

jurisdiction and its synthetic control. 23



3.3 Estimating Non-Localized "Superspread" from Capitol Riot

         To examine the nationwide spread effects of the January 6 Capitol Riot, we pool a panel

of 3,137 counties and 40 days from all U.S. states except the District of Columbia (which is

analyzed in the above local spread analysis) and estimate the following dose-response difference-

in-differences model:



20
   For stay at home behavior, these days are December 27, December 29, December 31, January 2, and January 4.
We allow January 5 (a travel day to attend the event) for stay at home behavior to diverge. For our COVID-19 case
analysis, these days are December 28, December 30, January 1, January 3, and January 5.
21
   Over the sample period, California lifted their stay-at-home advisory and curfew policy. However, given that
there were relatively few days of post-treatment data over our analysis period, we treat this policy as time-invariant
over our sample window for the synthetic control analysis. However, our results do not qualitatively change with an
alternate coding. Our dose-response analysis allows this policy to vary daily.
22
   The days on which the testing rate is matched includes December 31, January 5, January 15, and January 30.
23
   For instance, the unobserved counterfactual for COVID-19 case rate for the District of Columbia is given by
    , where  is the weight allocated to donor county j on day t. The estimated weights are selected for
all pre-treatment days to minimize the absolute difference between = , and     . The
treatment effect  is assessed as  = = , -     for   {January 6, February 3}, which is
used to construct the average treatment effect over the post-treatment window.

                                                         18
COVID_Growthcst = 0 + Travelersc *  t *1 + Xst * 2 + c + t + c *t + cst                                        (3)



where COVID_Growthcst is the daily growth in cumulative COVID-19 cases (following

Courtemanche et al. 2020) 24, Travelersc is a set of four indicators of intensity of inflows to the

core treatment CBGs in Washington D.C. on January 6th from resident county c relative to

counties that had zero inflow (reference). These categories correspond to the inflow categories

shown in the heat maps depicted in Figure 2. The PostProtest t measure captures lagged

windows of the post-treatment period beginning on January 6 and ending February 3, nearly one

month following the Capitol Riot.25,26 The coefficient 1 captures the differential impact of the

U.S. Capitol protest on COVID-19 cumulative COVID-19 case growth in counties in the four

inflow groups described above relative to counties without any inflows to the protest on January

6.

         Our controls are as follows: Xst includes the COVID-19 testing rate per 100,000

population, whether the state has a shelter-in-place advisory in effect, whether the state has a

mask mandate, and whether the state allows opening of indoor dining for restaurants and bars.

Finally, c is a time-invariant county effect, t are county-invariant day effects, and c *t is a

county-specific linear time trend. The latter helps to control for differential growth trends of


24
   In approximately 1 percent of county-days, cumulative COVID-19 cases are reported as falling, likely due to
reclassification of cases across time and jurisdictions. In unreported robustness checks, we find that are main
findings are qualitatively unchanged if we recode these declines in cumulative cases as missing or use the
methodology outlined by Courtemanche et al. (2020) to recode declining county-days to 0 (along with adjacent days
of the decline in some cases).
25
   This model also includes controls for leads for the Capitol Riot of up to 10 days prior to the event, mirroring the
event studies shown in Figures 8 and 9. All regressions are weighted by the county population (though we also
present unweighted estimates for comparison) and standard errors are clustered at the state level.
26
   As noted above, this post-treatment window captures a period well past the median incubation period (5 days) for
COVID-19, and surpasses the point where 99 percent of individuals who are infected would have started showing
symptoms (Lauer et al. 2020).

                                                         19
COVID-19 across counties. 27 Our primary strategy of assessing the common trends assumption

is, again, to conduct event study analysis across each of our inflow groups relative to no inflow

counties. 28



                                                     4. Results

        Our main findings appear in Tables 1 through Table 5 and Figures 5 through 9.

Supplemental results are shown in the appendix.



4.1 SafeGraph Results on Mobility

        We begin by exploring the impact of the January 6 Capitol Riot on mobility. Table 1

presents estimates of 1 from equations (1) and (2). We find that relative to non-protest CBGs in

the District of Columbia, the total number of pings increased in the core protest CBG by 478

percent on January 6 (Panel I, column 1). 29 Following the 6th, the number of pings in the protest

CBG fell to match non-protest CBG foot traffic. This result is consistent with police dispersal of

protest crowds and the conclusion of Congressional business. Our findings are largely

unchanged when we include controls for CBG-specific linear time trends (Panel I, column 2).

        In Panel II, we explore whether the effects we observe in Panel I are muted by the

inclusion of border CBGs to the core treatment CBG in the control group. Consistent with this

hypothesis, we find slightly larger increases in the total number of smartphone pings associated

with the January 6 events (Panel II, columns 1 and 2).




27
   When we estimated dose response models that excluded county-specific linear time trends, the pattern of results
was quite similar to those we report.
28
   Our main tables and figures present results from weighted dose-response difference-in-differences estimates,
which are weighted.
29
   The effect is (e1.755 ­ 1) = 4.78 = 478%.

                                                        20
           We find that January 6-induced increases in cell phone pings at the Ellipse, National

Mall, and Capitol were largely driven by non-residents of the District (columns 3 and 4).

Specifically, we find that the January 6 Capitol Riots are associated with a 402 to 452 percent

increase in non-resident smartphone pings. Together, the results in Table 1 are consistent with a

large protest event at the U.S. Capitol. 30

           Figure 5 shows the event study analyses associated with the main estimates in Table 1.

We find that in the period prior to the January 6 Capitol Riots, total (panel a) and non-resident

(panel b) smartphone pings trended similarly in the treatment and control CBGs. However, on

January 6, the day of the election certification and protests, foot traffic in the treatment CBGs

rose by almost 500 percent relative to the control CBGs before falling back to statistical

equivalence in the days following the protest. A similar pattern of results is detected when we

omit CBGs that border the core treatment CBGs from the analysis sample (see panels c and d).

These results are consistent with a causal interpretation of the estimates shown in Table 1.

           In Figure 6 and Table 2, we explore whether there was local risk averting behavior in

response to the January 6 riot. Specifically, we examine the impact of the January 6 Capitol Riot

on stay-at-home behavior by local residents of the District of Columbia. Panel (a) shows

synthetic control estimates on full-time stay-at-home behavior when we generate "synthetic

D.C." by matching on each pre-treatment day of the outcome under study. Our results show that

D.C. and synthetic D.C. track each other nearly identically in the pre-treatment period.

However, beginning on the day on which many non-resident protesters arrived in the city

(January 5) and continuing/peaking on the day of the protest (January 6), we see that full-time

stay-at-home behavior sharply rises in the District of Columbia relative to the synthetic control,



30
     In Appendix Table 1, we show estimated effects when we include border CBGs as part of the treatment group.

                                                         21
which is comprised of San Francisco County, CA (53.4 percent), Denver County, CO (19.4

percent), Val Verde County, TX (19.4 percent), DeKalb County, IL (5 percent), and Sarpy

County, NE (2.8 percent). The largest divergence in full-time stay-at-home behavior is seen

between January 5 through 7 before converging again. 31

        When we examine median percent of time at home (panel b), we also see a relative

increase in stay-at-home behavior among local District residents, though this increase appears to

be more "long-term," perhaps suggesting that the intensive margin of stay-at-home behavior is

affected by the Riot and its aftermath. Indeed Washington, D.C. appeared to enter "virtual

lockdown" in the turbulent period leading to President Biden and Vice President Kamala

Harris's inauguration on January 20th (Baldwin, McNamara, and Linton 2021) and the

moratorium on indoor dining and other restrictions as per the Mayor's Order were extended to

two days following the inauguration.

        In panels (c) and (d) of Figure 6, we repeat the exercise with an alternate matching

procedure, matching on the pre-treatment outcome on every other pre-treatment day, beginning

on December 26 and adding matching controls for: the county urbanicity rate, county population

density, the average state COVID-19 testing trend, and the number of days the state had a mask

mandate, a stay-at-home order, and banned indoor dining/drinking at restaurants and bars. Our

synthetic control results in panels (c) and (d) produce a pattern of results similar to panels (a)

through (b), and consistent with the hypothesis of risk averting behavior in response to the Riot.

        Table 2 shows synthetic control estimates of the effect of the Capitol Riot on stay-at-

home behavior. Columns (1) and (3) correspond to the panels shown in Figure 6. Column (2)


31
  We note that in this model, Denver, CO, which had a state Capitol protest on January 6, is a minority "matching
county" for Washington, D.C. This could bias estimated stay-at-home behavior toward zero if there were risk-
averting behavior in Denver as well. In a subsequent specification shown in Table 2 that excluded Denver,
Colorado from the donor pool, we detect a qualitatively similar pattern of results.

                                                        22
shows results from a model that matches on the outcome in every other pre-treatment day plus

the county urbanicity rate and population density. And in column (4), we drop counties that

included a state Capitol, which may have had a local protest scheduled at a State House (Cremen

2021; Reuters 2021). Across these specifications, we show that the Capitol Riots are associated

with a 3.6 to 4.5 percentage-point increase (10.1 to 12.5 percent increase relative to the baseline

mean) in full-time stay-at-home behavior during the January 5 to 6 period. Standard

permutation-based p-values do not allow us to definitively claim that this difference is

statistically distinguishable from zero at conventional levels though this pattern is suggestive.

       Turning to median percent of time at home (columns 5-8), we find consistent evidence

that the Capitol Riot led to longer-run risk averting behavior. We find that the Riot was

associated with a 10 to 12 percentage-point increase (13 to 17 percent) in median percent of time

at home among D.C. residents during the January 5 to 6 period (p-values = .02 to .07).

Moreover, there is evidence that the effect on median percent time at home persists and increases

over the longer-run as well (January 7 and later). This is consistent with the "virtual lockdown"

in Washington, D.C. following the Capitol Riot in the period leading up to President Biden's

inauguration.

       Together, the findings in Figure 6 and Table 2 are consistent with the hypothesis of risk-

averting increases in stay-at-home behavior in D.C. This result may suggest that any

community-level spread of COVID-19 in the District may be muted. We explore this below.



4.2 Local COVID-19 Spread in the District of Columbia

       In Figure 7 and in Table 3, we explore whether the Capitol Riots contributed to local

community spread of COVID-19. Panel (a) of Figure 7 shows synthetic control estimates for the



                                                 23
model where we match on all pre-treatment days of cumulative COVID-19 cases while panel (b)

shows estimates where we match on every other pre-treatment day beginning on December 26 as

well as on other predictors of community spread described above. Across both sets of figures,

we find very little evidence that the Capitol Riot led to significant COVID-19 spread in the

District up to approximately one month following the Riot.

       Table 3 presents the synthetic control estimates of the effect of the Capitol Riots on

cumulative COVID-19 cases (columns 1 through 4) as well as the natural log of cumulative

COVID-19 cases (columns 5 through 8). Panel I shows a single estimate over the full post-

treatment period, while Panel II divides the post-treatment period into windows that capture the

early (January 6-12) and later (January 13 to 19) 14-day-incubation period and the post-

incubation period (January 20th and later). Across specifications focusing on COVID-19 case

levels (columns 1 through 4), we generally find that over the full post-treatment period, the

Capitol Riot was associated with a statistically insignificant and economically small decline in

COVID-19 cases per 1,000 residents in the District during the full post-treatment window (Panel

I). These estimated effects are not statistically distinguishable from zero using permutation-

based p-values generated from placebo tests. In columns (5) through (8) we use the natural log

of COVID-19 cases as the outcome measure. Note that by matching on pre-Riot days of the log

COVID-19 cases, we assure that "synthetic D.C." has the same rate of pre-Riot COVID-19 case

growth as the District. Our pattern of findings is very similar.

       In Panel II, we explore the longer-run impact on community-level COVID-19 spread to

be sure that our findings do not mask important divergence on COVID-19 case growth in the

post-14-day incubation period. We continue to find little evidence that the Riot increased

COVID-19 spread in the District of Columbia in the near month-long period following the Riot.



                                                 24
4.3 Non-Localized Spread of COVID-19 Cases

        Finally, we assess the degree to which the Capitol Riots of January 6 contributed to non-

localized COVID-19 spread in counties with relatively higher inflows of attendees to the Capitol

protests. For this purpose, we exclude the District of Columbia from the analysis sample, as this

jurisdiction was examined in our local spread analysis in Section 4.2 above. We use our dose-

response difference-in-differences model (equation 3) to assess whether counties with relatively

higher numbers of residents attending Capitol events saw greater COVID-19 spread following

the event, when many protesters returned home. Figure 8 and Table 4 present the results of this

exercise.

        Figure 8 presents event-study analyses of the effect of absolute inflows into the Capitol

Events of January 6 on cumulative daily COVID-19 case growth in attendees' resident counties.

Note that the estimates show COVID-19 effects relative to counties with no inflows to the

Capitol on January 6. Our event study results show little evidence of differential pre-treatment

county-level COVID-19 case growth trends, consistent with the hypothesis that the treatment and

control counties were quite similar in the days leading up to the Capitol Rally. Moreover, we

find that across the lowest inflow groups, there is very little evidence of more rapid COVID-19

case growth, including in the period following COVID-19's full 14-day incubation period and

even up to three or more weeks following the Rally. However, in the highest inflow counties, we

find that the Capitol Riot is associated with a significant increase in daily cumulative COVID-19

case growth. The effects begin in the period including the 50th to 75th percentile of the

incubation period for COVID-19 and continue through approximately one month following the

Riot.



                                                25
        Table 4 presents the lagged effects of absolute Capitol Riot inflows on COVID-19 case

growth. Column (1) includes the full set of fixed effects and county linear time trends and

column (2) adds the observable control variables mentioned above. Across these specifications,

we find consistent evidence that COVID-19 cases grew faster in higher inflow counties relative

to counties that did not contribute any protest participants. In our most saturated specification

(column 2), we find that the Riot was associated with an approximate 0.4 to one percentage point

increase in daily COVID-19 case growth. 32,33 Accounting for the uncertainty around these

estimates implied by our estimated standard errors, our lower bound estimates from the 95

percent confidence intervals would suggest a 0.15 to 0.24 percentage point increase. In column

(3), we omit counties from the sample that include state Capitols where there may have been,

albeit smaller, protests. Our results show a slightly larger increase in daily cumulative COVID-

19 case growth, reaching just over a percentage-point in the longest lag window (21 or more

days following the Riot). 34

        To ensure that the estimates shown in columns (1) through (3) of Table 4 were not driven

by high population counties or by idiosyncratic SafeGraph coverage differences across counties,

we next use our relative inflow measure that normalizes absolute inflows by the total resident

pings in the county. Figure 9 shows event-study analyses of the effects of relative inflows into

the U.S. Capitol on the natural log of COVID-19 cases. Consistent with our absolute inflow

measure, we find no evidence that COVID-19 grew faster in lower inflow counties relative to


32
   For high absolute inflow counties, we estimate a pre-Riot cumulative COVID-19 daily case growth mean of
0.0101. For high relative inflow counties, we estimate a pre-Riot cumulative COVID-19 case growth rate mean of
0.0095
33
   In Appendix Table 2, we replicate columns (1) and (2) of Table 4 using the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation
of daily COVID-19 cases. While much less precisely estimated, the results are qualitatively similar to those shown
in Table 4.
34
   In Appendix Table 3, we add controls for census division-by-day fixed effects to control for common region-
specific shocks that may be correlated with the timing of the Capitol Riot and with COVID-19 growth. The results
are qualitatively similar to those reported in Table 4.

                                                        26
counties without inflows. However, in higher inflow counties, we find consistent evidence that

the Capitol Riot was associated with an increase in daily COVID-19 case growth, beginning in

the period after the median incubation period of COVID-19 and continuing through

approximately one month following the rally.

        In columns (4) through (6) of Table 4, we show dose-response estimates using the

relative inflow measure. We find that in high inflow counties, the Riot was associated with a 0.5

to 1.1 percentage point increase in COVID-19 case growth. These findings, consistent with our

absolute inflow results, suggest that the January 6 Capitol events contributed to non-localized

COVID-19 spread and generated potentially important public health costs. 35,36



4.4 Mitigating Policies

        Could home county mitigating policies have blunted non-localized COVID-19 spread

from the Capitol Riot? In Table 5, we explore whether the effects of the Capitol Riot on

nationwide spread differed by whether, on January 6th, the state had imposed restrictions on

indoor dining at restaurants or bars (capacity constraints or outright bans). There is evidence that

indoor dining/drinking among non-household members may play an important role in the spread

of COVID-19 (Courtemanche et al. 2020; Dave et al. 2020c,f). In the context of other large

gatherings involving participants who have traveled long distances, community-level spread of

COVID-19 when protesters return home appears to be muted by mitigation policies such as

restrictions on indoor dining at restaurants (Dave et al. 2020c). Thus, in Table 5, we interact



35
   The estimates shown in Table 4 are weighted using the county population. In Appendix Table 4, we show results
from unweighted regressions. The pattern of results is qualitatively similar.
36
   In Appendix Tables 5A and 5B, we explore the impact of the Capitol Riot on COVID-19-related deaths.
Consistent with out findings on COVID-19 cases in the District of Columbia, we find no evidence that the Riot
contributed to additional local COVID-19 deaths. However, while imprecisely estimated, our dose response results
suggest that the Riot may have contributed to increased non-localized COVID-19-related mortality.

                                                       27
Travelersc with an indicator for whether the state restricted indoor dining or drinking at

restaurants or bars and required mask wearing in public places. For our absolute inflow

measure, the strongest mitigation policy for which we have sufficient variation for identification

in our highest inflow category is a state mandate for partial (or greater) restrictions on indoor

dining at restaurants and drinking at bars. For our relative inflow measure, we can construct a

stricter mitigation policy: full bans on indoor dining/drinking at bars and some restrictions or a

full ban on dining at restaurants.

        The results in Table 5 provide evidence that existing mitigation policies in the home state

of Capitol protesters may have played an important role in reducing spread of COVID-19

following the Riot. This result is especially stark in the case of our strongest mitigation policy

using our relative ping measure. In the highest inflow category, we find that that the Riot was

associated with a 0.7 to 1.4 percentage point increase in county-level COVID-19 case growth

when the rally attendee's home state did not ban indoor dining at restaurants and drinking at

bars. 37 However, when such activities were banned, the Riot had a small and statistically

insignificant effect on COVID-19 spread. While we are cautious in interpretation given that the

policy variation we exploit is cross-sectional, these findings suggest that there is scope for public

policy to mitigate community-level spread of COVID-19. 38


                                                  5. Conclusions

        On January 6, 2021, one of the most dramatic political events in modern American

history took place when supporters of outgoing President Donald J. Trump stormed the U.S.


37
   Accounting for the uncertainty surrounding the estimates, the lower bounds of the 95 percent confidence intervals
are suggestive of an increase of about 0.3 to 0.6 percentage points.
38
   In unreported results, we explore whether state mask mandates mitigated the COVID-19-spread effects of the
Capitol Riot. We find no evidence that such policies were associated with slower case growth in high inflow
counties.

                                                         28
Capitol Building to protest the certification of the elections of President Joseph R. Biden and

Vice President Kamala Harris. Termed an "insurrection" by the U.S. Congress, this event

challenged the nation's tradition of a peaceful transition of political power across executives.

But in addition to the threats posed to the nation's democracy, some public health experts,

including the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, argued that the Capitol

Riot could cause a resurgence of COVID-19 in Washington, D.C. and nationwide. This study is

the first to explore this question.

        First, using data from SafeGraph, we document that non-resident smartphone presence at

the Ellipse, National Mall, and U.S. Capitol Building rose substantially on January 6, 2021.

Moreover, we find evidence that local residents of Washington, D.C. engaged in risk avoidance

behavior in response to this event. Stay-at-home behavior at the extensive margin (full-time stay

at home behavior) and the intensive margin (percent of time spent at home) rose in response to

the event. This result is consistent with risk-averting behavior in response to, perhaps, risks of

violence and COVID-19 spread. Risk aversion may also rise in response to congestion effects

as, during and after the protests, many streets were closed, and traffic rerouted as the Capitol

police regained control of the city and the National Guard was called out. Moreover, some of the

stay-at-home behavior induced by the Riot appeared to continue long past the event itself, owed

to the "virtual lockdown" of Washington, D.C. in the period leading up to President Biden's

inauguration.

        Perhaps in part because of this increase in social distancing, evidence from our synthetic

control models provide no evidence of local COVID-19 spread in Washington, D.C. in the

month following the event. However, when we explore whether there were non-localized

spillover effects of the Capitol Riot, our dose response models suggest that counties that



                                                 29
contributed higher inflows to Washington, D.C. on January 6 saw larger increases in daily

COVID-19 case growth. This result is consistent with Center for Disease Control and

Prevention warning that large gatherings of non-household members who do not engage in

mitigation generates the conditions for substantial risk for community-level COVID-19 spread.

       Descriptive evidence suggests that there may be an important role for policy in blunting

the adverse public health consequences of risky large gatherings. Restrictions in Washington,

D.C. and in counties that contributed relatively higher inflows to the Capitol may have helped

curb COVID-19 spread following the Riot, moderating interactions outdoors and risky activities

(for instance, going to restaurants and bars) once protesters traveled back to their resident

communities. Moreover, averting behaviors, particularly in the District of Columbia, which may

include increases in stay-at-home behavior as well as enhanced mask-wearing may have helped

cap COVID-19 growth.

       Our analysis, of course, only captures short-run estimates of the effect of the Capitol Riot

on community-level COVID-19 spread. While our post-treatment window captures a period

beyond the incubation window of COVID-19, additional weeks of data will provide a fuller

picture of the public health impacts of the event. Importantly, we note that our COVID-19 data

do not allow us to specifically measure disease spread among those protesting or among those

working in the Capitol Building on the day of the Riot. Precise and complete contact tracing

would be required to document person-to-person spread among those who had contact with

rioters. Our estimates should, therefore, be interpreted as the event's net effect on community-

level COVID-19 cases. Distributional effects may, of course, be important as well.




                                                 30
                                           6. References

Abadie, A., Diamond, A. and Hainmueller, J. (2010). "Synthetic Control Methods for
      Comparative Case Studies: Estimating the Effect of California's Tobacco Control
      Program." Journal of the American Statistical Association 105 (490): 493­505.

Abouk, R, and Heydari, B. (2020). "The Immediate Effect of COVID-19 Policies on Social
      Distancing Behavior in the United States." Retrieved from SSRN:
      https://ssrn.com/abstract=3571421

Adeline, Stephanie, Connie Hanzhang Jin, Alyson Hurt, Thomas Wilburn, Daniel Wood, and
       Ruth Talbot. 2021. Coronavirus Is Surging: How Severe Is Your State's Outbreak?
       January 14, 2021. National Public Radio. https://www.npr.org/sections/health-
       shots/2020/09/01/816707182/map-tracking-the-spread-of-the-coronavirus-in-the-u-s

Ahammer, Alexander, Martin Halla & Mario Lackner, 2020. "Mass Gatherings Contributed to
     Early COVID-19 Mortality: Evidence from US Sports," Economics working papers
     2020-13, Department of Economics, Johannes Kepler University Linz, Austria.

Baldwin, Sarah L., Audrey McNamara, and Caroline Linton. Washington, D.C., locks down as
      inauguration events kick off. January 17, 2021. CBS News.
      https://www.cbsnews.com/live-updates/joe-biden-inauguration-washington-dc-lockdown/

Balsamo, Michael. 2021. Discovery of pipe bombs in DC obscured by riot at Capitol. January
      11, 2021. The Associated Press. https://apnews.com/article/donald-trump-joe-biden-
      inaugurations-capitol-siege-8828a6a920198d0ea1ee0c73a49d8847

Bennett, G.G., McNeill, L.H., Wolin, K.Y., Duncan, D.T., Puleo, E. and Emmons, K.M., 2007.
       Safe to walk? Neighborhood safety and physical activity among public housing residents.
       PLoS medicine, 4(10).

Booker, Brakkton. 2021. About 20,000 National Guard Members to Deploy for Inauguration,
      Officials Say. January 13, 2021. National Public Radio.
      https://www.npr.org/sections/insurrection-at-the-capitol/2021/01/13/956458463/20-000-
      national-guardsmen-will-be-deployed-for-inauguration-d-c-official-says

Buchmueller, T. C., DiNardo, J., & Valletta, R. G. 2011. The effect of an employer health
    insurance mandate on health insurance coverage and the demand for labor: Evidence from
    Hawaii. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 3(4), 25-51.

Carless, Will. 2021. Nation's capital braces for violence as extremist groups converge to protest
      Trump's election loss. January 4, 2021. USA Today.
      https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/nation/2021/01/04/january-6-dc-protests-against-
      election-certification-could-violent/4132441001/




                                                31
Chappell, Bill. 2021. 3rd Member of Congress Tests Positive for Coronavirus, Blames Capitol
      Attack Lockdown. January 12, 2021. National Public Radio.
      https://www.npr.org/sections/insurrection-at-the-capitol/2021/01/12/955976431/rep-
      jayapal-blames-insurrection-lockdown-after-testing-positive-for-covid-19

Cochrane, Emily. 2021. Did Mixing a Riot with a Pandemic Yield a Superspreader Event?
      January 11, 2021. The New York Times.
      https://www.nytimes.com/2021/01/11/us/politics/us-capitol-super-spreader-
      coronavirus.html

Cotti, Chad D., Bryan Engelhardt, Joshua Foster, Erik T. Nesson, Paul S. Niekamp.
        Forthcoming. "The Relationship between In-Person Voting and COVID-19: Evidence
        from the Wisconsin Primary," Contemporary Economic Policy.

Courtemanche, C., Garuccio, J., Le, A., Pinkston, J., Yelowitz, A., 2020. Strong Social
      Distancing Measures in The United States Reduced The COVID-19 Growth Rate. Health
      Affairs 10.1377/hlthaff.2020.00608. https://doi.org/10.1377/hlthaff.2020.00608

Cremen, Alanea. 2021. 11 arrested for having pepper spray at Capitol demonstrations. January 6,
      2021. ABC 10 News, Sacramento.
      https://www.abc10.com/article/news/local/sacramento/hundreds-gather-at-sacramento-
      capitol-to-protest-2020-election/103-d2e330bd-1268-404f-8edc-bc97bef71629

Cronin, C.J., and Evans, W.N. 2020. Private Precaution and Public Restrictions: What Drives
       Social Distancing and Industry Foot Traffic in the COVID-19 Era? Working Paper No.
       27531. Working paper Series. National Bureau of Economic Research.

Cunningham, S. and Shah, M. 2018. Decriminalizing Indoor Prostitution: Implications for
      Sexual Violence and Public Health. The Review of Economic Studies, 85(3), pp.1683-
      1715.

Dave, D.M., Friedson, A.I., Matsuzawa, K., Sabia, J.J. and Safford, S. 2020a. Black Lives Matter
       Protests, Social Distancing, and COVID-19. Working Paper No. 27408. Working Paper
       Series. National Bureau of Economic Research.

Dave, D.M., Friedson, A.I., Matsuzawa, K., McNichols, D., Redpath, C. and Sabia, J.J. 2020b.
       Risk Aversion, Offsetting Community Effects and COVID-19: Evidence from an Indoor
       Political Rally. Working Paper No. 27552. Working Paper Series. National Bureau of
       Economic Research.

Dave, D.M., McNichols, D. and Sabia, J.J. 2020c. The Contagion Externality of a
       Suprespreading Event: The Sturgis Motorcycle Rally and COVID-19. Southern
       Economic Journal, Forthcoming.

Dave, D.M., Friedson, A.I., Matsuzawa, K., McNichols, D., Sabia, J.J., 2020d. Did the
       Wisconsin Supreme Court Restart a COVID-19 Epidemic? Evidence from a Natural


                                              32
       Experiment (Working Paper No. 27322). National Bureau of Economic Research.
       https://doi.org/10.3386/w27322

Dave, D.M., Friedson, A.I., Matsuzawa, K., Sabia, J.J., 2020e. When Do Shelter-in-Place Orders
       Fight COVID-19 Best? Policy Heterogeneity Across States and Adoption Time.
       Forthcoming, Economic Inquiry.

Dave, D.M., Friedson, A.I., Matsuzawa, K., Sabia, J.J., Safford, S., 2020f. Were Urban Cowboys
       Enough to Control COVID-19? Local Shelter-in-Place Orders and Coronavirus Case
       Growth. Forthcoming, Journal of Urban Economics.

Doig, Steve. 2021. It is difficult, if not impossible, to estimate the size of the crowd that stormed
       Capitol Hill. January 8, 2021. The Conversation. https://theconversation.com/it-is-
       difficult-if-not-impossible-to-estimate-the-size-of-the-crowd-that-stormed-capitol-hill-
       152889

Ellis, Ralph. 2021. Capitol Riot Likely a Superspreader Event. January 11, 2021. WebMD.
        https://www.webmd.com/lung/news/20210110/capitol-riot-likely-a-superspreader-event

Fandos, Nicholas and Emily Chochrane. 2021. After a day of chaos, Congress certifies Joe
      Biden's election victory. January 7, 2021. The New York Times.
      https://www.nytimes.com/live/2021/01/06/us/electoral-vote

Fe, Hao, and Viviane Sanfelice. 2020. How Bad is Crime for Business? Evidence from
       Consumer Behavior. Center for Health Economics and Policy Studies Working Paper No.
       2021101.

Friedson, Andrew I., Drew McNichols, Joseph J. Sabia, and Dhaval Dave. 2020. "Shelter-in-
       Place Orders and Public Health: Evidence from California During the COVID-19
       Pandemic." Forthcoming, Journal of Policy Analysis and Management.

Gupta, S., Nguyen, T.D., Rojas, F.L., Raman, S., Lee, B., Bento, A., Simon, K.I. and Wing, C.
       2020. Tracking Public and Private Responses to the COVID-19 Epidemic: Evidence from
       State and Local Government Actions. NBER Working Paper No. 27027.

Hsu, Spencer S., Tom Jackman, and Devlin Barrett. 2021. Self-styled militia members planned
       on storming the U.S. Capitol days in advance of Jan. 6 attack, court documents say.
       January 19, 2021. The Washington Post. https://www.washingtonpost.com/local/legal-
       issues/conspiracy-oath-keeper-arrest-capitol-riot/2021/01/19/fb84877a-5a4f-11eb-8bcf-
       3877871c819d_story.html

Janke, K., Propper, C. and Shields, M.A., 2016. "Assaults, murders and walkers: The impact of
       violent crime on physical activity." Journal of Health Economics, 47, pp.34-49.

Lasry, A., Kidder, D., Hast, M., Poovey, J., Sunshine, G., Zviedrite, N., Ahmed, F. and Ethier,
       K.A., (2020). "Timing of Community Mitigation And Changes in Reported COVID-19


                                                 33
       And Community MobilityFour US metropolitan Areas." Morbidity and Mortality
       Weekly Report, 69(15): 451-457

Lauer, Stephen A., Kyra H. Grantz, Qifang Bi, Forrest K. Jones, Qulu Zheng, Hannah R.
       Meredith, Andrew S. Azman, Nicholas G. Reich, and Justin Lessler. "The Incubation
       Period of Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) from Publicly Reported Confirmed
       Cases: Estimation and Application." Annals of Internal Medicine (2020).

Leary, Alex. 2021. Trump Tells Rioters, `I Know How You Feel,' Draws Bipartisan
       Condemnation. January 7, 2021. The Wall Street Journal.
       https://www.wsj.com/articles/trump-tells-rioters-i-know-how-you-feel-draws-bipartisan-
       condemnation-11609977209

Mandavilli, Apoorva. 2021. A Riot Amid a Pandemic: Did the Virus, Too, Storm the Capitol?
     January 7, 2021. The New York Times.
     https://www.nytimes.com/2021/01/07/health/coronavirus-capitol-riot.html

Mangrum, Daniel, and Paul Niekamp. 2020. JUE Insight: College Student Travel Contributed to
      Local COVID-19 Spread. Journal of Urban Economics, 103311.

Office of the Mayor. 2021. Mayor's Order 2020-127. Washington, D.C.
       https://coronavirus.dc.gov/sites/default/files/dc/sites/coronavirus/page_content/attachmen
       ts/Mayor%27s%20Order%20127%2012-18-2020.pdf

Peñaloza, Marisa. Trump Supporters Storm U.S. Capitol, Clash With Police. January 6, 2021.
       National Public Radio. https://www.npr.org/sections/congress-electoral-college-tally-
       live-updates/2021/01/06/953616207/diehard-trump-supporters-gather-in-the-nations-
       capital-to-protest-election-resul

Reuters Staff. 2021. Fact check: Protestors did not `storm' Georgia and Kansas statehouses.
       January 8, 2021. Reuters. https://www.reuters.com/article/uk-factcheck-ks-ga-capitols-
       not-stormed/fact-check-protestors-did-not-storm-georgia-and-kansas-statehouses-
       idUSKBN29D1YV

Roman, C.G. and Chalfin, A., 2008. "Fear of Walking Outdoors: A Multilevel Ecologic Analysis
     of Crime and Disorder." American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 34(4), pp.306-312.

Safdar, Khadeeja, Erin Ailworth, and Deepa Seetharaman. 2021. Police Identify Five Dead After
        Capitol Riot. January 8, 2021. The Wall Street Journal.
        https://www.wsj.com/articles/police-identify-those-killed-in-capitol-riot-11610133560

Sardarizadeh, Shayan and Jessica Lussenhop. 2021. Trump riots: 65 days that led to the chaos at
       the Capitol. January 10, 2021. BBC News. https://www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-
       55592332




                                               34
Shear, Michael. 2021. Biden calls on Trump to go on national television and `demand an end to
       this siege.' January 6, 2021. The New York Times.
       https://www.nytimes.com/live/2021/01/06/us/electoral-vote

Stafford, M., Cummins, S., Ellaway, A., Sacker, A., Wiggins, R.D. and Macintyre, S., 2007.
       Pathways to obesity: identifying local, modifiable determinants of physical activity and
       diet. Social Science & Medicine, 65(9), pp.1882-1897.

Stolzenberg, L., D'Alessio, S.J. and Flexon, J.L., 2019. The Impact of Violent Crime on Obesity.
       Social Sciences, 8(12), p.329.

U.S. Census Bureau. 2010. Decennial Census. Washington, D.C.
       https://www.icip.iastate.edu/tables/population/urban-pct-states

U.S. Census Bureau. 2019. U.S. Census Bureau Quick Facts. Washington, D.C.
       https://www.census.gov/quickfacts/DC

U.S. Department of Justice. 2021. U.S. Office of Public Affairs Press Release. January 14, 2021.
       https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/acting-attorney-general-jeffrey-rosen-attends-security-
       briefing-fbi-s-strategic-information

Wei, J. and Li, Y., 2016. "Airborne spread of infectious agents in the indoor environment."
        American Journal of Infection Control, 44(9), pp. S102-S108.

Wing, C., Simon, D.H., and Carlin, P. 2020. "Effects of Large Gatherings on the COVID-19
      Epidemic: Evidence from Professional and College Sports." Available at SSRN:
      https://ssrn.com/abstract=3657625.

Yu, E. and Lippert, A.M., 2016. Neighborhood crime rate, weightrelated behaviors, and obesity:
       a systematic review of the literature. Sociology Compass, 10(3), pp.187-207.

Zraick, Karen and Rebecca Robbins. 2021. As U.S. tops 4,000 deaths in a day, a record, Fauci
        warns that January will get harder. January 7, 2021. The New York Times.
        https://www.nytimes.com/2021/01/07/world/fauci-coronavirus-january.html




                                               35
 Figure 1. Distribution of Log Smartphone Pings Around the Capitol Riot, January 1, 2021
                                        through January 11, 2021


                                     Panel (a) Total Smartphone Pings




                                Panel (b) Non-Resident Smartphone Pings




Notes: "D.C." refers to all census block groups (CBGs) within the District of Columbia, "Cluster" refers to the
CBGs that include the Ellipse, the White House, the National Mall and all border CBGs. "Main" refers to the CBG
that includes the Ellipse, the White House, and the National Mall.




                                                      36
Figure 2. Distribution of Home Counties for Smartphones that "Pinged" in the Protest
               CBG on January 4, 6, and 8, 2021: Absolute Measure


                          Panel (a): January 4, 2021 (Before Riot)




                      Panel (b): January 6, 2021 (Day of Capitol Riot)




                           Panel (c): January 8, 2021 (After Riot)




                                           37
Figure 3. Distribution of Home Counties for Smartphones that "Pinged" in the Protest
                CBG on January 4, 6, and 8, 2021: Relative Measure

                            Panel (a): January 4 (Before Riot)




                            Panel (b): January 6 (Day of Riot)




                             Panel (c): January 8(After Riot)




                                          38
Figure 4. Trends in COVID-19 Cases, by "Absolute" County Inflows into the District of
                            Columbia on January 6, 2021


                            Panel (a): Cumulative COVID-19 Case Rate




                      Panel (b): Daily Cumulative COVID-19 Case Growth




                                         39
    Figure 5. Event-Study Analyses of the Effects of the January 6 Capitol Riot on
Log of Total Smartphone Pings and Non-Resident Smartphone Pings in Protest CBG
                          Relative to Other D.C. CBGs
   Panel (a): Total Pings (Full D.C. Sample)          Panel (b): Non-Resident Pings (Full D.C. Sample)




Panel (c): Total Pings (Exclude Border CBGs)        Panel (d): Non-Resident Pings (Exclude Border CBGs)




                                               40
       Figure 6. Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of Capitol Riot on Stay-at-Home Behavior in the District of Columbia
Panel (a): Percent Home Full-Time ­ Match on All Pre-Treatment Days                              Panel (b): Median Percent Time Home ­ Match on All Pre-Treatment Days




 Note: Synthetic D.C. is comprised of San Francisco County, CA (56.4%), Val Verde County,        Note: Synthetic D.C. is comprised of Grand Forks County, ND (24%), Kings County, CA (22.4%),
          TX (19.4%), Denver County, CO (15.5%), and Sarpy County, NE (4.8%)                     San Francisco County, CA (22.4%), Story County, IA (16.3%), Riley County, KS (7.3%), Albany
                                                                                                                      County, WY (5.8%), and Jim Hogg County, TX (1.8%).


 Panel (c): Percent Home Full-Time ­ Match on ½ Pre-Treatment Days                               Panel (d): Median Percent Time Home ­ Match on ½ Pre-Treatment Days
                     and All Observable Controls                                                                      and All Observable Controls




Note: Synthetic D.C. is comprised of San Francisco County, CA (54.5%), Denver County, CO
                        (24.1 %), and Val Verde County, TX (21.4 %).                             Note: Synthetic D.C. is comprised of Grand Forks County, ND (41.5%), San Francisco County, CA
                                                                                                                             (40.1%), and Story County, IA (18.2%).


Notes: The donor pool is comprised of counties with urbanicity rate of 80% or higher, and excludes counties in border states, as well as counties with any home residents that pinged
in the census block group of the United States Capitol Building on 1/6. Panels (a) and (b) are generated by matching on all pre-treatment days, and panels (c) and (d) are generated by
matching on 5 pre-treatment days plus urbanicity, weighted population density, mask wearing mandate, restrictions on bars/restaurants, curfew mandate, and stay-at-home advisory.



                                                                                            41
Figure 7. Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of Capitol Riot on Cumulative COVID-19 Cases Per 100,000 Population in D.C.

       Panel (a): Cumulative COVID-19 Cases Per 100,000 Population ­                              Panel (b): Cumulative COVID-19 Cases Per 100,000 Population ­
                      Match on All Pre-Treatment Days                                              Match on ½ of Pre-Treatment Days and All Observable Controls




   Note: Synthetic D.C. is comprised of Kauai County, HI (24.5%), Sonoma County, CA (17.6%),      Note: Synthetic D.C. is comprised of San Francisco, CA (55.3%), Denver County, CO
   St. Charles Parish, LA (13.3%), San Patricio County, TX (12.1%), and Polk County, OR (3.1%).        (32.4%), Asotin County, WA(7.6%), and Schenectady County, NY (4.5%).



                                                     Panel (c): Cumulative COVID-19 Cases Per 100,000 Population ­
                                                     Match on ½ of Pre-Treatment Days and All Observable Controls &
                                                              Exclude State Capitol Counties from Donor Pool




                  Notes: The donor pool is comprised of counties with urbanicity rate above 80%, and excludes counties in border states, as well as counties with any home
                  residents that pinged in the census block group of the United States Capitol Building on 1/6. Panel (a) is generated by matching on all pre-treatment days,
                  and panel (b) is generated by matching on 5 pre-treatment days plus urbanicity, weighted population density, mask wearing mandate, restrictions on
                  bars/restaurants, curfew mandate, and stay-at-home advisory.
                                                                                           42
Figure 8. Event-Study Analysis of Effect of Capitol Riot on Daily Rate of Cumulative COVID-19 Case Growth, by Absolute
                                Inflow of County Residents to Protest CBG on January 6


           Panel (a): High Absolute Inflow                                 Panel (b): Moderate-High Absolute Inflow




              Days Before/After Capitol Riot                                      Days Before/After Capitol Riot



         Panel (d): Moderate Absolute Inflow                                    Panel (d): Low Absolute Inflow




              Days Before/After Capitol Riot                                      Days Before/After Capitol Riot

                                                         43
Figure 9. Event-Study Analysis of Effect of Capitol Riot on Daily Rate of Cumulative COVID-19 Case Growth, by Relative
                                     Inflow of County Residents to Protest CBG on January 6

               Panel (a): High Relative Inflow                                       Panel (b): Moderate-High Relative Inflow




                  Days Before/After Capitol Riot                                              Days Before/After Capitol Riot



             Panel (d): Moderate Relative Inflow                                          Panel (d): Low Relative Inflow




                  Days Before/After Capitol Riot                                              Days Before/After Capitol Riot



                                                              44
              Table 1. Difference-in-Differences Estimates of Effect of the Capitol Riot on
                       Log Smartphone Pings in Treatment Census Block Group

                                           (1)                       (2)                 (3)                      (4)

                                           Total Smartphone Pings                   Non-Resident Smartphone Pings

                                                     Panel I: Sample: All District of Columbia CBGs

January 6th                            1.755***              1.654***                1.709***                 1.614***
                                      [p=0.0023]            [p=0.0046]              [p=0.0069]               [p=0.0046]
January 7+                               -0.07                -0.271                  -0.121                   -0.311
                                      [p=0.6528]            [p=0.8773]              [p=0.6968]               [p=0.8032]
Observations                             4,950                 4,950                   4,950                    4,950

                                                 Panel II Sample: Excludes Border CBGs to Protest CBG

January 6th                            1.783***              1.678***                1.741***                 1.635***
                                      [p=0.0023]            [p=0.0046]              [p=0.0046]               [p=0.0046]
January 7+                              -0.067                -0.277                  -0.119                   -0.333
                                      [p=0.6458]            [p=0.8796]              [p=0.6898]               [p=0.8125]
Observations                             4,752                 4,752                   4,752                    4,752

CBG Linear Time Trend?                     No                        Yes                 No                      Yes

       ***Significant at 1% level **at 5% level *at 10% level
       Notes: Estimates are generated using ordinary least squares. All models include cluster and day fixed effects.
       Permutation based p-value is reported inside the bracket




                                                                45
  Table 2. Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of Capitol Riot on Stay-at-Home Behavior Among Local Residents in District of Columbia
                                                                            Percent Staying at Home Full-Time                 Median Percent Time at Home
                                                                          (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)          (5)        (6)        (7)       (8)
                                                                                                   Panel I: Full Post-Treatment Period
Capitol Riot                                                            2.216            1.946           1.949        2.242      7.143     5.508*                         6.876*    7.633**
P-Value                                                                [0.826]          [0.716]         [0.688]      [0.689]    [0.431]    [0.165]                        [0.083]   [0.047]
One Sided P-Value                                                      [0.394]          [0.367]         [0.349]      [0.377]    [0.165]    [0.092]                        [0.055]   [0.028]
Pre-Treatment Mean of DV                                                36.06            36.06           36.06        36.06      72.38      72.38                          72.38     72.38
                                                                                                         Panel II: Lagged Post-Treatment Windows
Capitol Riot (1/5 to 1/6)                                               4.154            3.641           3.644        4.502     11.558    9.655**                       11.876**    12.321**
P-Value                                                                [0.606]          [0.394]         [0.367]      [0.349]    [0.321]    [0.073]                       [0.037]     [0.038]
One Sided P-Value                                                      [0.303]          [0.211]         [0.202]      [0.189]    [0.119]    [0.037]                       [0.028]     [0.028]
Capitol Riot (1/7+)                                                     1.828            1.607           1.609             1.79            6.26           4.679           5.876*    6.696**
P-Value                                                                [0.853]          [0.789]         [0.780]          [0.755]         [0.450]         [0.220]          [0.092]   [0.075]
One Sided P-Value                                                      [0.422]          [0.404]         [0.385]          [0.406]         [0.165]         [0.119]          [0.064]   [0.038]
Pre-Treatment Mean of DV                                                36.06            36.06           36.06            36.06           72.38           72.38            72.38     72.38

Matching Variables
 All Pre-Treatment Days                                                    Y                N               N               N                Y               N                N        N
 Match on 12/27,12/29,12/31,1/2,1/4
                                                                           N                Y               Y               Y                N               Y                Y        Y
 Outcome, Urbanicity, Restaurant/Bar Closure
 Match on Stay-at-Home Advisory, Mask
                                                                           N                N               Y               Y                N               N                Y        Y
 Mandate, Curfew Mandate
 State Capitol Counties Omitted                                            N                N               N               Y                N               N                N        Y
* Significant at the 10% level; ** Significant at the 5% level; *** Significant at the 1% level
Notes: The donor pool is comprised of counties with urbanicity rate above 80%, and excludes counties in border states, as well as counties with greater than 1 home resident that
pinged in the census block group of the United States Capitol Building on 1/6.



                                                                                                 46
       Table 3. Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of Capitol Riot on Cumulative COVID-19 Cases Per 100,000 Population in DC
                                                         Cases Per 100,000 Population             Log (Cases Per 100,000 Population)
                                                                       (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)              (5)             (6)             (7)                (8)
                                                                                                         Panel I: Full Post-Treatment Period
Full Capitol Riot Treatment Effect (1/6 ­ 1/21)                     -20.381         -24.016           -28.85     -12.726       -0.001     -0.005                       -0.005           -0.016
P-Value                                                             [0.936]         [0.899]          [0.807]      [0.915]     [0.853]    [0.835]                      [0.761]          [0.679]
One Sided P-Value                                                   [0.349]         [0.596]          [0.651]      [0.594]     [0.459]    [0.615]                      [0.670]          [0.387]
Pre-Treatment Mean of DV                                            4130.0          4130.0           4130.0       4130.0        8.33       8.33                         8.33             8.33
                                                                                                      Panel II: Lagged Post-Treatment Windows
First Post-Treatment Window (1/6-1/12)                               5.653          -27.968          -58.875     -25.394      -0.007    -0.014                         -0.013           -0.014
P-Value                                                             [0.881]         [0.706]          [0.394]      [0.642]    [0.661]   [0.312]                        [0.394]          [0.387]
One Sided P-Value                                                   [0.321]         [0.706]          [0.817]      [0.745]    [0.560]   [0.853]                        [0.844]          [0.236]
Middle Post-Treatment Window (1/13-1/19)                            -29.561         -45.838           -56.75     -31.152      -0.006    -0.011                         -0.011           -0.019
P-Value                                                             [0.853]         [0.789]          [0.706]      [0.811]    [0.761]   [0.706]                        [0.734]          [0.528]
One Sided P-Value                                                   [0.294]         [0.633]          [0.679]      [0.642]    [0.495]   [0.679]                        [0.670]          [0.292]
Longer-Run Post-Treatment Window (1/20+)                            -28.246         -11.988           -1.818          1.785            0.004           0.001           0.002            -0.015
P-Value                                                             [0.927]         [0.917]          [0.917]         [0.915]          [0.862]         [0.908]         [0.807]          [0.698]
One Sided P-Value                                                   [0.339]         [0.569]          [0.578]         [0.575]          [0.440]         [0.596]         [0.661]          [0.406]
Pre-Treatment Mean of DV                                            4130.0          4130.0           4130.0          4130.0             8.33            8.33            8.33             8.33

Matching Variables
 All Pre-Treatment Days                                                 Y               N                N               N               Y                N               N                 N
 Match on 12/28,12/30,1/1,1/3,1/5 Cases
 Urbanicity, Pop Density, Testing Trend,                                N               Y                Y               Y               N                Y               Y                 Y
 Restaurant/Bar Closure, Pre-1/6 SAH Behavior
 Match on Stay-at-Home Advisory, Mask
                                                                        N               N                Y               Y               N                N               Y                 Y
 Mandate, Curfew
 State Capitol Counties Omitted                                         N               N                N               Y               N                N               N                 Y

        * Significant at the 10% level; ** Significant at the 5% level; *** Significant at the 1% level
        Notes: The donor pool is comprised of counties with urbanicity rate above 80%, and excludes counties in border states, as well as counties with greater than 1 home resident that
        pinged in the census block group of the United States Capitol Building on 1/6.
                                                                                                47
                        Table 4. Dose-Response "Difference-in-Differences" Estimates of the Effect of the Capitol Riot
                                           on Daily Rate of Cumulative COVID-19 Case Growth

                                                            Absolute Inflow                               Relative Inflow
                                                   (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)            (6)
Counties with High Inflow
January 6-8 (0-2 Days After Capitol Riot)        -0.0019        -0.0018         -0.0012        0.001          0.0013          0.0008
                                                (0.0014)       (0.0014)        (0.0008)       (0.001)        (0.0009)        (0.0007)
January 9-13 (3-7 Days After Capitol Riot)      0.0042**       0.0044**       0.0051***      0.006***       0.0057***       0.0051***
                                                (0.0015)       (0.0015)        (0.0007)       (0.002)        (0.0015)        (0.0013)
January 14-15 (8-9 Days After Capitol Riot)      0.0069*        0.0073*        0.0083**       0.006**        0.0060**       0.0053**
                                                (0.0029)       (0.0029)        (0.0026)       (0.002)        (0.0017)        (0.0016)
January 16-19 (10-13 Days After Capitol Riot)     0.0075        0.0079*       0.0106***      0.011***       0.0109***       0.0104***
                                                (0.0038)       (0.0037)        (0.0020)       (0.003)        (0.0027)        (0.0028)
January 20-23 (14-17 Days After Capitol Riot)    0.0067*       0.0071**       0.0082***       0.008**        0.0082**       0.0072**
                                                (0.0025)       (0.0025)        (0.0014)       (0.003)        (0.0028)        (0.0025)
January 24-26 (18-20 Days After Capitol Riot)    0.0101*        0.0105*       0.0131***       0.011**       0.0117***       0.0108**
                                                (0.0042)       (0.0041)        (0.0019)       (0.003)        (0.0033)        (0.0033)
January 27+ (21+ Days After Capitol Riot)        0.0100*        0.0104*       0.0132***       0.012**        0.0120**       0.0106**
                                                (0.0046)       (0.0045)        (0.0021)       (0.004)        (0.0040)        (0.0037)
Counties with Moderate- High Inflow
January 6-8 (0-2 Days After Capitol Riot)        -0.0010        -0.0009        -0.0004        -0.001         -0.0007        -0.0004
                                                 (0.0015)       (0.0015)       (0.0014)       (0.002)        (0.0019)       (0.0019)
January 9-13 (3-7 Days After Capitol Riot)        0.0006         0.0009         0.0012         0.001          0.0009         0.0011
                                                 (0.0014)       (0.0014)       (0.0014)       (0.002)        (0.0021)       (0.0021)
January 14-15 (8-9 Days After Capitol Riot)       0.0003         0.0005         0.0005         0.001          0.0012         0.0013
                                                 (0.0015)       (0.0016)       (0.0017)       (0.002)        (0.0021)       (0.0021)
January 16-19 (10-13 Days After Capitol Riot)     0.0017         0.0020         0.0023         0.003          0.0027         0.0034
                                                 (0.0018)       (0.0019)       (0.0019)       (0.003)        (0.0029)       (0.0028)
January 20-23 (14-17 Days After Capitol Riot)     0.0009         0.0012         0.0009         0.003          0.0028         0.0031
                                                 (0.0017)       (0.0018)       (0.0019)       (0.003)        (0.0028)       (0.0028)
January 24-26 (18-20 Days After Capitol Riot)     0.0026         0.0028         0.0026         0.004          0.0039         0.0045
                                                 (0.0024)       (0.0025)       (0.0026)       (0.003)        (0.0034)       (0.0032)
January 27+ (21+ Days After Capitol Riot)         0.0026         0.0029         0.0025         0.005          0.0048         0.0056
                                                 (0.0027)       (0.0028)       (0.0029)       (0.004)        (0.0038)       (0.0037)

                                                                   48
Counties with Moderate Inflow
January 6-8 (0-2 Days After Capitol Riot)                         -0.0023               -0.0022               -0.0024                -0.001                 -0.0014    -0.0016
                                                                  (0.0014)              (0.0014)              (0.0015)               (0.002)                (0.0020)   (0.0022)
January 9-13 (3-7 Days After Capitol Riot)                        -0.0007               -0.0004               -0.0005                -0.001                 -0.0005    -0.0009
                                                                  (0.0014)              (0.0014)              (0.0015)               (0.002)                (0.0019)   (0.0020)
January 14-15 (8-9 Days After Capitol Riot)                       -0.0021               -0.0017               -0.0020                -0.002                 -0.0014    -0.0019
                                                                  (0.0015)              (0.0016)              (0.0016)               (0.002)                (0.0020)   (0.0021)
January 16-19 (10-13 Days After Capitol Riot)                     -0.0004                0.0000               -0.0003                -0.000                  0.0001    -0.0005
                                                                  (0.0016)              (0.0017)              (0.0018)               (0.002)                (0.0021)   (0.0022)
January 20-23 (14-17 Days After Capitol Riot)                     -0.0014               -0.0010               -0.0013                -0.000                 -0.0002    -0.0008
                                                                  (0.0016)              (0.0017)              (0.0018)               (0.002)                (0.0022)   (0.0023)
January 24-26 (18-20 Days After Capitol Riot)                     -0.0005                0.0000               -0.0004                 0.000                  0.0007    -0.0001
                                                                  (0.0018)              (0.0019)              (0.0019)               (0.002)                (0.0023)   (0.0024)
January 27+ (21+ Days After Capitol Riot)                         -0.0012               -0.0007               -0.0011                 0.000                  0.0004    -0.0005
                                                                  (0.0020)              (0.0021)              (0.0021)               (0.002)                (0.0025)   (0.0025)
Counties with Low Inflow
January 6-8 (0-2 Days After Capitol Riot)                         -0.0007               -0.0007               -0.0007                -0.002                 -0.0015    -0.0015
                                                                  (0.0012)              (0.0012)              (0.0014)               (0.001)                (0.0009)   (0.0011)
January 9-13 (3-7 Days After Capitol Riot)                         0.0007                0.0007                0.0007                 0.000                  0.0007     0.0008
                                                                  (0.0013)              (0.0014)              (0.0015)               (0.001)                (0.0012)   (0.0013)
January 14-15 (8-9 Days After Capitol Riot)                       -0.0001                0.0001               -0.0000                -0.001                 -0.0002    -0.0002
                                                                  (0.0015)              (0.0015)              (0.0016)               (0.001)                (0.0015)   (0.0016)
January 16-19 (10-13 Days After Capitol Riot)                      0.0013                0.0014                0.0014                 0.001                  0.0012     0.0013
                                                                  (0.0016)              (0.0016)              (0.0018)               (0.002)                (0.0017)   (0.0018)
January 20-23 (14-17 Days After Capitol Riot)                      0.0010                0.0011                0.0010                -0.000                  0.0002     0.0001
                                                                  (0.0017)              (0.0018)              (0.0019)               (0.002)                (0.0016)   (0.0017)
January 24-26 (18-20 Days After Capitol Riot)                      0.0020                0.0022                0.0021                 0.001                  0.0016     0.0015
                                                                  (0.0020)              (0.0020)              (0.0022)               (0.002)                (0.0020)   (0.0022)
January 27+ (21+ Days After Capitol Riot)                          0.0022                0.0024                0.0023                 0.001                  0.0012     0.0011
                                                                  (0.0022)              (0.0023)              (0.0024)               (0.002)                (0.0023)   (0.0024)

Observable Policy & Testing Controls                                 N                     Y                     Y                     N                       Y          Y
State Capitol Counties Omitted                                       N                     N                     Y                     N                       N          Y
N                                                                 125,400               125,400               123,400               125,400                 125,400    123,400
  * Significant at the 10% level, ** Significant at the 5% level, *** Significant at the 1% level
  Note: Standard errors are clustered at the state level. All estimates include county and day fixed effects as well as county specific linear time trend



                                                                                             49
  Table 5. Heterogeneity in the Effects of the Capitol Riot on Daily Rate of Cumulative COVID-19
                  Case Growth, by Mitigation Policies in Home Resident County

                                                    Absolute Inflow             Relative Inflow
                                                   (1)            (2)         (3)              (4)

                                                   No         Mitigation      No           Mitigation
                                                Mitigation     Policies    Mitigation       Policies
Counties with High Inflow
January 6-8 (0-2 Days After Capitol Riot)        -0.0007        -0.0024      0.0016        0.0073***
                                                (0.0010)       (0.0017)     (0.0010)        (0.0016)
January 9-13 (3-7 Days After Capitol Riot)       0.0040*         0.0039    0.0066***         0.0005
                                                (0.0012)       (0.0020)     (0.0018)        (0.0012)
January 14-15 (8-9 Days After Capitol Riot)      0.0034        0.0073*      0.0067**         0.0022
                                                (0.0018)       (0.0035)     (0.0019)        (0.0017)
January 16-19 (10-13 Days After Capitol Riot)   0.0124*         0.0053     0.0128***        -0.0031
                                                (0.0035)       (0.0048)     (0.0027)        (0.0018)
January 20-23 (14-17 Days After Capitol Riot)    0.0046         0.0063      0.0096**        -0.0035
                                                (0.0034)       (0.0033)     (0.0031)        (0.0031)
January 24-26 (18-20 Days After Capitol Riot)   0.0112*         0.0087     0.0138***        -0.0041
                                                (0.0042)       (0.0055)     (0.0035)        (0.0027)
January 27+ (21+ Days After Capitol Riot)        0.0090         0.0090      0.0144**        -0.0021
                                                (0.0050)       (0.0061)     (0.0041)        (0.0038)
Counties with Moderate- High Inflow
January 6-8 (0-2 Days After Capitol Riot)        0.0003        -0.0011     -0.0009           0.0011
                                                (0.0011)       (0.0017)    (0.0019)         (0.0014)
January 9-13 (3-7 Days After Capitol Riot)       0.0002         0.0007      0.0011           0.0013
                                                (0.0011)       (0.0015)    (0.0022)         (0.0013)
January 14-15 (8-9 Days After Capitol Riot)     -0.0003         0.0004      0.0013           0.0007
                                                (0.0016)       (0.0016)    (0.0022)         (0.0022)
January 16-19 (10-13 Days After Capitol Riot)   -0.0010         0.0021      0.0030           0.0023
                                                (0.0028)       (0.0019)    (0.0032)         (0.0022)
January 20-23 (14-17 Days After Capitol Riot)   -0.0016         0.0012      0.0030           0.0018
                                                (0.0027)       (0.0019)    (0.0030)         (0.0032)
January 24-26 (18-20 Days After Capitol Riot)   -0.0013         0.0031      0.0041           0.0030
                                                (0.0035)       (0.0026)    (0.0038)         (0.0029)
January 27+ (21+ Days After Capitol Riot)       -0.0022         0.0032      0.0050           0.0027
                                                (0.0039)       (0.0029)    (0.0043)         (0.0039)
Counties with Moderate Inflow
January 6-8 (0-2 Days After Capitol Riot)       -0.0007        -0.0030     -0.0020           0.0009
                                                (0.0012)       (0.0017)    (0.0024)         (0.0013)
January 9-13 (3-7 Days After Capitol Riot)      -0.0015        -0.0008     -0.0010           0.0012
                                                (0.0017)       (0.0017)    (0.0023)         (0.0013)
January 14-15 (8-9 Days After Capitol Riot)     -0.0031        -0.0025     -0.0019           0.0001
                                                (0.0026)       (0.0018)    (0.0023)         (0.0026)
January 16-19 (10-13 Days After Capitol Riot)   -0.0044        -0.0004     -0.0003           0.0015
                                                (0.0038)       (0.0019)    (0.0025)         (0.0025)

                                                   50
January 20-23 (14-17 Days After Capitol Riot)                    -0.0040           -0.0018              -0.0005                0.0004
                                                                 (0.0037)          (0.0019)             (0.0025)              (0.0038)
January 24-26 (18-20 Days After Capitol Riot)                    -0.0045           -0.0007               0.0003                0.0017
                                                                 (0.0048)          (0.0020)             (0.0028)              (0.0037)
January 27+ (21+ Days After Capitol Riot)                        -0.0056           -0.0015               0.0000                0.0006
                                                                 (0.0055)          (0.0022)             (0.0028)              (0.0052)
Counties with Low Inflow
January 6-8 (0-2 Days After Capitol Riot)                         0.0008           -0.0009              -0.0023               -0.0007
                                                                 (0.0011)          (0.0013)             (0.0012)              (0.0015)
January 9-13 (3-7 Days After Capitol Riot)                        0.0003            0.0007              -0.0006                0.0015
                                                                 (0.0005)          (0.0015)             (0.0014)              (0.0017)
January 14-15 (8-9 Days After Capitol Riot)                      -0.0010           -0.0000              -0.0012                0.0003
                                                                 (0.0009)          (0.0016)             (0.0019)              (0.0018)
January 16-19 (10-13 Days After Capitol Riot)                    -0.0011            0.0015              -0.0002                0.0018
                                                                 (0.0013)          (0.0017)             (0.0021)              (0.0019)
January 20-23 (14-17 Days After Capitol Riot)                    -0.0015            0.0012              -0.0009                0.0007
                                                                 (0.0013)          (0.0019)             (0.0020)              (0.0023)
January 24-26 (18-20 Days After Capitol Riot)                    -0.0016            0.0024               0.0002                0.0023
                                                                 (0.0017)          (0.0022)             (0.0026)              (0.0023)
January 27+ (21+ Days After Capitol Riot)                        -0.0026            0.0027              -0.0002                0.0022
                                                                 (0.0021)          (0.0024)             (0.0029)              (0.0031)

Restrictions on Restaurants or Bars?                                N                 Y                    N                     Y
N                                                                 19,440           105,960              108,360                17,040
  * Significant at the 10% level, ** Significant at the 5% level, *** Significant at the 1% level
  Note: Standard errors are clustered at the state level. All estimates include county and day fixed effects as well as county specific
  linear time trend. For columns (1) and (2), the mitigation policy under study is whether there was any restriction on indoor
  dining at restaurants or bars. For columns (3) and (4), where we have more mitigation policy variation, the mitigation policy
  under study is whether there were full indoor dining/drinking bans at bars and some capacity restriction or full indoor dining ban
  at restaurants.




                                                                    51
Appendix Figure 1. Distribution of Home Counties for Smartphones that "Pinged" in the
         Protest CBG Cluster on January 4, 6, and 8, 2021: Absolute Measure

                          Panel (a): January 4 (Before Riot)




                            Panel (b): January 6 (Day of Riot)




                            Panel (c): January 8 (After Riot)




                                            52
     Appendix Table 1. Difference-in-Differences Estimates of Effect of The Capitol Riot on
           Log Smartphone Pings in Treatment and Border Census Block Groups

                                            (1)                   (2)                   (3)                   (4)

                                           Total Smartphone Pings                 Non-Resident Smartphone Pings

January 6                                0.564**               0.354**               0.638**                0.381
                                       [p=0.0231]             [p=0.044]            [p=0.0324]            [p=0.1065]
January 7+                                0.044                 -0.376                0.029                -0.485
                                       [p=0.2731]            [p=0.9259]            [p=0.3935]            [p=0.9051]
Observations                              4,950                 4,950                 4,950                 4,950

CBG Linear Time Trend?                      No                   Yes                    No                    Yes
  ***Significant at 1% level **at 5% level *at 10% level
  Notes: Estimates are generated using ordinary least squares. All models include cluster and day fixed effects.
  Permutation based p-value is reported inside the bracket.




                                                           53
 Appendix Table 2. Estimated Effect of Capitol Riot on Inverse Hyperbolic Sine
                          of Daily COVID-19 Cases
                                                 Absolute   Relative
                                                  Inflow     Inflow
                                                    (1)         (2)
Counties with High Inflow
January 6-8 (0-2 Days After Capitol Riot)        -0.421      -0.136
                                                  (0.32)     (0.114)
January 9-13 (3-7 Days After Capitol Riot)        0.389       0.257
                                                 (0.252)     (0.146)
January 14-15 (8-9 Days After Capitol Riot)       0.318       0.168
                                                 (0.293)     (0.194)
January 16-19 (10-13 Days After Capitol Riot)     0.859       0.556
                                                 (0.545)     (0.306)
January 20-23 (14-17 Days After Capitol Riot)     0.534       0.255
                                                 (0.421)     (0.277)
January 24-26 (18-20 Days After Capitol Riot)     1.119       0.656
                                                 (0.559)      (0.39)
January 27+ (21+ Days After Capitol Riot)         0.916       0.589
                                                 (0.683)     (0.431)
Counties with Moderate- High Inflow
January 6-8 (0-2 Days After Capitol Riot)        -0.054        0.03
                                                  (0.16)     (0.054)
January 9-13 (3-7 Days After Capitol Riot)        0.079       0.139
                                                 (0.252)     (0.082)
January 14-15 (8-9 Days After Capitol Riot)       0.126       0.178
                                                 (0.249)     (0.094)
January 16-19 (10-13 Days After Capitol Riot)     0.058       0.225
                                                 (0.492)     (0.196)
January 20-23 (14-17 Days After Capitol Riot)    -0.017       0.193
                                                 (0.499)     (0.177)
January 24-26 (18-20 Days After Capitol Riot)     0.164       0.318
                                                 (0.653)     (0.223)
January 27+ (21+ Days After Capitol Riot)         0.048       0.295
                                                 (0.762)     (0.272)
Counties with Moderate Inflow
January 6-8 (0-2 Days After Capitol Riot)        -0.117       0.025
                                                 (0.075)     (0.067)
January 9-13 (3-7 Days After Capitol Riot)       -0.127      -0.033
                                                 (0.138)     (0.088)
January 14-15 (8-9 Days After Capitol Riot)      -0.063       0.047
                                                 (0.145)     (0.092)
January 16-19 (10-13 Days After Capitol Riot)    -0.268      -0.172
                                                 (0.271)     (0.202)
January 20-23 (14-17 Days After Capitol Riot)    -0.354      -0.125
                                                 (0.294)      (0.17)

                                            54
January 24-26 (18-20 Days After Capitol Riot)                     -0.261               -0.166
                                                                  (0.348)              (0.254)
January 27+ (21+ Days After Capitol Riot)                         -0.469               -0.214
                                                                  (0.435)              (0.278)
Counties with Low Inflow
January 6-8 (0-2 Days After Capitol Riot)                          0.025               -0.086
                                                                  (0.039)              (0.048)
January 9-13 (3-7 Days After Capitol Riot)                         0.058               -0.096
                                                                  (0.065)              (0.103)
January 14-15 (8-9 Days After Capitol Riot)                        0.109               -0.036
                                                                  (0.088)              (0.126)
January 16-19 (10-13 Days After Capitol Riot)                      0.009               -0.324
                                                                  (0.138)              (0.198)
January 20-23 (14-17 Days After Capitol Riot)                      0.016                -0.35
                                                                  (0.136)              (0.206)
January 24-26 (18-20 Days After Capitol Riot)                      0.074               -0.268
                                                                  (0.166)              (0.235)
January 27+ (21+ Days After Capitol Riot)                           0.05               -0.406
                                                                  (0.203)              (0.295)
N                                                                 125,400             125,400
* Significant at the 10% level, ** Significant at the 5% level, *** Significant at the 1% level
Note: Standard errors are clustered at the state level. All estimates include county and day fixed
effects as well as county specific linear time trend.




                                                     55
Appendix Table 3. Sensitivity of Estimates for Higher-Inflow Counties Shown in Columns (3)
          and (6) of Table 4 to Controls for Census Division-Specific Day Effects

                                                          Absolute   Relative
                                                           Inflow     Inflow
                                                             (1)        (2)
          Counties with High Inflow
          January 6-8 (0-2 Days After Capitol Riot)       -0.002      0.002
                                                          (0.002)    (0.002)
          January 9-13 (3-7 Days After Capitol Riot)       0.005     0.006*
                                                          (0.003)    (0.002)
          January 14-15 (8-9 Days After Capitol Riot)      0.007     0.005*
                                                          (0.005)    (0.003)
          January 16-19 (10-13 Days After Capitol Riot)    0.009     0.009**
                                                          (0.005)    (0.003)
          January 20-23 (14-17 Days After Capitol Riot)    0.008      0.006
                                                          (0.005)    (0.003)
          January 24-26 (18-20 Days After Capitol Riot)    0.012     0.010**
                                                          (0.007)    (0.004)
          January 27+ (21+ Days After Capitol Riot)        0.012     0.009*
                                                          (0.008)    (0.004)
          Counties with Moderate- High Inflow
          January 6-8 (0-2 Days After Capitol Riot)       -0.000     -0.001
                                                          (0.001)    (0.001)
          January 9-13 (3-7 Days After Capitol Riot)       0.001      0.001
                                                          (0.001)    (0.002)
          January 14-15 (8-9 Days After Capitol Riot)      0.000      0.000
                                                          (0.001)    (0.002)
          January 16-19 (10-13 Days After Capitol Riot)    0.002      0.001
                                                          (0.001)    (0.002)
          January 20-23 (14-17 Days After Capitol Riot)    0.001      0.001
                                                          (0.002)    (0.002)
          January 24-26 (18-20 Days After Capitol Riot)    0.002      0.002
                                                          (0.002)    (0.003)
          January 27+ (21+ Days After Capitol Riot)        0.002      0.003
                                                          (0.002)    (0.003)
          Counties with Moderate Inflow
          January 6-8 (0-2 Days After Capitol Riot)       -0.002**   -0.001
                                                           (0.001)   (0.001)
          January 9-13 (3-7 Days After Capitol Riot)       -0.000    -0.000
                                                           (0.001)   (0.001)
          January 14-15 (8-9 Days After Capitol Riot)      -0.002    -0.001
                                                           (0.001)   (0.001)
          January 16-19 (10-13 Days After Capitol Riot)    -0.000    -0.000
                                                           (0.002)   (0.001)
          January 20-23 (14-17 Days After Capitol Riot)    -0.001    -0.001
                                                           (0.002)   (0.001)
          January 24-26 (18-20 Days After Capitol Riot)    -0.000     0.000
                                                           (0.002)   (0.001)


                                              56
January 27+ (21+ Days After Capitol Riot)                           -0.001            -0.000
                                                                    (0.002)           (0.001)

N                                                                  125,400            125,400
* Significant at the 10% level, ** Significant at the 5% level, *** Significant at the 1% level
Note: Standard errors are clustered at the state level. All estimates include county and day fixed
effects as well as county specific linear time trend as well as observable policy controls.




                                               57
  Appendix Table 4. Unweighted Estimates of the Effect of the Capitol Riot on
             Daily Rate of Cumulative COVID-19 Case Growth
                                                 Absolute   Relative
                                                  Inflow     Inflow
                                                   (1)         (2)
Counties with High Inflow
January 6-8 (0-2 Days After Capitol Riot)         -0.001      0.002
                                                 (0.001)    (0.001)
January 9-13 (3-7 Days After Capitol Riot)       0.006**    0.006**
                                                 (0.002)    (0.002)
January 14-15 (8-9 Days After Capitol Riot)       0.006*     0.007*
                                                 (0.002)    (0.003)
January 16-19 (10-13 Days After Capitol Riot)     0.010*     0.009*
                                                 (0.004)    (0.004)
January 20-23 (14-17 Days After Capitol Riot)    0.008**      0.007
                                                 (0.002)    (0.004)
January 24-26 (18-20 Days After Capitol Riot)    0.012**      0.010
                                                 (0.004)    (0.006)
January 27+ (21+ Days After Capitol Riot)         0.011*      0.012
                                                 (0.004)    (0.007)
Counties with Moderate- High Inflow
January 6-8 (0-2 Days After Capitol Riot)        -0.002       0.000
                                                 (0.002)     (0.001)
January 9-13 (3-7 Days After Capitol Riot)        0.000       0.001
                                                 (0.002)     (0.001)
January 14-15 (8-9 Days After Capitol Riot)       0.001       0.001
                                                 (0.002)     (0.001)
January 16-19 (10-13 Days After Capitol Riot)     0.003       0.002
                                                 (0.003)     (0.002)
January 20-23 (14-17 Days After Capitol Riot)     0.002       0.001
                                                 (0.003)     (0.001)
January 24-26 (18-20 Days After Capitol Riot)     0.005       0.002
                                                 (0.003)     (0.002)
January 27+ (21+ Days After Capitol Riot)         0.005       0.003
                                                 (0.004)     (0.002)
Counties with Moderate Inflow
January 6-8 (0-2 Days After Capitol Riot)        -0.002      -0.001
                                                 (0.002)     (0.002)
January 9-13 (3-7 Days After Capitol Riot)        0.000      -0.001
                                                 (0.002)     (0.001)
January 14-15 (8-9 Days After Capitol Riot)       0.001      -0.001
                                                 (0.002)     (0.002)
January 16-19 (10-13 Days After Capitol Riot)     0.001      -0.000
                                                 (0.002)     (0.002)
January 20-23 (14-17 Days After Capitol Riot)     0.000      -0.001
                                                 (0.002)     (0.002)
January 24-26 (18-20 Days After Capitol Riot)     0.002      -0.000
                                                 (0.002)     (0.002)
January 27+ (21+ Days After Capitol Riot)         0.002      -0.000

                                            58
                                                                    (0.003)           (0.002)
Counties with Low Inflow
January 6-8 (0-2 Days After Capitol Riot)                           -0.000            -0.002
                                                                    (0.001)           (0.001)
January 9-13 (3-7 Days After Capitol Riot)                           0.001             0.000
                                                                    (0.001)           (0.001)
January 14-15 (8-9 Days After Capitol Riot)                          0.000            -0.000
                                                                    (0.001)           (0.001)
January 16-19 (10-13 Days After Capitol Riot)                        0.001             0.000
                                                                    (0.001)           (0.001)
January 20-23 (14-17 Days After Capitol Riot)                        0.000            -0.000
                                                                    (0.001)           (0.001)
January 24-26 (18-20 Days After Capitol Riot)                        0.001             0.001
                                                                    (0.001)           (0.001)
January 27+ (21+ Days After Capitol Riot)                            0.002             0.001
                                                                    (0.001)           (0.002)

N                                                                  125,400           125,400
* Significant at the 10% level, ** Significant at the 5% level, *** Significant at the 1% level
Note: Standard errors are clustered at the state level. All estimates include county and day fixed
effects as well as county specific linear time trend.




                                                     59
 Appendix Table 5A. Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of Capitol Riot on Cumulative COVID-
                               19 Deaths Per 100,000 Population
                                                                                                                           Deaths Per
                                                                               Log (Deaths Per 100,000)                     100,000
                                                                              (1)             (2)              (3)            (4)
                                                                                 Panel I: Full Post-Treatment Period
 Full Capitol Riot Treatment Effect (1/6 ­ 1/21)                            -0.055       -0.092       0.006      -11.514
 P-Value                                                                   [0.257]      [0.239]      [0.569]     [0.651]
 One Sided P-Value                                                         [0.174]      [0.138]      [0.752]     [0.339]
 Pre-Treatment Mean of DV                                                    4.71         4.71         4.71       111.48
                                                                             Panel II: Lagged Post-Treatment Windows
 First Post-Treatment Window (1/6-1/12)                                     -0.029        -0.05     -0.004     -2.743
 P-Value                                                                   [0.183]      [0.248]    [0.606]    [0.743]
 One Sided P-Value                                                         [0.147]      [0.156]    [0.716]    [0.385]
 Middle Post-Treatment Window (1/13-1/19)                                   -0.046       -0.063      0.005    -14.668
 P-Value                                                                   [0.248]      [0.321]    [0.725]    [0.431]
 One Sided P-Value                                                         [0.165]      [0.165]    [0.688]    [0.239]
 Longer-Run Post-Treatment Window (1/20+)                                   -0.071          -0.124           0.011           -14.135
 P-Value                                                                   [0.266]         [0.220]          [0.523]          [0.615]
 One Sided P-Value                                                         [0.174]         [0.128]          [0.752]          [0.303]
 Pre-Treatment Mean of DV                                                    4.71            4.71             4.71            111.48

 Matching Variables
  All Pre-Treatment Days                                                       Y               N               N                 N
  Match on 12/28,12/30,1/1,1/3,1/5 Cases
  Urbanicity, Pop Density, Testing Trend,                                      N               Y               Y                 Y
  Restaurant/Bar Closure, Pre-1/6 SAH Behavior
  Match on Stay-at-Home Advisory, Mask
                                                                               N               N               Y                 Y
  Mandate, Curfew

* Significant at the 10% level; ** Significant at the 5% level; *** Significant at the 1% level
Notes: The donor pool is comprised of counties with urbanicity rate above 80%, and excludes counties in border states, as well as counties
with greater than 1 home resident that pinged in the census block group of the United States Capitol Building on 1/6.




                                                                    60
         Appendix Table 5B. Dose-Response Difference-in-Differences Estimates of the Effect of the
                      Capitol Riot on Daily Rate of Cumulative COVID-19 Deaths
                                                    Absolute Inflow              Relative Inflow
                                                  (1)              (2)        (3)               (4)
Counties with High Inflow
January 6-8 (0-2 Days After Capitol Riot)       -0.0008         -0.0007     -0.0017          -0.0016
                                                (0.0019)        (0.0019)    (0.0019)         (0.0019)
January 9-13 (3-7 Days After Capitol Riot)       0.0033          0.0036      0.0030           0.0032
                                                (0.0023)        (0.0023)    (0.0018)         (0.0018)
January 14-15 (8-9 Days After Capitol Riot)      0.0052         0.0057*      0.0058           0.0061
                                                (0.0028)        (0.0028)    (0.0044)         (0.0044)
January 16-19 (10-13 Days After Capitol Riot)     0.006          0.0064     0.0089*          0.0092*
                                                (0.0048)        (0.0048)    (0.0039)         (0.0039)
January 20-23 (14-17 Days After Capitol Riot)    0.0062          0.0067      0.0111           0.0115
                                                (0.0055)        (0.0056)    (0.0065)         (0.0065)
January 24-26 (18-20 Days After Capitol Riot)     0.007          0.0074      0.0100           0.0103
                                                (0.0072)        (0.0073)    (0.0059)         (0.0059)
January 27+ (21+ Days After Capitol Riot)        0.0099          0.0103      0.0145           0.0147
                                                (0.0084)        (0.0084)    (0.0077)         (0.0077)
Counties with Moderate- High Inflow
January 6-8 (0-2 Days After Capitol Riot)        0.0012          0.0013     -0.0011          -0.0011
                                                (0.0019)        (0.0019)    (0.0018)         (0.0018)
January 9-13 (3-7 Days After Capitol Riot)       0.0037         0.0039*      0.0012           0.0014
                                                (0.0018)        (0.0018)    (0.0017)         (0.0017)
January 14-15 (8-9 Days After Capitol Riot)      0.0041          0.0045      0.0021           0.0024
                                                (0.0027)        (0.0027)    (0.0024)         (0.0024)
January 16-19 (10-13 Days After Capitol Riot)    0.0039         0.0043*      0.0014           0.0016
                                                (0.0021)        (0.0021)    (0.0030)         (0.0030)
January 20-23 (14-17 Days After Capitol Riot)     0.005          0.0054      0.0022           0.0025
                                                 (0.003)        (0.0030)    (0.0039)         (0.0039)
January 24-26 (18-20 Days After Capitol Riot)     0.005          0.0057      0.0019           0.0020
                                                 (0.003)        (0.0030)    (0.0044)         (0.0045)
January 27+ (21+ Days After Capitol Riot)        0.0065          0.0073      0.0035           0.0037
                                                (0.0037)        (0.0038)    (0.0054)         (0.0054)
Counties with Moderate Inflow
January 6-8 (0-2 Days After Capitol Riot)       -0.0014         -0.0013     -0.0019          -0.0018
                                                (0.0015)        (0.0015)    (0.0018)         (0.0018)
January 9-13 (3-7 Days After Capitol Riot)       0.0017          0.0020      0.0019           0.0021
                                                (0.0014)        (0.0014)    (0.0019)         (0.0019)
January 14-15 (8-9 Days After Capitol Riot)      0.0024          0.0028      0.0015           0.0018
                                                 (0.002)        (0.0020)    (0.0026)         (0.0026)
January 16-19 (10-13 Days After Capitol Riot)    0.0027          0.0031      0.0025           0.0029
                                                (0.0024)        (0.0025)    (0.0031)         (0.0032)
January 20-23 (14-17 Days After Capitol Riot)    0.0027          0.0031      0.0029           0.0033
                                                (0.0032)        (0.0033)    (0.0040)         (0.0041)
January 24-26 (18-20 Days After Capitol Riot)    0.0038          0.0042      0.0039           0.0042
                                                (0.0031)        (0.0032)    (0.0045)         (0.0046)
January 27+ (21+ Days After Capitol Riot)        0.0049          0.0053      0.0056           0.0059
                                                (0.0042)        (0.0043)    (0.0055)         (0.0056)

                                                   61
Counties with Low Inflow
January 6-8 (0-2 Days After Capitol Riot)                         -0.0011               -0.0011               -0.0001               -0.0000
                                                                  (0.0013)              (0.0013)              (0.0013)              (0.0013)
January 9-13 (3-7 Days After Capitol Riot)                         0.0013                0.0014                0.0022               0.0025*
                                                                  (0.0013)              (0.0013)              (0.0011)              (0.0012)
January 14-15 (8-9 Days After Capitol Riot)                        0.0005                0.0008                0.0023                0.0027
                                                                   (0.002)              (0.0021)              (0.0017)              (0.0017)
January 16-19 (10-13 Days After Capitol Riot)                      0.0003                0.0006                0.0020                0.0024
                                                                  (0.0031)              (0.0032)              (0.0023)              (0.0024)
January 20-23 (14-17 Days After Capitol Riot)                      0.0016                0.0019                0.0029                0.0033
                                                                  (0.0032)              (0.0032)              (0.0027)              (0.0027)
January 24-26 (18-20 Days After Capitol Riot)                       0.002                0.0024                0.0036                0.0041
                                                                   (0.004)              (0.0041)              (0.0030)              (0.0030)
January 27+ (21+ Days After Capitol Riot)                          0.0024                0.0028                0.0041                0.0046
                                                                  (0.0049)              (0.0049)              (0.0037)              (0.0037)

Observable Policy & Testing Controls                                 N                     Y                     N                     Y
State Capitol Counties Omitted                                       N                     N                     N                     N
N                                                                 125,400               125,400               125,400               125,400
    * Significant at the 10% level, ** Significant at the 5% level, *** Significant at the 1% level
    Note: Standard errors are clustered at the state level. All estimates include county and day fixed effects as well as county specific linear
    time trend




                                                                       62
