                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     EDUCATION GRADIENTS IN MORTALITY TRENDS BY GENDER AND RACE

                                         Adam A. Leive
                                       Christopher J. Ruhm

                                       Working Paper 28419
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28419


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2021




We thank Bradley Katcher and Kelsey Pukelis for superb research assistance. Ruhm is grateful
for financial support provided from the University of Virginia Bankard Fund. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed additional relationships of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w28419.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Adam A. Leive and Christopher J. Ruhm. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Education Gradients in Mortality Trends by Gender and Race
Adam A. Leive and Christopher J. Ruhm
NBER Working Paper No. 28419
January 2021
JEL No. I10,I12,I14,I24,J10

                                          ABSTRACT

We examine gender and race differences in education-mortality trends among 25-64 year olds in
the United States from 2001-2018. The data indicate that the relationships are heterogeneous with
larger mortality reductions for less educated non-Hispanic blacks than other races and mixed
results at higher levels of schooling. We also investigate the causes of death associated with
changes in overall mortality rates and identify key differences across race groups and education
quartiles. Drug overdoses represent the single most important contributor to increased death rates
for all groups, but the sizes of these effects vary sharply. Cardiovascular disease, cancer, and HIV
are the most significant sources of mortality rate reductions, with the patterns again
heterogeneous across sex, race, and educational attainment. These results suggest the limitations
of focusing on all-cause mortality rates when attempting to determine the sources of positive and
negative health shocks affecting population subgroups. Examining specific causes of death can
provide a more nuanced understanding of these trends.


Adam A. Leive
Batten School of Leadership and Public Policy
University of Virginia
109 Garrett Hall, 235 McCormick Road
Charlottesville, VA 22904
leive@virginia.edu

Christopher J. Ruhm
Frank Batten School of
Leadership and Public Policy
University of Virginia
235 McCormick Rd.
P.O. Box 400893
Charlottesville, VA 22904-4893
and NBER
ruhm@virginia.edu
1. Introduction
       A long history of research identifies a positive relationship between health and education
or other measures of socioeconomic status (e.g. Marmot, Shipley, and Rose, 1984; Marmot et al.,
1991; Link and Phelan, 1995). Although part of this association may reflect confounding factors
or reverse causation (e.g. poor health at young ages inhibiting educational attainment), careful
quasi-experimental designs confirm a causal effect of education in improving health (Lleras-
Muney, 2005; Clark and Royer, 2013). Many studies provide evidence of widening education
gradients over time, often with differences in both the levels and trends across race groups
(Kitagawa and Hauser, 1973; Meara et al., 2008; Cutler et al., 2011; Montez et al., 2011;
Olshansky et al., 2012; Hendi, 2017).
       In recent years, race and education disparities in mortality rates trends have received
increasing attention. This focus is in part due to Case and Deaton's (2015, 2017, 2020) findings
of increased mortality rates for some groups of less educated non-Hispanic whites since the start
of the 21st century and because overall life expectancy in the United States fell on a year-to-year
basis from 2014 to 2017 (National Center for Health Statistics, 2017). Understanding the
evolution of mortality trends is important to gauge the progress of economic and social
indicators. Changes in mortality that vary by race and education also have implications for the
incidence of large areas of public spending, including Medicare and Social Security.
       However, methodological challenges have frustrated efforts to compare changes in
mortality rates over time by education and race. First, levels of schooling have generally risen
which, under reasonable assumptions, results in increasing negative selection into the lowest
education categories, and potentially into more educated groups as well (Dowd and Hamoudi,
2014; Bound et al., 2015). Changes in average mortality rates over time may reflect such
compositional changes, at least in part. Consider the simple case used by Case and Deaton
(2020) where individuals are divided into those with and without a college degree. If education is
trending upwards, persons who in previous cohorts would not have graduated from college might
now do so. Assuming that these marginal changes occur among individuals who, if born earlier,
would have had among the lowest mortality rates for non-graduates (but higher rates than prior
graduates) then, ceteris paribus, the negative selection alone might increase the death rates of
both groups.




                                               Page 1
        Second, differences in the coding of education over time and across data sources
complicate the construction of comparable levels of schooling. Of particular relevance here is
that the recording of educational attainment on death certificates was reported as the number of
grades completed before 2003 but then gradually switched to the use of categories (e.g. high
school graduate, some college, college graduate). The two coding systems are not completely
comparable, making the analysis of trends challenging.1
        In this paper, we attempt to overcome these difficulties by constructing quartiles of
educational attainment, based on single years of schooling, for population groups stratified by
sex, race/ethnicity (hereafter referred to as race) and five-year age ranges, and then examining
how mortality trends from 2001-2018 differ by race and education. The results indicate that this
heterogeneity is important. There is little evidence of a consistent relationship between education
and mortality rate changes from all causes combined, except for non-Hispanic whites (hereafter
"whites) where the largest declines are experienced for the most educated. For non-Hispanic
blacks (hereafter "Blacks"), the biggest reductions are for those with intermediate levels of
schooling, although the differences across education levels are generally not statistically
significant. Mortality trends by education vary less for Hispanics and other races. We also
document that, for each race, the highest-educated quartile experienced the greatest percentage
declines in mortality, although since these are often from low initial baseline levels, the absolute
reductions are frequently small.2
        We then examine specific causes of death to determine which are associated with
increases and decreases in overall mortality rates and identify key differences across race groups
and education quartiles. Non-intentional drug deaths constitute the single largest source of
increased mortality across all demographic groups. There is also a marked education gradient in
fatal overdoses, particularly for Blacks and whites, with the greatest growth among the least
educated. While suicides and chronic liver disease have previously been suggested as important
causes of the recent mortality increases among low-educated whites, we find that deaths from

1
  There are similar difficulties with classifying education in the American Community Survey. See Rostron, et al.
(2010) for a further discussion of some of these issues.
2
  We use similar methods in a recent paper (Leive and Ruhm, 2020) focusing on educational gradients in all-cause
mortality within sex, age and race groups. An important result of that study is that the hypothesis that the worst
mortality trends are concentrated at the bottom of the education distribution is overly simplified and, across
important dimensions, substantially incorrect. The results of the current study are not inconsistent with these
findings because we focus here on race differences across all age groups, rather than on heterogeneity between 5-
year age ranges.


                                                      Page 2
respiratory diseases and the variety of illnesses composing our residual category have generally
increased at least as much, particularly for white females. The causes of death contributing
substantially to declining mortality rates are cardiovascular diseases, cancer, and HIV. However,
the sizes and patterns of these changes also vary dramatically across races. For instance, low-
educated Black males experience much larger reductions in these causes than corresponding
whites, Hispanics, or other races. These heterogeneous patterns suggest limitations in what can
be learned about the nature of the favorable or unfavorable health shocks experienced by
different population groups when focusing only on all-cause mortality rates. Examining specific
causes of death provides a more nuanced understanding of mortality trends.
         Before turning to the empirical analysis and results, we provide a conceptual framework
to consider how positive and negative health shocks might affect the mortality rates of different
education and race groups.


2. Conceptual Framework
         There are many reasons why mortality rates at a point-in-time might be negatively related
to education. For example, the review by Cutler and Meara (2008) identifies at least five non-
mutually exclusive, potential sources of a causal effect of education: health behaviors such as
drinking, smoking and overeating; income and access to health care; labor market factors
whereby highly educated individuals work in safer environments and are more likely to have
comprehensive health insurance; information and cognitive skills, where those with more
schooling have both better access to information and also greater ability to use it to preserve or
restore health; relative position in the social hierarchy, which may directly improve health (e.g.
by reducing stress) and indirectly do so by, for example, improving access to medical care and
other health-enhancing inputs; social networks, from which the more highly educated may have
superior access to financial, physical and emotional support.3 Each of these may help to explain
cross-sectional education gradients in mortality, and changes over time in them could influence
its trends.




3
 In addition, there may be confounding factors, such as genetic factors and underlying preferences like the ability to
delay gratification, that cause both higher education and better health, as well as reverse causation, whereby poor
health when young reduces completed education.


                                                       Page 3
       It is beyond the scope of this study to examine these determinants in detail. Instead, our
goal is to provide descriptive evidence useful to others who are interested in conducting in-depth
analyses of the trends that we identify. As a first step, we provide a conceptual framework
examining how health shocks, from a wide variety of sources, potentially influence mortality
trends for different socioeconomic status (SES) groups, where SES is proxied for by education in
our empirical study. This framework will also often be applicable to other types of groups that
have initial differences in mortality rates. For instance, it is equally informative for considering
racial differences in mortality trends.
      In studying changes in mortality rates across SES groups, we consider a model where the
probability of death depends on investments in and depreciation or shocks to health capital
(Grossman 1972). This section discusses the intuition, with further details provided in Appendix
A. Death occurs when health capital falls below some minimum threshold. As a result, the
probability of death depends on an individual's initial level of health capital, relative to the
threshold, and health "shocks" that change it, as well as exogenous depreciation that we do not
model. For a given SES group, we assume there is a distribution of initial health capital. Changes
in this distribution over time determine the evolution of that group's mortality rate.
      Here it is important to understand that we refer to a health "shock" as the combined net
effect of any external (exogenous to the individual) influences on health capital as well as
(potentially endogenous) behavioral responses to it. For example, the emergence of COVID-19
represents an external factor that possibly reduces health capital, while the extent to which it
actually does so also depends on the ability and willingness of individuals to take actions to
mitigate it, such as social isolation and mask-wearing. Similarly, the emergence of a new
medical technology may improve health but whether or not it does so could depend on whether
an individual has adequate income, health insurance coverage, and information to take advantage
of it. In our framework, the net effect of either of these on health capital will be considered a
negative health shock (in the first case) or a positive health shock (in the second case). Thus, our
empirical analysis does not attempt to disentangle the exogenous health influences and
adaptation effects just described, but rather focuses on the combined effect. We take this
approach both because our data are aggregated, and because we view the net effect on health
capital, and thus mortality, as relevant for policy and for understanding how groups are being
differentially affected by changes over time in the determinants of health.



                                                Page 4
       To fix ideas, consider a negative shock that produces an equal-sized reduction in health
capital for two groups that vary in their initial average levels of the capital stock. Assuming that
the distribution of the baseline health capital is monotonically increasing in education, the
absolute increase in death rates will be larger for the less educated group.4 This occurs because
deaths are "left-tail" events, but more so for higher SES individuals, so that the relevant portion
of the distribution over which deaths are being induced is "thicker" for low SES groups.
Interestingly, however, high SES individuals may experience bigger relative increases in
mortality risk from the same-sized negative shock.
       These ideas are illustrated in Figure 1, which shows the left tail of cumulative distribution
functions (CDF) for health capital, assumed here to be normally distributed and with the same
variance but different means for high and low SES groups. The solid lines show the CDFs without
a shock and the dotted lines are moved horizontally to the left by the shock, S, which is assumed
to be of equal size for both groups. Under these assumptions, the negative health shock increases
                                               "                                        "
the death rate by more for the low SES group (!! - !! ) than for high SES individuals (!# - !# )
due to the position of each group's tail. However, in this example, the relative increase in death
rates is greater for the high SES group because their baseline mortality rate is so much lower than
for the low SES group (!# versus !! ).
        This conceptual framework implies that an equal-sized negative health shock will lead to
larger absolute increases in the death rates of less-educated individuals but will not necessarily
result in larger percentage increases. Importantly, it is incorrect to conclude that the less educated
experience a greater negative health shock just because of their bigger absolute growth in mortality
rates. On the other hand, death rates will only rise more, in absolute terms, for the higher educated
group if they are hit with a more negative shock.
       Next consider a positive shock, such as an improvement in medical technology. This shifts
the distribution of health capital to the right, with death rates declining as more persons are now
above the survival threshold. An equal-sized shock translates into a larger absolute mortality rate
reduction, but not necessarily a larger percentage reduction, for the low SES group than high
SES group, using the converse argument to that for a negative shock described above. Greater


4
 While we take the initial differences in baseline health capital as given, there are many reasons to expect these to
be increasing with education. For instance, Ehrlich and Vin (2005) hypothesize that more educated individuals,
because they have relatively high levels of average wealth, also have greater incentives to invest in life protection.


                                                        Page 5
absolute mortality rate reductions for the less educated therefore do not necessarily mean they
experience more beneficial health shocks, whereas smaller decreases strongly point to a less
positive health shock for them. Finally, if the mortality rates of more and less educated groups
move in the opposite direction, we can infer that the category with adverse (favorable) trend is
more negatively (positively) shocked.
      As noted above, a similar analysis can be applied when considering race-specific mortality
trends. In this case, Blacks are the group with higher baseline rates, compared with the lower
initial rates of non-Hispanic whites.


3. Data and Methods
Construction of Death Rates by Education Quartile
      We provide a brief overview of the methods of constructing group-specific education
percentiles and their use in calculating corresponding mortality rates. A more detailed description
of the data and imputation methods is provided in Appendix B. Our analysis spans 2001-2018 and
uses three data sources as inputs for calculating death rates at the level of sex, 5-year age groups,
race, education quartile, and year. First, we construct sex-age-race-education-specific death counts
from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Multiple Cause of Death (MCOD) files,
which provide data on the universe of deaths to U.S. residents in the specified year. Second, we
utilize the National Cancer Institute's Surveillance Epidemiology and End Results (SEER)
database to obtain population counts by sex, age and race. Third, we estimate educational
attainment for each sex-age-race group using the Census Bureau's American Community Survey
(ACS) since SEER does not provide information on education.
      Combining these sources, we calculate educational quartiles separately by sex, 5-year age
bins, gender, race and year. This approach allows the distribution of education to differ across both
demographic groups and time periods. We construct death rates for age group a, race r and
education quartile i, in year t as:
                                                    ()$'#*!"#$
                                      %&'($%&' =     +,+!"#$
                                                                                                   (1)

where +,-(/$%&' and 0&0$%&' refer, respectively, to the number of deaths and population of the
relevant group. Throughout, we calculate and analyze mortality rates separately for males and
females, with the sex subscript excluded from equation (1) and later equations to simplify notation.
We restrict analysis to ages 25 to 64 since educational attainment may not be complete for person


                                               Page 6
younger than 25 and prior mortality selection becomes increasingly important for senior citizens.
For brevity, we often refer to the first through fourth education quartiles as Q1 through Q4,
respectively, with Q4 indicating the highest education level and Q1 the lowest.
        In some analyses, we calculate annual average mortality rates for education quartile-
specific race and sex groups, across the full set of ages analyzed. These are obtained as:
                                       1 %&' = $(3$%&
                                       %&'(       -./0
                                                       × %&'($%&' )                                             (2)
      1 %&' denotes the death rate for race group r and education quartile i in year t and 3$%&
where %&'(                                                                                  -./0


are weights for each 5-year age group in education quartile i, based on 2018 population shares, as
defined by:
                                                           -./0
                                              -./0
                                                       0&0$%&
                                             3$%&    =       -./0
                                                       $ 0&0$%&
       -./0
for 0&0$%&  the population of age group a, race r and education quartile i in 2018.
       Our approach constructs education quartiles that are general across all races, within age and
sex groups, rather than also being race-specific. This implies that persons of different races but
with the same age, gender and education will be classified in the same quartile in a given year.
One result is that the lower quartiles will be disproportionately populated by race groups with
below average education levels (e.g. Blacks and Hispanics) while the whites and other races will
be over-represented in the higher quartiles. We return to this issue below.
        There are multiple complications involved in constructing the mortality rates described by
equation (1). First, education is frequently measured in discrete rather than continuous units and
the data are not fully comparable across time periods or data sources. If schooling were always a
continuous variable, we could easily calculate the group- and year-specific distribution of
education and then divide it into percentiles. Since this is not the case, we use or construct single-
year measures of education ranging from 0 to 17 years.5 The MCOD and ACS sometimes record
education in single year increments but frequently instead report it in categories (e.g. high school,
some college, college). Appendix B describes the imputation procedures employed to construct
single years of education for death and population counts, as well as methods of dealing with other




5
  In two cases we combine groups. Persons with one or more years of college, but no bachelor's degree, are assigned
a value of 14 years of education. Those with at least a year of post-graduate education are categorized as having 17
years.


                                                      Page 7
complicating factors, such as cases where information on education is missing on the death
certificate.
        Another issue is that a single year of education may straddle quartiles. For instance, this
often occurs for persons with exactly 12 years of schooling. In these cases, we proportionately
assign deaths from the overlapping education cell to each quartile, based on population shares.
Thus, if 12 years of education ranges from the 21st to the 40th percentile, we assign one quarter of
these deaths to the bottom quartile and three-quarters to Q2. Bound et al. (2015) and Meara,
Richards, and Cutler (2008) use a similar approach.


Regression Specifications
        A primary objective is to test whether the relationship between mortality trends and
educational attainment differs by race. We do so using the regression specification:
                                 1

          %&'($%&' = 5 5 5[7$%& -8,$ × '-9,% × :& ]  + 5[ =% (',>+ × '-9,% ]
                        $5 %4 &2/                                %4

                                + %4 &61 =%& (',>+ × '-9,% × :& + ?$%&'                        (3)
where %&'($%&' is the death rate for age group -, race ' and education quartile @ in year (;
:/ , :- ,and:7 denote indicator variables for education quartiles 1, 2, and 3, with the highest
quartile, :1 , serving as the reference group; '-9,% is a vector of indicator variables for races:
White, Black, Hispanic, and other non-Hispanics, -8,$ is a vector of indicators for 5-year ages
from 25-64, and (',>+ is a linear time trend. The regression models are estimated separately for
men and women, so that each includes 160 age-race-education quartile groups. We cluster standard
errors by age, race and education, and weight each cell by its population to obtain nationally-
representative estimates.


Cause-Specific Death Rates
        After examining trends in total mortality rates, we estimate models for specific causes of
death. The specifications mirror equation (3), with the cause-specific mortality rates replacing the
all-cause rate as dependent variables. We use detailed ICD-10 codes as reported on the death
records and select causes of death to analyze using the following procedure. First, we identified
the top 10 causes for each of the four ten-year age groups in the overall age range examined (25-
34, 35-44, 45-54 and 55-64). We also separately categorize accidental deaths, excluding those


                                               Page 8
involving drugs, and non-intentional drug fatalities (hereafter simply referred to as drug deaths).
Suicides are the final cause of death analyzed and include intentional drug fatalities. We estimate
race-ethnicity education quartile trends for each of these 13 causes, as well as for a residual
category.6 We divide the specific sources of death into "major" and "minor" causes, where the
criterion for distinguishing between them is whether the magnitude of the trend coefficient exceeds
0.8 for any group.7 Using this standard, the major causes of death are cardiovascular disease,
malignant neoplasms (Cancer), cerebrovascular disease (Stroke), respiratory disease, HIV, drugs,
and suicide. The minor causes are diseases of the chronic liver disease, nervous system, kidneys,
diabetes, non-drug accidents (Accident) and homicide. ICD-10 codes corresponding to each of
these causes are detailed in Appendix Table B1.


4. Trends in Total Death Rates
Descriptive Evidence
         This section presents trends in annual death rates, from 2001-2018, for subgroups stratified
by race and each of the four education quartiles, calculated using equation (2). Several patterns are
consistent for both men (Figure 2a) and women (Figure 2b). Blacks have the highest average
mortality rates for all education quartiles and in nearly all periods. The only exception is that Q1
white females have equal or marginally greater death rates in the last few years. Whites almost
always have the second-highest mortality rates, with those of Hispanics and other races being much
lower. For instance, quartile-specific death rates in 2018 for whites and Blacks are often double
those for Hispanics and other races. The magnitude of the race differences declines with rising
educational attainment but remains apparent even in the top quartile.
         The quartile-specific differences in death rates may understate the racial gap between
Blacks and whites. Evidence points to a variety of institutional and psychological factors that make
it harder for Blacks to attain the same level of education as whites (Bertrand, Chugh, and
Mullainathan 2005; Milkman, Akinola, and Chugh 2012, 2015). In light of these barriers, one
might expect Blacks to be healthier than whites at given levels of educational attainment.


6
  There is one exception. Sepsis is among the leading causes of death for 35-64 year olds but is included in the
residual category because the magnitude of its trend coefficient is below 0.2 in all but one case (where it is -0.27)
and it is 0.1 or less in 23 of 32 cases.
7
  This division represents a natural breakpoint in the data and results in an equal number of major and minor causes,
once the residual is included in the latter category.


                                                       Page 9
Specifically, conditioning on education may introduce a form of positive health selection for
Blacks relative to whites. Consistent with such selection, 28 to 33 percent of Blacks were in Q1 in
2001 and 2018, compared to just 20 percent of whites (Appendix Table C2). The positive selection
is probably even more pronounced for Hispanics, who have the lowest overall amounts of
education, providing a likely explanation for at least some of their lower mortality rates. However,
the same is not true for other races, who are generally more educated than whites and with
particularly high Q4 shares.8
         We provide a detailed examination of mortality trends in the next section, but some key
results are previewed in Figure 2. In particular, Q1 and Q2 whites experienced steady increases in
mortality rates from 2001-2018, with more modest growth for Q3 and stable or slightly declining
rates for Q4. By contrast, less-educated Blacks had some of the largest declines but starting from
the highest levels. Since educational attainment rose more over time for Blacks than whites,
especially at the bottom of the distribution (Appendix Table C2), these changes are not due to
increasing positive selection for Blacks. Nonetheless, even in 2018, Black mortality rates
continued to equal or exceed those of whites. There are few obvious trends for Hispanics or other
races. Given that schooling levels are also rising over time for them, relative to whites, the changes
in selection raise the possibility that the trends are marginally more favorable than they appear,
but their overall rates of mortality are certainly low even without this adjustment.


Regression Estimates of Trend Differences in All-Cause Mortality Rates
         Figure 3 presents regression results from estimating equation (3) for death rates from all
causes. The entry for Q4 is the trend "main effect" for race r, =
                                                                B % . Estimates for the remaining
groups are calculated as the main effect plus the education quartile-specific trend coefficient. For
instance, the estimated trend for Q1 and race r is calculated as =
                                                                 B% + =
                                                                      B/% . The 95 percent confidence
intervals (CIs) are centered on the Q1 through Q3 total effects and indicate whether these are
statistically significantly different from Q4.




8
 These selection issues can be avoided by examining overall (not quartile-specific) mortality rates. This is done in
Appendix Figure C1, which shows evidence consistent with the patterns of selection just described. For instance,
mortality rates trended downwards for Blacks, while remaining essentially constant for whites, but the Black
disadvantage remains sizable: Black mortality rates per 100,000 declined from 882 to 709 from 2001 to 2018 for
males and from 539 to 427 for females, while barely changing (from 539 to 541 and 334 to 330) for whites.


                                                       Page 10
       The education gradient appears strongest for whites of both sexes, where Q1 and Q2
experienced either increased or unchanged mortality rates over time and statistically significantly
worse trends than Q4. Q3 also did more poorly than Q4 but the differences are barely significant
for men and insignificant for women. By contrast, there is no obvious education gradient for the
other three races. None of the quartile differences are statistically significant for Blacks or
Hispanics and the point estimates for Blacks suggest larger trend reductions in mortality for the
two lowest quartiles. For men of other races, Q4 does better than the other three education quartiles
but the differences are modest.
       Results from the models just estimated may be influenced by the experiences of groups
with the highest baseline mortality rates, such as those in the lower education quartiles, since equal
percentage changes in death rates will have larger absolute effects for them. Figure 4 summarizes
regression estimates with logs rather than levels of death rates as the dependent variables. The
results indicate that Q4 has the largest percentage reductions in mortality rates, with the differences
between those of the of the other three quartiles generally being statistically significant. However,
these often do not translate into large absolute reductions. For example, death rates for Q4 Hispanic
females are predicted to decline by 1.39% more per year than those in the Q1, but this corresponds
to just a 0.45 per 100,000 larger annual reduction in the overall rate. There are no clear education
gradients for the lower three quartiles, except for white females, where larger percentage declines
are again observed for the more educated. Blacks and Hispanics have the most favorable log
mortality trends while less-educated whites show the largest percentage increases.


5. Specific Causes of Death
       We next examine trends in mortality rates from the specific causes described above.
Figures 5 and 6 summarize the results for men and women. We display point estimates without
confidence intervals or standard errors to aid interpretability, but report both the coefficients and
standard errors in Appendix Tables C3 and C4.
       Increases in (non-intentional) drug deaths are the single largest component contributing to
rising mortality rates for all sex, race and education groups. The changes in fatal overdose rates
are monotonically declining in education for Blacks and whites and, to a lesser extent, for
Hispanics and other races. No other cause consistently contributes to trend increases in mortality.
For whites, suicide plays a role, particularly among men, as do respiratory diseases for the two



                                               Page 11
lower quartiles of both sexes. Chronic liver disease deaths contribute to higher mortality rates for
whites in the bottom three quartiles, but the impact is modest. To illustrate, the estimated annual
mortality rate increases per 100,000 for Q1 white males from drugs, suicide, respiratory and
chronic liver diseases are 4.34, 0.92, 0.74 and 0.72, while for corresponding white females they
are 2.74, 0.35, 0.97 and 0.64.
       The causes of death contributing substantially to declining mortality rates are
cardiovascular disease, cancer, HIV, and sometimes strokes. However, the sizes and patterns of
these effects vary dramatically across races. Reductions in cancer and cardiovascular disease death
rates are of roughly equal magnitude for white males but there is no education gradient and they
are the only two causes of any real importance. Decreases in cancer mortality are by far the most
substantial for white females, especially for the highly educated, with cardiovascular disease
mortality also playing some role but only for Q3 and Q4.
       The patterns for Blacks differ markedly and these dissimilarities explain the much larger
overall mortality reductions they experience, particularly among the less educated. The three most
important contributors to declining mortality among Black males are cardiovascular disease,
cancer and HIV. These decreases are particularly large for Q1 (-4.21, -4.61 and -3.63 per 100,000)
and Q2 (-5.52, -5.29 and -3.34 per 100,000). Stroke mortality also falls substantially, although by
considerably less than the three causes just mentioned. Reductions in death rates from these causes
have been markedly greater among the less educated than for Q4. Cardiovascular and cancer deaths
also fall sharply over time for Black females, although considerably less so for Q1 (-1.83 and -
0.94 per 100,000) than the other three quartiles (ranging from -3.36 to -3.80 and -2.83 to 2.94 per
100,000). Conversely, the decrease in HIV mortality is largely restricted to Q1 and Q2 (-1.64 and
-1.39 per 100,000 for these two quartiles versus -0.59 and -0.36 per 100,000 for Q3 and Q4). The
patterns for Hispanics and other races are generally similar to those just described for Blacks,
except that the magnitudes of the mortality changes are much smaller and declines in HIV are less
important.
       By construction, the minor causes of death play relatively small roles (Figures 5b and 6b).
We display the mortality rate changes from these sources on the same scale as the major causes to
illustrate the differences in relative magnitudes between them. Most important among these are
deaths from chronic liver disease for less-educated whites, but the annual changes never exceed
0.72 per 100,000 and are dwarfed by the major sources of death discussed previously. There is an



                                              Page 12
education gradient in the residual "all other causes" category for whites ­ the estimated annual
increases are 1.39 and 1.50 per 100,000 for Q1 males and females, with much smaller changes for
their Q3 and Q4 counterparts ­ but no corresponding education relationship for other races. Further
investigation into the residual causes revealed that their contribution reflects the cumulative
influence of death from many diseases that each exhibited small increases over time.
        We also conducted a corresponding analysis of changes in log death rates (see Appendix
Figures C2 and C3 and Tables C5 and C6). For the most part, the educational gradients are similar
for trends in logs and levels. In particular: less-educated whites and Blacks experienced the largest
percentage, as well as absolute, increases in drug mortality rates; there are relatively weak
education gradients in cardiovascular and cancer mortality trends for white males but with
somewhat stronger gradients for white and Black females; the large absolute decreases over time
in black male cardiovascular and cancer mortality reflect fairly similar relative changes but starting
from much higher baseline rates. Also, noteworthy are the extremely large percentage reductions
in HIV mortality for virtually all groups, without much of an educational gradient for men but with
suggestive evidence of one for females other than Hispanics.


6. Discussion
        This analysis supplies descriptive evidence on mortality trends at the beginning of the 21st
century by sex, education quartile and race. In context of the conceptual framework developed in
Section 2, the results for all-cause mortality suggest that Blacks faced the most positive overall
health shocks and non-Hispanic whites the most negative ones, as evidenced by the large absolute
and percentage decreases for the former group and corresponding increases for the latter.9 Within
race groups, the education gradients in mortality trends vary. Among whites, the lower education
quartiles experienced increases or no changes in death rates, while those of the most educated
declined, implying positive shocks for the highly educated and neutral or negative ones for the
lower quartiles. For Blacks, there were no clear educational gradients in absolute mortality rates
but with the largest relative declines for the highest quartile. Since equal-sized increases in health
capital are predicted to decrease absolute mortality rates by more for the less educated, but possibly


9
  There are many potential sources of these racial differences. For instance, in their analysis of health capital
investments, Ehrlich and Chuma (1990) identify more rapid improvements in life expectancy, although starting from
lower levels, for nonwhites than whites throughout much of the 20th century. Their theoretical model suggests that
this may be due greater increases in permanent incomes for nonwhites.


                                                     Page 13
with smaller percentage reductions, these results suggest larger positive shocks for those with more
schooling. Given the small overall changes for Hispanics and other nonwhites, the size of any
shocks appeared to be modest compared to those experienced by whites or Blacks.
       These overall patterns conceal considerable heterogeneity across causes of death. For
example, one reason non-Hispanic whites generally experienced the least favorable mortality
trends over the first two decades of the 21st century is because they have been hardest hit by the
fatal drug epidemic, as has been detailed elsewhere (e.g. Ruhm, 2019; Case and Deaton, 2020).
More generally, this negative health shock increased the cause-specific fatality rates of all groups
but with by far the largest growth in both absolute and percentage drug death rates among less-
educated whites and Blacks. Whites were more affected than Blacks or Hispanics early in the fatal
drug epidemic, because they were more widely prescribed opioids (Anderson, Green and Payne,
2009; Singhal, Tien and Hsia, 2016). Less-educated Blacks, particularly males, experienced large
increases later as the main source of drug mortality shifted from prescribed to illicit opioids (such
as heroin and fentanyl).
       Other sources of higher mortality have been less consequential. Suicides grew over time
for whites but considerably less for other races. Among the least-educated whites, respiratory
disease deaths increased more than suicides for women and by similar amounts for men. The
variety of illnesses composing our residual category grew at least as much as those from either
suicide or chronic liver disease for less-educated whites. Notably, changes in the education
gradients for all of these causes have been much less steep than the extreme differences observed
for drugs. This pattern also holds for Blacks and, to a lesser extent, Hispanics and other races.
       Reductions in cancer, cardiovascular and HIV deaths are the dominant causes associated
with declining mortality rates. These generally reflect bigger reductions, in both absolute and
percentage terms, for Blacks than whites, and higher versus lower education quartiles suggesting,
in terms of our conceptual model, more positive health shocks for these groups. However, Black
males represent an important exception, with the largest absolute mortality rate reductions from
these causes occurring among Q1 and Q2. In combination with fairly similar percentage changes,
this may indicate that Black males experienced equal or larger positive shocks than their more
educated counterparts.
       Prior research suggests some reasons for these decreases in mortality. For instance, the
large declines in cardiovascular and cancer deaths for blacks may have occurred because of



                                              Page 14
particularly large declines in smoking for them since the mid-1960s (Garrett et al. 2011). Health
insurance coverage expansions may have also reduced inequalities in access to medical care; for
instance, recent evidence highlights large effects of Medicaid insurance expansions (Sommers et
al. 2012, Sommers 2017, Miller et al. 2019, Borgschulte and Vogler 2020), although gaps still
persist (Buchmueller et al. 2016). However, further research is needed to understand the limited
progress among the least-educated quartiles (other than Black men), particularly since slowdowns
in reducing cardiovascular mortality are seen as a key factor restraining improvements in life
expectancy (Mehta, Abrams, and Myrskylä 2020).
       Enormous progress has been made in reducing HIV deaths and, as documented above, this
has been particularly important for Blacks in the lower two education quartiles. This reflects the
particularly devastating death toll of HIV on less-educated Blacks during the 1980s and early
1990s (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2001), combined with the increasing use of
antiretroviral drugs, starting in the late 1990s and continuing into the 21st century, that reversed
many of the effects of this initial negative health shock (Diamond, 2018).
        We are hesitant to draw strong implications for Hispanics and other races, given their
generally small absolute, although not percentage, changes in death rates and the likelihood that
the composition of these groups may have changed over time. Here, we simply note that the trends
in drug, cardiovascular, cancer and HIV mortality are usually in the same direction but of more
limited magnitude than for whites or Blacks, leading to modest overall death rate changes that
show no clear education gradient.
       A principal conclusion of this analysis is that single factor explanations for mortality trends
are likely to be inadequate given the heterogeneity of experiences across population groups and
that useful information can be gained by examining differences in trends by cause of death. This
result is consistent with the recent study of Novosad, Rafkin, and Asher (2020) who use partial
identification methods to examine trends in mortality. A corollary of this conclusion is that
grouping together different causes of death may conceal important differences. For example, Case
and Deaton (2015, 2017, 2020) combine deaths from drugs, suicide and chronic liver disease into
a single "deaths of despair" category. Yet we find that the fatality trends differ dramatically for
these causes within and across race and sex groups. As discussed, drug deaths are the dominant
cause of mortality growth for the less educated. Trends in suicide and chronic liver disease are of




                                              Page 15
secondary importance, with larger fatality rate increases often observed from respiratory
diseases.10
        Several caveats should be kept in mind when interpreting our results. First, larger annual
decreases in death rates do not automatically imply better overall status. In particular, Blacks
experienced the largest mortality reductions over the first two decades of the 21st century, but their
death rates in 2018 almost always remained higher than those of other races. Second, our analysis
does not fully control for cross-sectional compositional differences or corresponding changes
occurring over time. We have noted that these might lead us to understate the mortality
disadvantage of Blacks and overstate the corresponding advantage of Hispanics in any given year.
Moreover, they might also affect the estimated trends. For instance, the extent to which Blacks
and Hispanics are disproportionately represented in the lower education quartiles has fallen
modestly over time (Appendix Table C2). This suggests a small decrease in the extent of favorable
selection for them, possibly leading to slightly smaller mortality reductions (or larger increases)
than if this selectivity had remained constant. Third, there could be additional changes over time
in the composition of some groups, especially Hispanics and other races, due to migration into the
United States from other countries (Bundiman, et al., 2020). Fourth, stated amounts of schooling
may not correspond to true levels of human capital. This could reflect changes in the quality of
education or of its reporting. A particular issue is that the high school graduate group includes
persons with a GED or other high school equivalency exam which, at least in prior years, did not
indicate the same level of skill acquisition as actual graduation from high school (Heckman,
Humphries and Mader, 2011).11
        Finally, the COVID-19 pandemic may have modified or reversed some of the trends
documented above. In particular, the large declines in mortality rates experienced by low educated
Blacks may have stalled or reversed, given data indicating that Blacks and Hispanics have
experienced particularly high rates of COVID-related hospitalizations and deaths (Gross, et al.,

10
   Consistent with the importance of heterogeneity, studies of the causal effects of economic shocks and policies
show different results by cause of death. For example, Pierce and Schott (2020) find that trade shocks increase drug
mortality but not deaths from suicides or alcohol-related causes. Dow et al. (2020) indicate that expansions in the
EITC and the minimum wage reduce non-drug suicides, but have no effect of deaths from drugs or alcohol-related
causes.
11
   In addition to the General Educational Development (GED) credential, since 2014 high school equivalency exams
include the Test Assessing Secondary Completion (TASC) and the High School Equivalency Test (HiSET).
Appendix Figure C4 shows that the share of people coded as high school graduates with a GED differs little by race
and that the trends have remained flat since 2008, which is the first year that GEDs were separately recorded in the
ACS, indicating that this is unlikely to be an important issue for our analysis.


                                                      Page 16
2020; Price-Haywood, et al., 2020). The pandemic's health effects on different populations have
become an active area of research and one that will continue to be important for both academics
and policymakers. We hope our methods and findings will be useful to researchers interested in
estimating these and other changes in mortality by educational attainment for different
demographic groups.




                                            Page 17
                                              References
Anderson, Karen O., Carmen R. Green, and Richard Payne. 2009. "Racial and Ethnic Disparities in
   Pain: Causes and Consequences of Unequal Care." Journal of Pain 10(12): 1187­1204.
   doi:10.1016/j.jpain.2009.10.002.
Bertrand, Marianne, Dolly Chugh, and Sendhil Mullainathan "Implicit Discrimination"
    American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings. 95(2): 94-98. 2005.
Borgschulte, Mark, and Jacob Vogler. 2020 "Did the ACA Medicaid Expansion Save
    Lives?" Journal of Health Economics 72: 102333.
Buchmueller, Thomas, Zachary Levinson, Helen Levy, and Barbara Wolfe. 2016. "Effect of the
   Affordable Care Act on Racial and Ethnic Disparities in Health Insurance Coverage" American
   Journal of Public Health. 106(8): 1416-1421.
Bundiman, Abby, Christine Tamir, Lauren Mora and Luis Noe-Bustamante. 2020. "Facts on U.S.
   Immigrants, 2018: Statistical Portrait of the Foreign-Born Population in the United States", Pew
   Research Center. https://www.pewresearch.org/hispanic/2020/08/20/facts-on-u-s-immigrants/.
Bound, John, Arline T. Geronimus, Javier M. Rodriguez, and Timothy A. Waidmann. 2015.
   "Measuring Recent Apparent Declines in Longevity: The Role of Increasing Educational
   Attainment." Health Affairs 34 (12): 2167­73. https://doi.org/10.1377/hlthaff.2015.0481.
Case, Anne, and Angus Deaton. 2015. "Rising Morbidity and Mortality in Midlife among White Non-
    Hispanic Americans in the 21st Century." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 112
    (49): 201518393. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1518393112.
------. 2017. "Mortality and Morbidity in the 21st Century." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.
------. 2020. Deaths of Despair and the Future of Capitalism. Princeton University Press.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2001. "HIV and AIDS--United States, 1981-2000."
    MMWR. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 50(21): 430­34.
Clark, Damon, and Heather Royer. 2013. "The Effect of Education on Adult Mortality and Health:
    Evidence from Britain." American Economic Review 103 (6): 2087­2120.
Cutler, David M and Adriana Lleras-Muney. 2008. "Education and Health: Evaluating Theories and
    Evidence" in Schoeni, Robert F., James S. House, George A. Kaplan and Harold Pollack (eds.)
    Making Americans Healthier: Social and Economic Policy as Health Policy. New York: Russell
    Sage Foundation: 29-60.
Cutler, David M, Fabian Lange, Ellen Meara, Seth Richards-Shubik, and Christopher J Ruhm. 2011.
    "Rising Educational Gradients in Mortality: The Role of Behavioral Risk Factors." Journal of
    Health Economics 30 (6): 1174­87.
Diamond, Frank. 2018. "HIV/AIDS Treatment Drastically Reduces Mortality and Helps Limit
   Transmission." Managed Care (Langhorne, Pa.) 27(11): 16­17.
Dow, William, Anna Godoy, Christopher Lowenstein, and Michael Reich. 2020. "Can Labor Market
   Policies Reduce Deaths of Despair?" Journal of Health Economics. 74: 102372.
Dowd, Jennifer B, and Amar Hamoudi. 2014. "Is Life Expectancy Really Falling for Groups of Low
   Socio-Economic Status? Lagged Selection Bias and Artefactual Trends in Mortality."


                                                Page 18
    International          Journal        of        Epidemiology        43        (4):       983­88.
    https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1093/ije/dyu120.
Ehrlich, Isaac and Hiroyuki Chuma. 1990. "A Model of the Demand for Longevity and the Value of
    Life Extension. Journal of Political Economy 98(4): 761-782
Ehrlich, Isaac and Young Yin. 2005. "Explaining Diversities in Age-Specific Life Expectancies and
    Values of Life Saving: A Numerical Analysis" The Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 31(2):129-
    162.
Garrett, Bridgette, Shanta Dube, Angela Trosclair, Ralph Caraballo, Terry Pechacek. 2011. "Cigarette
    Smoking ­ United States, 1965-2008." CDC Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report. Supplements
    60(1): 109-113.
Gross, Cary P., Utibe R. Essien, Saamir Pasha, Jacob R. Gross, Shi-yi Wang and Marcella Nunez-
    Smith. 2020. "Racial and Ethnic Disparities in Population-Level Covid-19 Mortality." Journal of
    General Internal Medicine, 1­3, 4 Aug., doi:10.1007/s11606-020-06081-w
Grossman, Michael. 1972. "On the Concept of Health Capital and the Demand for Health." Journal of
    Political Economy, 80(2): 223-255. https://doi.org/10.1086/259880.
Heckman, James J., John Eric Humphries, and Nicholas S. Mader. 2011. "The GED" in Hanushek,
   Eric A., Stephen J. Machin, and Ludger Woessmann (eds.), Handbook of the Economics of
   Education. Vol. 3. Elsevier: 423-483.
Hendi Arun S. 2017. Trends in education-specific life expectancy, data quality, and shifting education
   distributions: a note on recent research. Demography 54(3):1203­13
Kitagawa, Evelyn M, and Philip M Hauser. 1973. Differential Mortality in the United States: A Study
    in Socioeconomic Epidemiology. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Leive, Adam, and Christopher Ruhm. 2020 "Has Mortality Risen Disproportionately for the Least
    Educated?" NBER Working Paper No. 27512.
Link, Bruce G., and Jo Phelan. 1995 "Social conditions as Fundamental Causes of Disease." Journal
    of Health and Social Behavior (1995): 80-94.
Lleras-Muney, Adriana. 2005. "The Relationship between Education and Adult Mortality in the United
    States." The Review of Economic Studies 72(1): 189­221.
Marmot, Michael G, Martin J Shipley, and Geoffrey Rose. 1984. "Inequalities in Death--Specific
   Explanations of a General Pattern?" The Lancet 323 (8384): 1003­6.
Marmot, Michael G, Stephen Stansfeld, Chandra Patel, Fiona North, Jenny Head, Ian White, Eric
   Brunner, Amanda Feeney, and G Davey Smith. 1991. "Health Inequalities among British Civil
   Servants: The Whitehall II Study." The Lancet 337 (8754): 1387­93.
Meara, Ellen R, Seth Richards, and David M Cutler. 2008. "The Gap Gets Bigger: Changes in Mortality
   and Life Expectancy, by Education, 1981­2000." Health Affairs 27 (2): 350­60.
Mehta, Neil K., Leah R. Abrams, and Mikko Myrskylä. 2020. "US Life Expectancy Stalls Due to
   Cardiovascular Disease, Not Drug Deaths." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 117
   (13): 6998­7000.




                                                 Page 19
Milkman, K.L., M. Akinola, and D. Chugh. 2015. "What Happens Before? A Field Experiment
    Exploring How Pay and Representation Differentially Shape Bias on the Pathway into
    Organizations." Journal of Applied Psychology, 100(6), 1678-1712.
Milkman, K.L., M. Akinola, and D. Chugh. 2012. "Temporal Distance and Discrimination: An Audit
    Study in Academia." Psychological Science, 23(7), 710-717.
Miller, Sarah, Sean Altekruse, Norman Johnson, and Laura Wherry. 2019. "Medicaid and Mortality:
    New Evidence from Linked Survey and Administrative Data" NBER Working Paper 26081.
Montez, Jennifer Karas, Robert A Hummer, Mark D Hayward, Hyeyoung Woo, and Richard G Rogers.
   2011. "Trends in the Educational Gradient of US Adult Mortality from 1986 through 2006 by
   Race, Gender, and Age Group." Research on Aging 33 (2): 145­71.
National Center for Health Statistics. 2017. "Health United States, 2017: With Special Feature on
    Mortality." Hyattsville, MD.
Novosad, Paul, Charlie Rafkin, and Sam Asher. 2020. "Mortality Changes Among Less Educated
   Americans." Mimeograph, Darmouth University.
Olshansky, S. Jay, Toni Antonucci, Lisa Berkman, Robert H. Binstock, Axel Boersch-Supan, John T.
    Cacioppo, Bruce A. Carnes, et al. 2012. "Differences in Life Expectancy Due to Race and
    Educational Differences Are Widening, and Many May Not Catch Up." Health Affairs 31 (8):
    1803­13. https://doi.org/10.1377/hlthaff.2011.0746
Pierce, Justin and Peter Schott. 2020. "Trade Liberalization and Mortality: Evidence from US
    Counties." American Economic Review: Insights. 2(1): 47-64.
Rostron, Brian L, Elizabeth Arias, and John L Boies. 2010. "Education Reporting and Classification
    on Death Certificates in the United States." Vital Health and Statistics 2 (151).
    www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/series/sr_02/sr02_151.pdf.
Price-Haywood, Eboni G., Jeffrey Burton, Daniel Fort, and Leonardo Seoane. 2020. "Hospitalization
    and mortality among black patients and white patients with Covid-19" New England Journal of
    Medicine,                     June                     25,                    382:2534-2543
    DOI: 10.1056/NEJMsa2011686
Ruhm, Christopher J. 2019, "Drivers of the Fatal Drug Epidemic." Journal of Health Economics, 64:
   25-42.
Singhal, Astha, Yu Yu Tien, and Renee Y. Hsia. 2016. "Racial-Ethnic Disparities in Opioid
    Prescriptions at Emergency Department Visits for Conditions Commonly Associated with
    Prescription Drug Abuse." PLoS ONE 11(8). doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0159224.
Sommers, Benjamin D. 2017. "State Medicaid expansions and mortality, revisited: A cost-benefit
   analysis." American Journal of Health Economics, 3(3): 392­421.
Sommers, Benjamin, Katherine Baicker, Arnold Epstein, 2012. "Mortality and access to care among
   adults after state Medicaid expansions." New England Journal of Medicine, 367(11): 1025­1034.




                                               Page 20
                     Figure 1. Probability of death with and without health shock by SES




Note: Figure shows the cumulative distribution function for health capital which is assumed to have an equal variance
for high and low SES groups (proxied in our empirical analysis by education) but with a higher mean value for the
former group. A health shock ! causes an equal left-ward shift of the distribution for both groups. Death occurs if
health capital falls below "% , and the fraction of the group dying is shown by the dotted lines extending to the y-axis.
Figure shows the case where normal distributions in the "without shock" case have means of 0 and 1, equal variances
of 1.0 and where the health shock shifts both distributions to the left by 0.075 standard deviations.




                                                        Page 21
       Figure 2 Trends in Death Rates for 25-64 Year Olds from 2001-2018, by Education Quartile
                                                    (a)      Males




                                                  (b)       Females




Note: Figure shows mortality rates per 100,000 by race, education quartile, and sex from 2001 to 2018. Mortality
rates are age-adjusted to 2018. Panel (a) displays trends for males and Panel (b) displays trends for females.
Education quartiles are calculated separately by age, sex, and year, as described in the text.




                                                     Page 22
     Figure 3: Regression Estimates for Death Rate Trends of 25-64 Year Olds, by Education Quartile

                                                       (a) Males




                                                       (b) Females




Note: Figure shows regression estimates of the interactions between race, trend, and quartile from equation (3) for
death rates, with males in Panel (a) and females in Panel (b). The estimate for Q4 is the interaction of trend and race.
The estimates for Q1, Q2, and Q3 are calculated as the main effect plus the education quartile-specific trend
coefficient. Whiskers show 95% confidence intervals clustered by age, race and education on the difference between
each quartile and Q4. Regression is weighted by population of each age-race-year cell to obtain nationally-
representative estimates.



                                                       Page 23
  Figure 4: Regression Estimates for Log Death Rate Trends of 25-64 Year Olds, by Education Quartile

                                                     (a) Males




                                                    (b) Females




Note: Figure shows regression estimates of the interactions between race, trend, and quartile from equation (3) for
log death rates, with males in Panel (a) and females in Panel (b). The estimate for Q4 is the interaction of trend and
race. The estimates for Q1, Q2, and Q3 are calculated as the main effect plus the education quartile-specific trend
coefficient. Whiskers show 95% confidence intervals clustered by age, race and education on the difference between
each quartile and Q4. Regression is weighted by population of each age-race-year cell to obtain nationally-
representative estimates.



                                                      Page 24
  Figure 5: Regression Estimates by Causes of Death for 25-64 Year Old Males, By Education Quartile

                                                 (a) Major causes




                                                 (b) Minor causes




Note: Figure shows regression estimates of the interactions between race, trend, and quartile from equation (3) for
cause-specific death rates among males. Results for major causes are presented in Panel (a) and minor causes in
Panel (b) Standard errors are presented in Appendix Table C3. The estimate for Q4 is the interaction of trend and
race. The estimates for Q1, Q2, and Q3 are calculated as the main effect plus the education quartile-specific trend
coefficient. Regression is weighted by population of each age-race-year cell to obtain nationally-representative
estimates.



                                                      Page 25
 Figure 6: Regression Estimates by Causes of Death for 25-64 Year Old Females, By Education Quartile

                                                 (a) Major causes




                                                 (b) Minor causes




Note: Figure shows regression estimates of the interactions between race, trend, and quartile from equation (3) for
cause-specific death rates among females. Results for major causes are presented in Panel (a) and minor causes in
Panel (b) Standard errors are presented in Appendix Table C4. The estimate for Q4 is the interaction of trend and
race. The estimates for Q1, Q2, and Q3 are calculated as the main effect plus the education quartile-specific trend
coefficient. Regression is weighted by population of each age-race-year cell to obtain nationally-representative
estimates.



                                                      Page 26
                              Appendix A Conceptual Framework
      This Appendix presents additional details on the health capital framework discussed in
Section 2 of the main text. We consider a stylized model that incorporates the key ideas of standard
health capital models (Grossman 1972). In particular, health capital is based on investments, which
are endogenously chosen to maximize utility, depreciation, which we treat as exogenous, and
health shocks. Death occurs when health capital falls below some minimum threshold for survival.
On average, health capital is positively related to socioeconomic status (SES), which is proxied in
our empirical analysis by education. We allow for a distribution of health capital for each group,
which accounts for the realistic feature that some people with lower SES are healthier than some
people with higher SES, although health rises with education on average.
      As emphasized in the main text, our current usage of the term "health shock" refers to the
combined effect of any external (exogenous to the individual) influences on health as well as
potentially endogenous behavioral responses to it. Thus, we refer to the size of the shock as the
extent to which it raises or lowers health capital, on net. The equal-sized shock studied below
changes the stock of health capital of the different groups by the same amount.
      Our interest is in studying what this framework predicts for changes in absolute and relative
mortality rates when two different SES face groups face the same health shock. Given this
objective, we are primarily concerned with how the position in the tail of each SES group's
distribution changes over time, since those movements map directly to changes in mortality rates.
We are not focused on structurally modeling the primitives of individual utility because our
empirical methods are descriptive and measure changes in aggregate mortality rates, rather than
the micro-foundations that lead to those changes. The "shocks" we refer to may capture many
different phenomena that are external to the individual, such as improvements in medical
technology, greater availability and prescribing of opioids, or environmental events, as well as the
behavioral responses that may accompany them.
      For simplicity, assume there are two groups: those with low SES and those with high SES.
The stock of latent (unobserved) health capital at the end of a period for members of these two
groups, denoted by C! and C# , is D! + E and D# + E , for D# = D! + F, with F > 0 and E a random
variable normalized without loss of generalization as E~(0,1).Death occurs if health capital falls
below a threshold level C. . For group L, where L  {O, }, this occurs if:



                                              Page 27
                                             C8  C. &'D8 + E  C. .
      Defining R = C. - D! , the probability of death for the low and high SES groups are:
                                              !! = S(R)                                          (A.1a)
and
                                              !# = S(R - F)                                     (A.1b)
where S() is the cumulative distribution function of the relevant distribution. High SES
individuals have lower death rates than their low SES counterparts: !# < !! , since F > 0.
      We begin by considering the effects of a health shock, V, that has a uniformly negative effect
on the health capital of all individuals. The new health capital for members of group L is then
C8" = D8 - S + E and the risk of death of low and high SES persons becomes
                                                     "
                                                    !! = S(R + V)                                (A.2a)
and
                                             "
                                            !# = S(R + V - F).                                  (A.2b)
      The probability of death has risen for both groups; however, what we are interested in are
the absolute and relative changes in these risks. The absolute changes are:
                                                  "
                                            !! = !! - !! = S(R + V) - S(R)                       (A.3a)
and
                                          "
                                    !# = !# - !# = S(R + V - F) - S(R - F).                     (A.3b)
The absolute change in the probability of death will then be higher for low SES group members
if !! > !# , which occurs if:
                                       S(R + V) - S(R + V - F) > S(R) - S(R - F).                 (A.4)
This condition holds as long as the density of F is increasing on the interval to the left of C. and
the shock is "small" (such that V < D! - C. ). Intuitively, this occurs if deaths are "left-tail" events
and the shock is not so large as to change this.
      Next, consider the conditions under which the high SES group has higher relative increases
in mortality than the low SES group, even though the absolute increase is smaller. This occurs by
                4&       4'
definition if   4&
                     <   4'
                              , which is equivalent to:
                                             ;(=>?)A;(=)       ;(=>?AB)A;(=AB)
                                                 ;(=)
                                                           <       ;(=AB)
                                                                                                  (A.5)

Rearranging the inequality and canceling terms yields:




                                                     Page 28
                                         ;(=AB)       ;(=>?AB)
                                          ;(=)
                                                  <    ;(=>?)
                                                                 .                              (A.6)

This expression holds for S > 0 if the density of F is increasing on the interval(-, C. ] which
will occur for left-tail events with many common distributions (e.g. normal and T-distributions),
although it need not be the case for others.
       The analysis of positive health shocks is largely the reverse of that just described, with
greater absolute mortality reductions anticipated for the less advantaged and with unclear
predictions for relative decreases in death rates. To the extent that improvements in medical
technology or other similar positive health shocks are the norm, we expect to observe larger
absolute (although again not necessarily relative) mortality improvements for disadvantaged
groups with relatively elevated initial death rates. Mortality rates will only trend in opposite
directions if one of the SES groups experiences a positive shock while the other group experiences
one that is negative.
       Finally, note that this analysis will apply, with little modification, to the analysis of other
types of groups that have differing baseline mortality rates. Specifically, for our application, we
can compare trends for groups with high initial death rates, such as Blacks, to those with lower
baseline rates, like whites and other (non-Black) race or ethnic groups.




                                                 Page 29
                  Appendix B. Construction of Death Rates by Education Quartiles

       This Appendix describes our methods for constructing death rates by education quartile.
We first detail the procedures used for calculating death and population counts by years of
education and demographic characteristics. These counts are then used to construct death rates by
group, and represent the data employed in the main regressions. Section B2 describes the specific
causes of death analyzed.

B1. Procedure to Estimate Population and Deaths by Years of Education

      To estimate death counts (the numerator in mortality rate calculations), we sum all yearly
deaths for the specified gender-age-race-educational attainment cell using the MCOD data. We
drop approximately 5,400 observations with missing age out of over 45.8 million recorded deaths
during this period. Prior to 2003, information on single year of education is provided on the death
certificates. Beginning in 2003, approximately 16 percent of deaths measure education in one of
seven categories: 8th grade or less, 9-12th grades without a diploma, high school, some college (no
degree), bachelor's degree, master's degree, or a doctorate/professional degree. By 2007, just over
half of records classify education using these coarser groups, rather than single years, and in 2017,
nearly all deaths are recorded using the seven education categories.
      For some classifications, we can reasonably assign a single year of education. Specifically,
we treat high school graduation as 12 years, some college or associate's degree as 14 years, a
bachelor's degree as 16 years, and a master's or doctorate/professional degree as 17 years.
However, for the other education categories (e.g. "<= 8th grade" and "9-12th grade, no diploma"),
this assignment cannot be done, since they include people with substantially different years of
schooling. Therefore, we developed an imputation procedure for these cases. To implement the
procedure, we first calculate the fraction of single year educational attainment, when these are
provided, comprising each of the broader categories. For example, for grades 9 to 12 without a
diploma, we calculate the percentages of deaths occurring among persons where the death
certificate specifies 9, 10 and 11 years of education, respectively (and not just the broader
education category). We then regress the percentages for each of these years of education on a
quadratic trend in years and a full set of age, sex, and race interactions, with the sample restricted
to those in the specified broader education categories (e.g. 9 to 12 years of education without a
diploma). To ensure a large enough sample to make these extrapolations, we use wider than five-



                                               Page 30
year age bins, specifically, combining those 25-39, 40-54 and 55-74 years of age. We restrict the
time period for these regressions to be prior to 2011, since after 2010 fewer than 30 percent of
death certificates record single years of education. Next we use these estimates to predict the
probability of a particular number of years of schooling for persons with information only on the
broad education category, conditional on the three aforementioned age categories as well as sex,
race and year of death.
       A potential threat to this strategy is that states adopting broad education categories might
have different distributions of within-category educational attainment than those that do not. To
examine whether this is a problem, we first classified states according to whether they
predominantly reported continuous years of education in 2010 versus those that primarily used the
broader education categories. We compared the distribution of deaths across these two
classifications for those with 9, 10 and 11 years of education prior to 2003 (when all states used
continuous education), conditional on having between 9 and 12 years of education without a high
school degree. The distributions were nearly identical across the two types of states. We repeated
this for those with 8th grade or less education, and again found very similar distributions of 0
through 8 years of education in the pre-2003 period for states using different classification methods
in 2010.12 These results suggest that the educational distributions in earlier years provide a useful
indication of the predicted distributions in later ones.
       Educational attainment is missing for roughly 5 percent of death certificates. In these cases,
we assume that the education distribution within a given year, race, sex, 5-year age bin is the same
for these missing certificates as when schooling is reported and include such deaths in the analysis
using this allocation.
       To estimate population, the denominator of death rates, we first obtain counts by age, gender,
year and race group from the SEER. Since, the SEER does not include education, we computed the
distribution of education shares within these cells using the ACS to estimate population counts by
single year of education and demographic sub-group. While information on education is also


12
   Since the data includes over 2 million deaths each year, the distributions of educational attainment between the
two groups of states are statistically significant at any conventional level based on chi-squared tests. However, the
magnitudes of the differences in early years between states that later code education predominantly using categories
as opposed to single years are extremely small. For example, 86.59% of deaths among those with either 10 or 11
years of education had 10 years of education in states that later use categories vs. 86.79% in states that later use
single years. Among those with 8 years or less of education, 51.85% have 8 years in the states later using categories
vs. 50.93% in states that continue to use single years in later years.


                                                      Page 31
available from the 2000 Census, analysis indicated that these data were not fully consistent with
those reported in the ACS. Since we also use the ACS for other years, we choose to exclusively
use the ACS to maintain comparability over time.
      Our procedure for calculating years of education is straightforward for categories up to grade
12 starting in 2008, since education is measured in single year bins in the ACS. Prior to 2008,
grades below 8th grade were combined (nursery school to 4th grade, 5th and 6th grade, and 7th and
8th grade). We split these into each of the possible grades based on the distribution within a given
race, sex and wide age bin for years 2008-2017. We record "no schooling completed", "nursery
school, preschool", and "kindergarten" as 0 years of education. We assume a high school degree
is equivalent to 12 years, classify 12th grade without a diploma as 11 years of schooling, and less
than one year of college as 12 years. We assign "1 or more years of college credit, no degree" or
an associate's degree as 14 years and assume that a college degree without additional education is
equivalent to 16 years. Education beyond a college degree is coded as 17 years. Using ACS sample
weights, we then calculate the distribution of education for each of 0 to 17 years (excluding 13 or
15 years) by 5-year age categories, gender, survey year, and sometimes race.
      It is important to acknowledge the assumptions implied by proportionately assigning deaths
across quartiles for years of education that span thresholds. Novosad, Ravkin and Asher (2020)
note that the proportional assignment, which is also used by Meara, Richards, and Cutler (2008)
and Bound et al. (2015), treats mortality rates as being flat within education categories, and only
allow for discrete changes across them. By contrast, their method assumes a continuous latent
education rank distribution, with mortality rates weakly declining in this rank. Assuming a step-
function of mortality with proportional assignment is undesirable when education bins are wide
but is less problematic when education is measured in single years of schooling, as in our analysis.
Where Novosad, Ravkin and Asher (2020) consider four education bins (less than high school,
high school, some college, and bachelor's degree or higher), while we split education into 16 (0,
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 14, 16 and 17 years). Given the finer granularity of our measure
of educational attainment, we view the assumption of constant mortality rates within single year
of education as reasonable and potentially advantageous compared to analyses that divide the
sample into just four education categories.

B2. Classification of Causes of Death




                                               Page 32
Table B1 presents the ICD-10 codes used to classify the causes of death into the specific sources
used in the regression analysis. We also have a residual "all other causes" category that includes
any deaths other than for the 13 specific causes detailed below. Some drug deaths are intentional
and so, in principle, could be included either in the drug fatality category or with other types of
suicides. We have chosen to do the latter, so as not to understate the (relatively small)
contribution of intentional deaths to mortality rate trends. Our accidental death category excludes
accidental drug fatalities, which are separately analyzed given their particular importance.




                    Appendix Table B1: Causes of Death and ICD-10 Codes
Abbreviation                                   Description (ICD-10 Codes)
Cardiovascular        Major cardiovascular diseases (I00-I78)
Cancer                Malignant neoplasms (C00-C97)
Diabetes              Diabetes mellitus (E10-E14)
HIV                   Human immunodeficiency virus (B20-B24)
Kidney                Nephritis, nephrotic syndrome, nephrosis (N00-N07,N17-N19,N25-N27)
Liver                 Chronic liver disease and cirrhosis (K70, K73, K74)
Nerve                 Nervous system diseases (G00-G99)
Respiratory           Respiratory diseases (J00-J98)
Stroke                Cerebrovascular diseases (I60-I69)
Drug (Non-Suicide)    Drug poisoning: accidental, undetermined intent, assault (X40-X44,X60-
                      X64,X85,Y10-Y14)
Accident (Non-Drug)   Accidents, other than drugs (V01-X39, X45-X59, Y85-Y86)
Homicide              Homicide (*U01-*U02,X85-Y09,Y87.1)
Suicide               Intentional deaths, including drugs (*U03,X60-X84, Y87.0)




                                               Page 33
                                   Appendix C. Supplemental Results

   Appendix Table C1: Average Years of Schooling by Education Quartile and Sex, 2001 and 2018
   Education                      Males                                   Females
    Quartile             2001                2018               2001                  2018
       1                 9.58               10.07                9.82                10.29
       2                12.05               12.32               12.10                12.74
       3                13.98               14.51               13.81                14.74
       4                16.40               16.47               16.17                16.53
Note: Table shows average years of completed school by education threshold for 25-64 year olds, calculated as
discussed in the text.




                Appendix Table C2: Education Quartile Distributions Within Race Groups
                  Non-Hispanic      Non-Hispanic Black           Hispanic               Other
Education
                      White
 Quartile
                 2001       2018     2001       2018         2001       2018      2001        2018
                                               Males
     1          19.84      19.66     32.95      29.81        51.82      44.71     20.89       18.90
     2          25.63      24.96     28.57      30.10        21.01      24.80     17.38       17.14
     3          26.41      26.70     24.94      25.02        16.86      18.78     23.48       24.16
     4          28.13      28.68     13.53      15.07        10.31      11.72     38.25       39.80
                                              Females
     1          19.92      19.70     32.05      28.15        51.12      45.09     25.40       22.23
     2          25.86      25.09     26.34      28.93        21.01      24.59     18.28       18.40
     3          26.42      26.80     25.00      24.67        16.61      17.97     22.50       25.12
     4          27.80      28.41     16.61      18.26        11.25      12.35     33.82       34.25
Note: Table shows the distribution across education quartiles (in percentages) for the 25-64 year olds in specified
race group and year. These do not total 25 percent in each case because we utilize general rather than race-
specific education quartile thresholds.




                                                     Page 34
                                              Appendix Table C3: Regression estimates for death rates by cause of death, Males
                                     WNH                                    Blacks                             Hispanics                                  Other
                        Q1        Q2       Q3         Q4        Q1        Q2       Q3      Q4       Q1        Q2        Q3         Q4        Q1        Q2        Q3          Q4
Total                  5.09      2.28     0.48      -3.81    -11.43 -15.93       -8.00   -9.14     -3.46    -5.75      -1.81     -3.70      -0.26     0.48      0.06       -2.06
                      (0.92) (1.15) (1.62) (1.59) (3.57) (4.58) (3.02) (2.89) (1.10) (2.04) (0.89) (1.23) (1.31) (0.91) (0.70)                                             (0.72)
Cardiovascular         -1.72    -1.76     -1.28     -1.67     -4.21     -5.52    -2.79   -3.13     -1.38    -1.72      -0.75     -1.11      -1.29    -0.58      -0.27      -0.76
                      (0.75) (0.78) (0.78) (0.68) (1.65) (2.22) (1.45) (1.36) (0.64) (0.82) (0.38) (0.50) (0.80) (0.55) (0.23)                                             (0.31)
Cancer                 -1.90    -2.43     -1.82     -2.10     -4.61     -5.29    -3.05   -2.51     -0.69    -1.35      -0.62     -1.07      -0.85    -0.86      -0.67      -0.77
                      (0.63) (0.97) (0.94) (0.95) (1.66) (1.99) (1.43) (1.14) (0.28) (0.62) (0.30) (0.50) (0.26) (0.44) (0.39)                                             (0.32)
Drugs                  4.34      3.43     1.69       0.44      2.52      1.80     0.94    0.11     0.81      0.83      0.60       0.15      1.04      1.06      0.49        0.11
                      (0.42) (0.40) (0.25) (0.05) (0.39) (0.36) (0.23) (0.08) (0.12) (0.11) (0.08) (0.03) (0.10) (0.07) (0.06)                                             (0.02)
HIV                    -0.33    -0.29     -0.23     -0.16     -3.63     -3.34    -1.78   -1.28     -0.82    -1.21      -0.56     -0.46      -0.16    -0.18      -0.10      -0.05
                      (0.12) (0.09) (0.08) (0.04) (0.83) (0.73) (0.40) (0.28) (0.18) (0.31) (0.16) (0.11) (0.06) (0.07) (0.03)                                             (0.02)
Suicides               0.92      0.87     0.82       0.34      0.10      0.06     0.17    0.12     0.14      0.09      0.22       0.13      0.45      0.32      0.27        0.10
                      (0.05) (0.04) (0.06) (0.04) (0.06) (0.03) (0.03) (0.02) (0.06) (0.06) (0.03) (0.03) (0.08) (0.07) (0.05)                                             (0.03)
Respiratory            0.74      0.47     0.05      -0.16     -0.13     -0.35    -0.17   -0.22     0.00     -0.13      0.02      -0.11      -0.08     0.10      0.06       -0.04
                      (0.29) (0.19) (0.13) (0.09) (0.13) (0.10) (0.15) (0.09) (0.02) (0.06) (0.03) (0.05) (0.13) (0.08) (0.04)                                             (0.04)
Stroke                 -0.09    -0.09     -0.10     -0.15     -0.97     -1.01    -0.56   -0.45     -0.27    -0.25      -0.11     -0.12      -0.29    -0.18      -0.15      -0.20
                      (0.06) (0.05) (0.06) (0.06) (0.34) (0.38) (0.27) (0.19) (0.10) (0.10) (0.05) (0.07) (0.18) (0.12) (0.05)                                             (0.09)
Liver                  0.72      0.55     0.41       0.09     -0.25     -0.40    -0.20   -0.13     -0.12    -0.34      -0.01     -0.07      0.38      0.30      0.16        0.00
                      (0.37) (0.26) (0.13) (0.02) (0.27) (0.22) (0.13) (0.05) (0.16) (0.20) (0.08) (0.04) (0.10) (0.05) (0.07)                                             (0.02)
Kidney                 0.09      0.06     0.04      -0.02     -0.29     -0.28    -0.04   -0.14     0.01     -0.03      0.00      -0.03      0.02      0.01      0.04       -0.02
                      (0.03) (0.02) (0.02) (0.01) (0.11) (0.10) (0.03) (0.05) (0.01) (0.02) (0.01) (0.02) (0.02) (0.02) (0.02)                                             (0.02)
Diabetes               0.21      0.17     0.10      -0.07     -0.14     -0.23    -0.06   -0.26     -0.19    -0.17      -0.02     -0.08      0.06      0.32      0.20       -0.05
                      (0.06) (0.04) (0.06) (0.03) (0.17) (0.16) (0.13) (0.13) (0.14) (0.10) (0.08) (0.05) (0.11) (0.09) (0.06)                                             (0.05)
Nerve                  0.43      0.26     0.18       0.04      0.39      0.20     0.16    0.04     0.14      0.09      0.07       0.00      0.20      0.21      0.10        0.02
                      (0.12) (0.07) (0.08) (0.04) (0.13) (0.07) (0.07) (0.07) (0.05) (0.03) (0.04) (0.02) (0.03) (0.07) (0.03)                                             (0.02)
Accidents              0.16      0.01     0.03      -0.26     -0.17     -0.48    -0.13   -0.38     -0.51    -0.50      -0.21     -0.40      -0.02    -0.19      -0.21      -0.24
                      (0.29) (0.22) (0.16) (0.04) (0.21) (0.15) (0.08) (0.04) (0.13) (0.11) (0.06) (0.06) (0.13) (0.13) (0.07)                                             (0.04)
Homicides              0.06      0.03     -0.04     -0.14      0.46     -0.01    -0.24   -0.42     -0.30    -0.32      -0.24     -0.25      0.02     -0.08      -0.10      -0.21
                      (0.02) (0.01) (0.01) (0.02) (0.63) (0.36) (0.20) (0.08) (0.06) (0.07) (0.08) (0.02) (0.05) (0.03) (0.03)                                             (0.02)
All other causes       1.48      1.00     0.62       0.02     -0.51     -1.07    -0.25   -0.49     -0.27    -0.73      -0.21     -0.28      0.27      0.24      0.25        0.05
                      (0.91) (0.65) (0.42) (0.13) (0.80) (0.54) (0.36) (0.14) (0.32) (0.33) (0.15) (0.11) (0.18) (0.27) (0.17)                                             (0.06)
      Notes: Table presents regression estimates for cause of death among males. Point estimates correspond to results in Figure 5 in the text. Standard errors for each
      trend are reported in parentheses and clustered by age, race, and education.




                                                                                   Page 35
                                             Appendix Table C4: Regression estimates for death rates by cause of death, Females
                                     WNH                                    Blacks                             Hispanics                                   Other
                        Q1        Q2       Q3         Q4       Q1         Q2       Q3      Q4       Q1        Q2        Q3         Q4        Q1         Q2       Q3       Q4
Total                  5.41      2.10     -1.69     -3.34    -2.65      -9.03    -8.42   -9.02     -1.66    -2.49     -1.83      -2.11     -1.11      -1.04     -1.69   -1.69
                      (1.57) (0.99) (1.45) (1.53) (0.72) (2.46) (2.68) (3.31) (0.74) (1.17) (0.80) (0.73) (1.48) (1.00) (0.80)                                          (0.60)
Cardiovascular         -0.34     -0.32    -0.85     -0.80    -1.83      -3.58    -3.80   -3.36     -0.91    -0.87     -0.68      -0.57     -1.01      -0.75     -0.67   -0.48
                      (0.73) (0.38) (0.53) (0.41) (0.66) (1.38) (1.57) (1.44) (0.44) (0.46) (0.39) (0.26) (0.63) (0.47) (0.37)                                          (0.22)
Cancer                 -1.11     -1.84    -2.14     -2.18    -0.94      -2.89    -2.83   -2.94     -0.39    -0.94     -0.73      -0.73     -0.60      -0.63     -0.53   -0.64
                      (0.58) (0.77) (0.96) (0.92) (0.29) (0.96) (0.95) (1.15) (0.16) (0.44) (0.29) (0.28) (0.20) (0.25) (0.26)                                          (0.23)
Drugs                  2.74      1.67     0.74       0.17     1.11       0.63     0.42    0.08     0.31      0.32      0.22       0.06      0.47       0.33     0.11     0.02
                      (0.30) (0.14) (0.07) (0.03) (0.16) (0.17) (0.11) (0.04) (0.05) (0.04) (0.03) (0.01) (0.06) (0.03) (0.03)                                          (0.01)
HIV                    -0.07     -0.05    -0.02     -0.01    -1.64      -1.39    -0.59   -0.36     -0.27    -0.37     -0.14      -0.07     -0.05      -0.04     -0.02   -0.01
                      (0.03) (0.02) (0.01) (0.00) (0.41) (0.30) (0.13) (0.05) (0.05) (0.08) (0.03) (0.02) (0.02) (0.01) (0.01)                                          (0.00)
Suicides               0.35      0.32     0.23       0.11     0.07       0.06     0.05    0.05     0.08      0.10      0.08       0.06      0.15       0.15     0.09     0.02
                      (0.03) (0.02) (0.02) (0.02) (0.01) (0.02) (0.02) (0.01) (0.02) (0.02) (0.01) (0.02) (0.04) (0.03) (0.02)                                          (0.02)
Respiratory            0.97      0.56     -0.04     -0.21     0.64       0.11     0.00   -0.27     0.04     -0.09     -0.06      -0.04      0.03       0.00     -0.05   -0.01
                      (0.33) (0.19) (0.15) (0.15) (0.35) (0.17) (0.10) (0.12) (0.04) (0.05) (0.04) (0.02) (0.07) (0.05) (0.03)                                          (0.01)
Stroke                 -0.10     -0.12    -0.21     -0.17    -0.53      -0.88    -0.91   -0.71     -0.26    -0.19     -0.16      -0.14     -0.37      -0.31     -0.24   -0.18
                      (0.09) (0.05) (0.08) (0.08) (0.14) (0.26) (0.32) (0.29) (0.09) (0.06) (0.06) (0.06) (0.18) (0.16) (0.13)                                          (0.08)
Liver                  0.64      0.50     0.29       0.08     0.14       0.00     0.01   -0.08     0.08      0.08      0.13       0.01      0.32       0.26     0.02    -0.02
                      (0.16) (0.12) (0.09) (0.03) (0.09) (0.06) (0.04) (0.04) (0.05) (0.02) (0.04) (0.02) (0.08) (0.06) (0.03)                                          (0.01)
Kidney                 0.03      0.02     -0.02     -0.02    -0.15      -0.30    -0.23   -0.25     -0.04    -0.05     -0.01      -0.05     -0.13      -0.05     -0.06   -0.04
                      (0.02) (0.01) (0.02) (0.01) (0.08) (0.12) (0.11) (0.10) (0.02) (0.03) (0.01) (0.02) (0.08) (0.04) (0.02)                                          (0.02)
Diabetes               -0.06     -0.01    -0.10     -0.09    -0.33      -0.52    -0.52   -0.49     -0.29    -0.22     -0.19      -0.19     -0.13      -0.05     -0.09   -0.07
                      (0.13) (0.05) (0.05) (0.04) (0.32) (0.31) (0.27) (0.25) (0.17) (0.12) (0.10) (0.08) (0.19) (0.09) (0.06)                                          (0.04)
Nerve                  0.41      0.20     0.07       0.00     0.36       0.11     0.11   -0.05     0.09      0.04      0.05       0.00      0.11       0.09     0.03    -0.01
                      (0.09) (0.06) (0.05) (0.02) (0.07) (0.04) (0.06) (0.03) (0.02) (0.02) (0.02) (0.03) (0.03) (0.03) (0.03)                                          (0.01)
Accidents              0.19      0.09     -0.06     -0.16     0.08      -0.11    -0.18   -0.24     -0.17    -0.16     -0.20      -0.17     -0.12      -0.17     -0.22   -0.26
                      (0.06) (0.05) (0.04) (0.01) (0.03) (0.04) (0.03) (0.04) (0.04) (0.05) (0.04) (0.04) (0.07) (0.07) (0.05)                                          (0.03)
Homicides              0.03      0.00     -0.01     -0.04    -0.10      -0.17    -0.11   -0.11     -0.05    -0.08     -0.08      -0.11     -0.04      -0.07     -0.08   -0.06
                      (0.01) (0.01) (0.01) (0.01) (0.06) (0.04) (0.03) (0.02) (0.01) (0.01) (0.01) (0.01) (0.01) (0.02) (0.02)                                          (0.01)
All other causes       1.74      1.09     0.43      -0.02     0.48      -0.11     0.17   -0.29     0.12     -0.07     -0.05      -0.16      0.27       0.21     0.02     0.02
                      (0.39) (0.28) (0.21) (0.04) (0.29) (0.23) (0.28) (0.07) (0.12) (0.07) (0.08) (0.10) (0.06) (0.11) (0.08)                                          (0.04)
      Notes: Table presents regression estimates for cause of death among females. Point estimates correspond to results in Figure 6 in the text. Standard errors for
      each trend are reported in parentheses and clustered by age, race, and education.




                                                                                   Page 36
                                              Appendix Table C5: Regression estimates for log death rates by cause of death, Males
                                   WNH                                     Blacks                               Hispanics                                   Other
                     Q1        Q2        Q3        Q4        Q1         Q2        Q3     Q4         Q1        Q2        Q3        Q4         Q1         Q2        Q3          Q4
Total               0.009     0.008     0.007    -0.010 -0.012 -0.017 -0.012 -0.025 -0.009 -0.013 -0.004 -0.022                             0.004      0.003     0.001      -0.015
                   (0.003) (0.004) (0.004) (0.003) (0.002) (0.003) (0.002) (0.002) (0.003) (0.005) (0.004) (0.002) (0.003) (0.002) (0.002)                                  (0.002)
Cardiovascular -0.004 -0.006 -0.006 -0.021 -0.014 -0.017 -0.010 -0.019 -0.007 -0.009 -0.006 -0.017 -0.001                                              0.000    -0.003      -0.015
                   (0.002) (0.002) (0.003) (0.002) (0.004) (0.003) (0.004) (0.003) (0.004) (0.005) (0.004) (0.007) (0.005) (0.003) (0.002)                                  (0.004)
Cancer             -0.012 -0.015 -0.013 -0.023 -0.027 -0.028 -0.020 -0.024 -0.004 -0.009 -0.006 -0.021 -0.008 -0.012 -0.017                                                 -0.016
                   (0.002) (0.002) (0.002) (0.002) (0.004) (0.005) (0.004) (0.004) (0.005) (0.007) (0.004) (0.003) (0.003) (0.003) (0.004)                                  (0.002)
Drugs               0.098     0.098     0.087     0.064     0.064     0.051      0.052  0.015     0.047      0.042     0.055     0.044      0.086      0.090     0.083       0.078
                   (0.013) (0.012) (0.011) (0.008) (0.011) (0.010) (0.011) (0.010) (0.009) (0.008) (0.009) (0.009) (0.007) (0.008) (0.011)                                  (0.012)
HIV                -0.064 -0.069 -0.072 -0.079 -0.087 -0.092 -0.081 -0.094 -0.093 -0.116 -0.084 -0.104 -0.037 -0.056 -0.046                                                 -0.066
                   (0.021) (0.020) (0.020) (0.018) (0.014) (0.013) (0.013) (0.013) (0.013) (0.014) (0.014) (0.020) (0.019) (0.019) (0.017)                                  (0.012)
Suicides            0.023     0.024     0.031     0.021     0.008     0.004      0.014  0.018     0.010      0.007     0.020     0.021      0.024      0.019     0.022       0.014
                   (0.002) (0.002) (0.002) (0.001) (0.004) (0.002) (0.002) (0.004) (0.003) (0.004) (0.003) (0.004) (0.003) (0.004) (0.003)                                  (0.004)
Respiratory         0.012     0.014     0.004    -0.017 -0.007 -0.011 -0.008 -0.025               0.011     -0.007     0.019    -0.017      0.004      0.008     0.005       0.004
                   (0.002) (0.002) (0.003) (0.005) (0.002) (0.003) (0.003) (0.004) (0.008) (0.004) (0.013) (0.009) (0.006) (0.008) (0.010)                                  (0.011)
Stroke             -0.001 -0.003 -0.004 -0.027 -0.027 -0.023 -0.015                     0.003     -0.012 -0.010 -0.004           0.001      0.004     -0.008     0.009      -0.038
                   (0.002) (0.002) (0.004) (0.005) (0.006) (0.003) (0.006) (0.022) (0.004) (0.006) (0.006) (0.014) (0.010) (0.004) (0.024)                                  (0.007)
Liver               0.029     0.032     0.038     0.032    -0.033 -0.030 -0.010 -0.016            0.006      0.004     0.027     0.025      0.028      0.034     0.034       0.045
                   (0.010) (0.011) (0.010) (0.011) (0.011) (0.008) (0.013) (0.014) (0.011) (0.014) (0.014) (0.018) (0.011) (0.013) (0.014)                                  (0.021)
Kidney              0.008     0.008     0.008    -0.012 -0.020 -0.021            0.003 -0.040     0.019      0.009     0.017     0.000      0.000      0.005     0.026      -0.005
                   (0.004) (0.003) (0.003) (0.011) (0.005) (0.005) (0.004) (0.010) (0.010) (0.008) (0.005) (0.026) (0.005) (0.008) (0.020)                                  (0.015)
Diabetes            0.014     0.011     0.009    -0.013     0.000     -0.003     0.003 -0.014     0.009      0.004     0.019     0.055      0.022      0.025     0.053       0.014
                   (0.004) (0.002) (0.003) (0.004) (0.004) (0.003) (0.003) (0.008) (0.007) (0.007) (0.013) (0.028) (0.008) (0.007) (0.017)                                  (0.014)
Nerve               0.023     0.019     0.012    -0.002     0.018     0.011      0.014  0.002     0.024      0.020     0.012     0.010      0.035      0.041     0.033       0.010
                   (0.002) (0.001) (0.005) (0.004) (0.003) (0.003) (0.003) (0.008) (0.006) (0.005) (0.008) (0.031) (0.003) (0.008) (0.006)                                  (0.025)
Accidents           0.002     0.000     0.000    -0.019 -0.004 -0.010 -0.004 -0.022 -0.013 -0.015 -0.009 -0.032                             0.000     -0.005 -0.010         -0.027
                   (0.005) (0.004) (0.005) (0.004) (0.003) (0.003) (0.002) (0.003) (0.003) (0.003) (0.003) (0.005) (0.003) (0.003) (0.004)                                  (0.004)
Homicides           0.007     0.006    -0.007 -0.049        0.013     0.004     -0.006 -0.045 -0.019 -0.023 -0.031 -0.076                   0.001     -0.004 -0.020         -0.083
                   (0.002) (0.002) (0.003) (0.005) (0.006) (0.005) (0.004) (0.008) (0.003) (0.003) (0.007) (0.006) (0.005) (0.004) (0.006)                                  (0.007)
All other           0.010     0.009     0.007    -0.006 -0.013 -0.020 -0.010 -0.022 -0.012 -0.023 -0.012 -0.023                             0.008      0.005     0.008       0.005
causes             (0.007) (0.006) (0.006) (0.005) (0.007) (0.005) (0.005) (0.004) (0.007) (0.006) (0.006) (0.006) (0.005) (0.006) (0.008)                                  (0.008)
       Notes: Table presents regression estimates for cause of death among males. Point estimates correspond to results in Figure 5 in the text. Standard errors for each
       trend are reported in parentheses and clustered by age, race, and education.




                                                                                    Page 37
                                            Appendix Table C6: Regression estimates for log death rates by cause of death, Females
                                   WNH                                     Blacks                              Hispanics                                    Other
                     Q1        Q2        Q3        Q4        Q1         Q2        Q3       Q4      Q1        Q2        Q3         Q4         Q1         Q2        Q3       Q4
Total              0.019     0.012      0.000    -0.016 -0.007 -0.018 -0.018 -0.027 -0.004 -0.007 -0.007 -0.018                             0.004      0.002    -0.011   -0.019
                  (0.005) (0.004) (0.003) (0.002) (0.002) (0.002) (0.002) (0.003) (0.004) (0.004) (0.002) (0.003) (0.005) (0.004) (0.001)                                (0.002)
Cardiovascular 0.007         0.001     -0.010 -0.025 -0.010 -0.022 -0.024 -0.035 -0.012 -0.013 -0.010 -0.022 -0.003 -0.004 -0.020                                        -0.032
                  (0.004) (0.002) (0.002) (0.002) (0.002) (0.002) (0.003) (0.004) (0.004) (0.004) (0.004) (0.006) (0.007) (0.005) (0.003)                                (0.002)
Cancer             -0.007 -0.013 -0.016 -0.023 -0.012 -0.022 -0.021 -0.024 -0.002 -0.009 -0.009 -0.010 -0.006 -0.005 -0.007                                              -0.015
                  (0.001) (0.001) (0.002) (0.001) (0.003) (0.002) (0.003) (0.005) (0.003) (0.002) (0.001) (0.004) (0.002) (0.002) (0.001)                                (0.002)
Drugs              0.102     0.097      0.072    0.045      0.077     0.058     0.060     0.033   0.064     0.066     0.063      0.056      0.091      0.070    0.042     0.026
                  (0.007) (0.008) (0.008) (0.006) (0.016) (0.015) (0.013) (0.013) (0.012) (0.013) (0.011) (0.014) (0.010) (0.010) (0.009)                                (0.011)
HIV                -0.036 -0.053 -0.066 -0.088 -0.070 -0.097 -0.090 -0.130 -0.107 -0.141 -0.114 -0.119 -0.030 -0.047 -0.038                                              -0.095
                  (0.020) (0.023) (0.020) (0.019) (0.019) (0.017) (0.018) (0.022) (0.014) (0.015) (0.015) (0.030) (0.018) (0.016) (0.035)                                (0.017)
Suicides           0.044     0.044      0.037    0.024      0.035     0.026     0.030     0.031   0.047     0.042     0.042      0.037      0.037      0.035    0.031     0.012
                  (0.001) (0.002) (0.002) (0.003) (0.005) (0.008) (0.012) (0.005) (0.008) (0.005) (0.005) (0.009) (0.006) (0.007) (0.007)                                (0.006)
Respiratory        0.023     0.018     -0.001 -0.022        0.009     -0.005 -0.007 -0.017        0.006    -0.004     0.002     -0.021      0.015      0.006    -0.010   -0.005
                  (0.004) (0.003) (0.005) (0.004) (0.005) (0.004) (0.005) (0.007) (0.005) (0.003) (0.005) (0.007) (0.008) (0.005) (0.006)                                (0.005)
Stroke             -0.003 -0.012 -0.023 -0.032 -0.022 -0.036 -0.039 -0.045 -0.019 -0.022 -0.012 -0.025 -0.012 -0.017 -0.022                                              -0.031
                  (0.002) (0.002) (0.003) (0.002) (0.003) (0.003) (0.003) (0.006) (0.006) (0.002) (0.007) (0.010) (0.010) (0.011) (0.007)                                (0.008)
Liver              0.053     0.054      0.052    0.042      0.013     0.005     0.011     0.006   0.023     0.031     0.042      0.041      0.039      0.041    0.018     0.009
                  (0.009) (0.010) (0.014) (0.016) (0.007) (0.007) (0.010) (0.014) (0.013) (0.010) (0.010) (0.015) (0.013) (0.010) (0.012)                                (0.015)
Kidney             0.006     0.000     -0.013 -0.025 -0.007 -0.025 -0.019 -0.049 -0.001 -0.022 -0.008 -0.048 -0.011                                    0.008    -0.028   -0.009
                  (0.005) (0.006) (0.009) (0.006) (0.002) (0.004) (0.007) (0.005) (0.004) (0.009) (0.010) (0.014) (0.009) (0.016) (0.009)                                (0.013)
Diabetes           0.010     0.005     -0.012 -0.036        0.010     -0.004 -0.013 -0.020        0.001    -0.011 -0.012 -0.041             0.022      0.016    -0.009   -0.023
                  (0.007) (0.004) (0.003) (0.008) (0.008) (0.006) (0.005) (0.008) (0.011) (0.006) (0.005) (0.011) (0.015) (0.008) (0.011)                                (0.008)
Nerve              0.029     0.017      0.002    -0.008     0.026     0.007     0.002    -0.015   0.023     0.010     0.002      0.018      0.030      0.035    0.007    -0.005
                  (0.002) (0.002) (0.003) (0.006) (0.002) (0.003) (0.003) (0.005) (0.004) (0.002) (0.007) (0.020) (0.009) (0.009) (0.007)                                (0.013)
Accidents          0.009     0.005     -0.008 -0.024        0.004     -0.007 -0.014 -0.029 -0.017 -0.015 -0.024 -0.033 -0.007 -0.013 -0.029                              -0.058
                  (0.003) (0.003) (0.004) (0.004) (0.002) (0.003) (0.002) (0.003) (0.004) (0.004) (0.004) (0.006) (0.004) (0.005) (0.006)                                (0.007)
Homicides          0.009     0.002     -0.006 -0.028 -0.004 -0.020 -0.019 -0.025 -0.015 -0.027 -0.037 -0.061 -0.013 -0.029 -0.041                                        -0.039
                  (0.002) (0.003) (0.005) (0.008) (0.006) (0.005) (0.006) (0.009) (0.005) (0.002) (0.005) (0.015) (0.005) (0.004) (0.011)                                (0.013)
All other          0.029     0.024      0.008    -0.005     0.006     -0.006 -0.003 -0.015        0.002    -0.003 -0.006 -0.018             0.014      0.010    -0.002    0.002
causes            (0.002) (0.003) (0.004) (0.003) (0.003) (0.004) (0.005) (0.005) (0.005) (0.004) (0.003) (0.010) (0.003) (0.005) (0.007)                                (0.010)
       Notes: Table presents regression estimates for cause of death among females. Point estimates correspond to results in Figure 5 in the text. Standard errors for
       each trend are reported in parentheses and clustered by age, race, and education.




                                                                                   Page 38
                  Appendix Figure C1: Trends in Total Mortality Rates: 25-64 Year Olds by Race

                                                           (a) Males




                                                          (b) Females




Note: Figure shows race specific annual mortality rates measured across all education quartiles. Mortality rates are age-
adjusted to 2018. Panel (a) presents results for males and Panel (b) presents results for females.




                                                          Page 39
       Figure C2: Log Death Rates: Regression Estimates by Major Causes of Death for 25-64 Year Olds,
                                           By Education Quartile




Note: Figure shows regression estimates of the interactions between race, trend, and quartile from equation (3) for major
causes of death in logs. Results for males are presented in Panel (a) and females in Panel (b). Standard errors are presented
in Appendix Table C4. The estimate for Q4 is the interaction of trend and race. The estimates for Q1, Q2, and Q3 are
calculated as the main effect plus the education quartile-specific trend coefficient. Regression is weighted by population of
each age-race-year cell to obtain nationally-representative estimates.




                                                          Page 40
       Figure C3: Log Death Rates: Regression Estimates by Minor Causes of Death for 25-64 Year Olds,
                                           By Education Quartile




Note: Figure shows regression estimates of the interactions between race, trend, and quartile from equation (3) for minor
causes of death in logs. Results for males are presented in Panel (a) and females in Panel (b). Standard errors are presented
in Appendix Table C4. The estimate for Q4 is the interaction of trend and race. The estimates for Q1, Q2, and Q3 are
calculated as the main effect plus the education quartile-specific trend coefficient. Regression is weighted by population of
each age-race-year cell to obtain nationally-representative estimates.




                                                          Page 41
   Appendix Figure C4: Share of ACS Respondents with 12-years of Education who have a GED, 2008-2018




Note: Figure plots the percentage of ACS respondents who report 12 years of education who hold a GED by race between
2008 and 2018. GED attainment was not separately recorded in the ACS prior to 2008. Ages are restricted to 25 to 64 to
match the analysis sample. Means are computed using person-level survey weights.




                                                        Page 42
