                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     MIGRATION, SPECIALIZATION, AND TRADE:
                   EVIDENCE FROM BRAZIL'S MARCH TO THE WEST

                                       Heitor S. Pellegrina
                                        Sebastian Sotelo

                                      Working Paper 28421
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28421


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2021




We thank Dominick Bartelme, Jonathan Eaton, Andrei Levchenko, Steve Redding, Esteban
Rossi-Hansberg, and Matthew Turner for helpful comments, as well as Walter Steingress, João
Paulo Pessoa, and Ferdinando Monte for useful discussions. We also thank participants in
seminars at Purdue, Michigan, NYU Abu Dhabi, St. Louis Fed, IADB, TIGN-LACEA,
Middlebury, RMET, UEA, FGV/EESP, Banco Central de Colombia, Insper, UFABC, Banco
Central de Chile, UCLA, Berkeley ARE, Aarhus, the World Bank, NBER Agricultural Trade
Policy, ETOS-FREIT, Princeton, CAF, SBE 2020 Meeting, and the Econometric Society 2021
Meetings. Andrés Fajardo, Natalia Martinez Camelo, Brian Cevallos Fujiy, and Elliot Kang
provided excellent research assistance. Financial support from the Michigan Institute for
Teaching and Research in Economics (MITRE) is gratefully acknowledged. Sotelo thanks the
IES at Princeton for its hospitality and funding during part of this research. E-mail:
heitor.pellegrina@nyu.edu and ssotelo@umich.edu. All errors are our own. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Heitor S. Pellegrina and Sebastian Sotelo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Migration, Specialization, and Trade: Evidence from Brazil's March to the West
Heitor S. Pellegrina and Sebastian Sotelo
NBER Working Paper No. 28421
January 2021
JEL No. F10,F16,Q17,R23

                                        ABSTRACT

Exploiting a large migration of farmers to the West of Brazil between 1950 and 2010, we study
how migration shapes aggregate and regional comparative advantage. We document that farmers
emigrating from regions with high employment in an activity are more likely to work in that
activity and have higher income than other migrants doing so. We incorporate this heterogeneity
into a quantitative model and find that, by reshaping comparative advantage, declines in
migration costs contributed substantially to Brazil's rise as a leading commodity exporter.
Opportunities to migrate, moreover, account for a substantial share of the gains from trade.


Heitor S. Pellegrina
A5 Office 1995
NYU Abu Dhabi, Saadiyat Campus
bu Dhabi, UAE
heitor.pellegrina@nyu.edu

Sebastian Sotelo
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
Department of Economics
611 Tappan Ave
Ann Arbor, MI 49109
United States
ssotelo@umich.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28421
1       Introduction
A central task in international trade, and in spatial economics more generally, is to under-
stand the impact of trade on welfare and on the patterns of specialization across locations.
Seeking to quantify the consequences of trade, a recent literature has incorporated compara-
tive advantage--differences in relative costs across locations and activities--into quantitative
models and established it as a major determinant of trade flows.1 But while recent work
has also documented that comparative advantage itself evolves over time, there has been
comparatively less progress in quantifying the mechanisms that drive that evolution.
    The starting point of this paper is the observation that episodes of large internal migration
are common, and that they are often associated with dramatic changes in the sectoral and
spatial composition of economic activity of the countries experiencing them. Consider, for
example, the U.S. westward expansion and, more recently, the large migration of Chinese
workers to export-oriented clusters. Across the world, moreover, rural-urban migration is a
hallmark of development.
    Based on this observation, we ask: How does migration within a country shape regional
and aggregate comparative advantage? We consider three channels. First, migration de-
termines the allocation of labor across regions and activities that differ in their natural
advantage. Second, migration alters the relative abundance of land and labor across regions.
Third, workers whose knowledge is heterogeneous across activities sort according to their own
comparative advantage, which determines the labor supply composition across economic ac-
tivities and regions. To measure the strength of these mechanisms, we incorporate them into
a quantitative spatial model, which we then take to data from Brazil in the second half of
the 20th century.
    We focus on an episode often called the "March to the West" (Villas B^   oas and Villas B^
                                                                                             oas,
1994 and Nehring, 2016). Starting in the 1950s and following a series of public initiatives to
integrate the country's West to the urban centers in the East, a large number of Brazilian
workers migrated to low-density, high productivity-growth areas in the Cerrado and the
Amazon. As a result, the share of Brazil's population living in the West grew from 7 to
15 percent between 1950 and 2010, while that region's participation in total agricultural
production and total land use also rose sharply.2
    1
     Eaton and Kortum (2012) discuss the recent revival of Ricardian trade theory. Costinot and Rodr´   iguez-
Clare (2015) review the welfare implications of a wide class of quantitative models, including those based on
comparative advantage.
   2
     This episode involved the migration of approximately 8 million workers from the East to the West of
Brazil. This magnitude is comparable to that of other migration episodes in which government policy played
a role. For example, the Transmigration Program in Indonesia (Bazzi, Gaduh, Rothenberg, and Wong, 2016)
resettled 2 million migrants, and in China the stock of migrants across provinces increased by 15 million



                                                      2
    Our paper begins by documenting three empirical facts that guide our modeling ap-
proach, and to that end, we construct a data set that combines several waves of Brazil's
demographic census with production and trade data since the 1950s. Over the course of the
March, Brazil's agricultural sector was transformed: it developed a comparative advantage
in new commodities, and it became a leading global exporter of those new commodities.
Specifically, using an index of comparative advantage, we first show that Brazil's exports
increasingly specialized in soy, beef, and corn (relative to the rest of the world).3 Likewise,
these commodities' share in total exports grew from nearly zero to about 13 percent, while
the share of commodities that had been traditional mainstays of Brazil's external sector, such
as coffee, cacao, and bananas, declined sharply. Second, Eastern migrants comprise about
30 percent of the West's labor force in 2010, but this share varies greatly across agricultural
activities and is particularly large for soy. Third, there is a strong link between a migrant's
origin and her income and employment activity choice. We compare farmers who emigrate
from different origin regions but end up in the same destination and working in the same
activity. We find that farmers coming from a region with 1 percent larger employment in
that activity earn 0.02 to 0.08 percent larger incomes and that their number is 0.07 to 0.16
percent larger than those of other regions.
    Guided by these facts, we develop an overlapping generations model of trade with many
activities and heterogeneous workers. Workers in our model are endowed with good-specific
knowledge, which they acquire through exposure to economic activity in their origin region,
and choose the location and activity that is best suited to that knowledge. In equilibrium,
regional and aggregate comparative advantage reflect a combination of natural advantage,
the abundance of labor, and the knowledge of the labor force.
    Using a pared down version of our model, we obtain two analytical results. Our first result
shows that the impact of migration costs on comparative advantage--defined as autarky
opportunity costs--is ambiguous. By spreading knowledge across regions, migration undoes
the ex-ante spatial allocation of worker knowledge, and doing so may amplify or reduce
opportunity cost differentials relative to the rest of the world. In addition, migration modifies
the link between comparative advantage and realized patterns of trade specialization. The
reason is that, when opening up to trade, regions within a country compete both for domestic
workers and for goods markets. A region's production costs, therefore, depend not only on
its own productivity, but also on the productivity of all the other regions to which workers
can migrate. Our second result introduces a statistic that reveals the mechanisms driving our
between 2000 and 2005, enabled by changes in the houkou system (Tombe and Zhu, 2019).
   3
     According to FAOSTAT, by 2010, Brazil was among the top three world exporters in soy, beef, and corn;
as of 2018 it was the largest exporter of soy and beef.



                                                    3
quantitative results. In our model, the non-migrant employment share in a region-activity
pair is a sufficient statistic for the impact of migrants on comparative advantage (along the
lines of Arkolakis, Costinot, and Rodriguez-Clare, 2012).
    In bringing our model to the data, we identify key parameters that control worker hetero-
geneity and mobility, based on our reduced form elasticities relating migrants' activity and
income to their regions of origin. We also calibrate the rest of the parameters to match pro-
duction by region and activity between 1950 and 2010. We then conduct an experiment to
gauge the consequences of migration cost reductions that induce labor reallocation. Specifi-
cally, we shut down the evolution of migration costs since the 1950s, while allowing all other
exogenous factors to evolve over time, and we compare the evolution of this counterfactual
economy to our baseline.
    We find that the evolution of migration costs was critical in settling the West, accounting
for half of the growth of that region's population share. Turning to trade, had migration costs
not declined, trade specialization in agricultural goods in 2010 would have been pervasively
lower across Western regions. In line with our theoretical results, the observed exposure of
each region and activity to workers migrating from the East is strongly associated with these
changes in specialization, because this exposure captures the direct impact of limiting mi-
gration on relative marginal costs. Aggregating these regional counterfactual changes yields
large swings in specialization in new commodities for the West as a whole: specialization
drops by 58 percent for soy and by 35 percent for beef and corn.
    While migration is a key driver of the West's transformation, in Eastern regions, which
were already densely populated in 1950, its impact is minor. Nonetheless, reductions in
migration costs are critical to understand Brazil's country-wide international specialization
in agriculture. Soy and beef specialization are 29 and 25 percent lower in 2010, absent
migration cost reductions. The observed drop in migration costs, moreover, accounts for up
to 30 percent of the observed evolution of Brazil's specialization between 1950 and 2010 (or
27 percent of the of the export share growth of these commodities).
    We next assess how our margins of comparative advantage shape the impact of migration.
Due to the essential role that heterogeneity in land productivity plays in agriculture, we
keep this feature in our next two exercises. First, we measure the role of differences in land
intensity across crops and land abundance across regions. Absent migration, regions in the
West experience a negative labor-supply shock whose impact is smaller for land-intensive
activities. In our baseline, this mechanism mitigates the impact of migration on agriculture,
which is land intensive relative to manufacturing. Allowing for land-intensity heterogeneity
within agriculture, the impact of migration on cattle ranching declines by about 5 percent
in aggregate (17 percent for the West) because this is a particularly land-intensive activity;


                                              4
the response of the other activities is modest.
    Second, we measure the contribution of heterogeneity in workers' knowledge. We recal-
ibrate our model shutting down knowledge heterogeneity and find that this heterogeneity
amplifies the impact of migration on aggregate trade, albeit with different magnitudes across
crops. In the West, worker heterogeneity is quantitatively important to understand the
disparate expansion of several agricultural activities, both new and traditional. In the ag-
gregate, the role of worker heterogeneity is particularly strong for soybean--accounting for
about one-ninth of our baseline results--, but for other crops, it is more muted. In addi-
tion, worker heterogeneity and migration strengthen the link between trade specialization
and natural advantage in the long-run. Quantitatively, this channel operates most strongly
again for soy, doubling its aggregate export and revenue shares, relative to a model without
knowledge.
    We close our investigation by studying welfare. We offer a decomposition that shows that
the full gains from trade (i.e. welfare costs of not being able to trade with any other region)
depend critically on the ability of workers to migrate. Migration opportunities, in fact,
account for up to 60% of the gains from trade. In addition, regional comparative advantage
has a large quantitative impact on how migration shapes the gains from trade. Finally, we
show that East-West migration interacted with regional comparative advantage (relative to
the rest of the world), often increasing the gains from international trade.4
    Our paper relates to several strands of previous work. First, we contribute to a literature
that measures the sources and evolution of comparative advantage in international trade.
Levchenko and Zhang (2016) and Hanson, Lind, and Muendler (2015) document substantial
changes in Ricardian comparative advantage over time and across countries. Morrow (2010)
and Chor (2010) show that forces such as relative productivity and factor abundance differ-
ences are key drivers of comparative advantage. Other work has studied the role of alternative
sources of comparative advantage, such as institutional differences (Levchenko, 2007, Nunn,
2007, and Manova, 2013), the unobservable dispersion of workers' abilities (Grossman and
Maggi, 2000, Bombardini, Gallipoli, and Pupato, 2012, Ohnsorge and Trefler, 2007) and,
related to our empirical findings, international migration (Bahar and Rapoport, 2016).5 We
contribute to this literature in two ways. First, we establish conditions under which domestic
migration determines the evolution of regional and national comparative advantage, through
Ricardian and Heckscher-Ohlin forces and by reallocating activity-specific knowledge over
   4
      We allow for endogenous expansions of the agricultural frontier, but we do not incorporate their welfare
cost due to deforestation. Although it is an important issue, carefully measuring those costs is challenging,
and we leave it for future research.
    5
      Buera and Oberfield (2016) and Cai, Li, and Santacreu (2019), among others, study how the diffusion
of ideas in an open economy shapes international comparative advantage (see Lind and Ramondo, 2018).



                                                      5
space--a hitherto unexplored mechanism. Second, we show that in an economy in which
heterogeneous regions compete for workers, regional comparative advantage does not fully
determine realized trade specialization.
    This paper also relates to a recent literature that measures the impact of agricultural
trade on welfare (Costinot and Donaldson, 2014, Allen and Atkin, 2016, Porteous, 2019, Pel-
legrina, 2020, Sotelo, 2020), development and structural change (Tombe, 2015, Farrokhi and
Pellegrina, 2020, Porteous, 2020), and the welfare implications of climate change (Costinot,
Donaldson, and Smith, 2016, Gouel and Laborde, 2018). In most of this literature, compar-
ative advantage is static and arises from differences in exogenous factors, such as the quality
of land, factor proportions, or both. We show that taking advantage of those exogenous
factors requires availability of workers and their knowledge. Our paper also clarifies our un-
derstanding of Brazil's emergence as a major global player in commodity markets, a unique
episode that transformed international agricultural markets.6
    Our quantitative analysis deploys the tools of the spatial economics literature studying
the interaction of goods and people mobility, including Allen and Arkolakis (2014), Cosar
and Fajgelbaum (2016), Redding (2016), Bryan and Morten (2019), Tombe and Zhu (2019),
Morten and Oliveira (2016), Porcher (2020), and Fujiwara, Morales, and Porcher (2020) (see
Redding and Rossi-Hansberg, 2017 for a recent review). Fajgelbaum and Redding (2014),
in particular, explore how the domestic allocation of workers interacted with international
comparative advantage to contribute to structural change and urbanization in 19th century
Argentina. Different from that paper, we focus here on the role of migration costs and worker
heterogeneity.7 Building on the recent dynamic approaches of Allen and Donaldson (2020)
and Caliendo, Dvorkin, and Parro (2019), we also add to this literature a new source of
complementarity between trade and migration, which relies on the differential propensity of
workers--driven by ability or geography--to migrate to different regions and pursue different
activities.8
    Lastly, our paper contributes to a literature documenting how migrants' characteristics
   6
     Our results complement those of Bustos, Castro Vincenzi, Monras, and Ponticelli (2020), who show that
the arrival of GMO soy to Brazil in the 2000s expanded local production of low R&D sectors by releasing
unskilled labor from agriculture. We take productivity growth as given and focus instead on how spatial
labor mobility shaped comparative advantage within agriculture since the 1950s.
   7
     In a Heckscher-Ohlin framework, Courant and Deardorff (1992) show that, if one factor of production is
unevenly distributed across otherwise homogeneous regions within a country, aggregate comparative advan-
tage can arise in the sector that uses that factor more intensively. In our framework, an uneven allocation
of a single factor might affect aggregate comparative advantage depending on the distribution of natural
advantages across regions.
   8
     Burchardi, Chaney, and Hassan (2019) show that the nationality of international migrants is a deter-
minant of the sources and destinations of FDI across US counties. Likewise, Cardoso and Ramanarayanan
(2019) and Bonadio (2020) show that international migration increases international trade flows in Canada
and in the US.


                                                    6
shape their impact on the economy.9 Studying a population resettlement program in Indone-
sia, Bazzi, Gaduh, Rothenberg, and Wong (2016) show that differences in land suitability
between origin and destination drive migrants' performance upon resettlement. Olmstead
and Rhode (2011) document the role of geography and migration in the expansion of different
crops in the United States. Arkolakis, Lee, and Peters (2018) study the impact of migrants
on the technological frontier in the U.S. in the 19th century.10 Our contribution to this
literature is twofold. First, we provide a new set of measurements relating the productivity
of migrants to their origin. Second, different from these papers, we embed this heterogeneity
into a quantitative general equilibrium framework to measure how it alters the incentives to
trade.


2       The March to the West
The West of Brazil is nowadays one of the World's major agricultural powerhouses, whose
agricultural exports are comparable to those large countries like Mexico and India. This
status, however, came rather recently: As Figure 1 shows, the 1950s mark an inflection point
in the evolution of Brazil's West. The share of Brazil's population living there remained
around 7 percent before the 1950s, but it has doubled since then. Likewise, the share of
agricultural land employed in the West increased by 12 percentage points, and the share of
value added in agriculture generated there increased by 20 percentage points. The sequence
of maps in Figure 2 shows the area we term the West in a red contour and displays its uneven
settlement, in which population grew fastest in regions close to the East.11

The Onset of the March. Until the 1950s, Brazil's population had been historically concen-
trated in its eastern shores, mirroring economic development. The economy was organized
mostly around export-oriented commodities such as sugarcane, coffee, and cotton, which
benefited from easy access to ports located along the Atlantic coast. Two noteworthy excep-
    9
     Several papers have documented the role of migrants' knowledge on the production patterns of host
regions. Sabel, Fernandez-Arias, Hausmann, Rodriguez-Clare, and Stein (2012) describe their role in the
formation of new export sectors in Latin America. Other examples include the diffusion of crops during
the Columbian Exchange (Crosby, 1973), the introduction of new varieties of wheat in the northeast of the
US in the 19th century (Olmstead and Rhode, 2008), the introduction of wheat in North Africa during the
diffusion of Islam (Watson, 1983), and the production of flowers by Dutch refugees in England in the late
16th century (Scoville, 1951).
  10
     Other recent work, including de la Roca and Puga (2017), Becker, Grosfeld, Grosjean, Voigtlander, and
Zhuravskaya (2020) and Sviatschi et al. (2018), has shown that a migrant's past environment shapes his
future learning and productivity.
  11
     Brazilian States are officially divided in five broad regions based on socioeconomic and geographic fea-
tures: Central-West, North, Northeast, Southeast, and South. Our analysis focuses on the occupation of the
Central-West and the North, which we label the West for simplicity.


                                                     7
tions were gold extraction in the state of Minas Gerais during the 18th century and rubber
exploitation in the Amazon in the late 19th century. Beyond that, poor access to the interior
severely limited economic activity there (Baer, 2001).
    The March to the West began in the 1940s, when urbanization and demographic transition
took off in Brazil. Concerned with food security and the population pressure in urban centers
of the southeast, Getulio Vargas, the president at the time, initiated a large-scale project
to occupy the Central-West region; he named the project the "March to the West". Part of
the project aimed at changing Brazilians' perceptions about the West via public information
campaigns, proclaiming for example that "the true sense of Brazilianness is the March to the
West" (e.g., see Appendix Figure A.1 and Vargas, 1938). Other parts of the project consisted
in launching expeditions to the West, investing in expanding and improving railroads, and
creating institutions to establish new agricultural colonies (Villas B^oas and Villas B^ oas,
       12
1994).
    While Getulio Vargas' government gave the occupation of the West its initial thrust,
it was not until the 1960s, when successive governments undertook larger investments in
infrastructure to occupy the interior of Brazil, that the migration to the West became a
large scale phenomenon.

The Progress of the March. The next major step of the March occurred in 1964, when
the president Juscelino Kubitschek moved the Brazilian capital from the coastal city of Rio
de Janeiro to Bras´ ilia, a newly constructed city in the Central-West region. Complementing
this political decision, the government built a series of new highways connecting the new
capital to ports and cities along the coast.13
    Between the 1960s and the 1980s, a military dictatorship in Brazil expanded Kubitschek's
projects as to further integrate the North of Brazil. The government invested in new roads
under a new national transportation plan (Plano Nacional de Via¸        c~
                                                                         ao ), granted land to
agricultural colonization companies, and created a free economic zone focused on assembly
plants in Manaus, a city located along the Amazon river.14 Alongside these investments
  12
     In 1941, Getulio Vargas launched the first expedition to the west called "Roncador-Xingu". The goal
of this expedition was to chart unpopulated regions in the interior of Brazil that were amenable to the
construction of new cities. To complement this expedition, in 1943 the government created the Funda¸     c~
                                                                                                          ao
Brasil Central (FBC), an institution charged with creating new population nuclei in the Western and Central
region of Brazil. FBC was also tasked with coordinating the construction of a railroad in Tocantins to cross
the center of Brazil, near Brasilia.
  13
     See Morten and Oliveira (2016) and Bird and Straub (2020) for a detailed description of the roads that
were constructed during this period to connect Bras´ ilia to peripheral regions.
  14
     Many of the transportation investments and the land settlements during the military government
were part of the federal government's regional development program for the Amazon (POLOAMAZO-
NIA) (Browder, Pedlowski, Walker, Wynne, Summers, Abad, Becerra-Cordoba, and Mil-Homens, 2008).
POLONOROESTE, a regional development project that received financing and development assistance from


                                                     8
in infrastructure, the Brazilian agricultural research institute EMBRAPA--founded in the
1960s--expanded its research on the adaptation of crops to regions closer to the tropics. An
emblematic result of this effort was the adaptation of soybeans to tropical areas (Nehring,
2016; Sabel, Fernandez-Arias, Hausmann, Rodriguez-Clare, and Stein, 2012; Amann, Azzoni,
and Baer, 2018).15
    Spurred by these public investments, the March progressed against the backdrop of spec-
tacular economic growth, structural transformation out of agriculture, and continued urban-
ization, especially in the Southeast. But as Brazil entered a decade-long period of economic
depression and hyperinflation in the 1980s, the cycle of large-scale investments in infrastruc-
ture that started in the 1950s came to a halt.

Knowledge and the Origin of Workers during the March. The knowledge of migrants has
driven the expansion of new economic activities in several historical episodes (Olmstead and
Rhode, 2008; Scoville, 1951; Watson, 1983). Sabel, Fernandez-Arias, Hausmann, Rodriguez-
Clare, and Stein (2012), p.181 document that this was also the case in Brazil during the 20th
century, where gauchos, migrants from the South of Brazil, led the expansion of soybeans in
the West:

      The first movers had some experience with these crops in the southern part of
      Brazil, a region with a favorable climate and adequate conditions for soybean
      agriculture[...] Such experience and technical capabilities allowed them to exper-
      iment with soybean cultivation in other regions of the country at a time when
      international markets started to demand higher volumes of soybeans.

Additional anecdotal evidence points to this mechanism also being present in the westward
expansion of other crops, such as coffee. For example: "The new amazonian experience with
the "black gold" is the result of the entrepreneurship of migrants coming from Paran´    a, Minas
Gerais and Esp´ irito Santo [...] Farmers from Paran´ a and Minas Gerais brought arabica coffee
to the region and farmers from Esp´   irito Santo brought canephora coffee (i.e., robusta), which
they cultivated in their region of origin." Marcolan and Espindula (2015), p. 13.16
the World Bank, focused on the forest area of Rondonia, near the Bolivian border (World Bank, 1981).
  15
     Pellegrina (2020) analyzes the general equilibrium impact of the expansion of soybeans to tropical areas
during the 1970s. Bustos, Caprettini, and Ponticelli (2016) show that the arrival of new varieties of soybeans
in the late 1990s released labor from agriculture and contributed to structural change in Brazil.
  16
     A cursory inspection of our migration data suggests that migration patterns are consistent with this
idea. For instance, in the municipality of Sorriso, the largest producer of soybean in the West today, 26
percent of the labor force employed in soy comes from from Rio Grande do Sul, the state with the highest
soybean output per farmer in the East. The data also bears this out for coffee, as Marcolan and Espindula
(2015) suggest. In the State of Rond^  onia, the West's leading producer of robusta, which is a higher quality
bean, accounts for 20 percent of production. The main origin of immigrant farmers in Rond^   onia is the State


                                                      9
    The fact that Brazilian farms are usually managed by small teams of workers--even farms
having large acreage--is also suggestive of the important role of knowledge in the organization
of production. In particular, the average number of workers per farm in the West is 3.5, with
small variations across municipalities: in the 1st decile there are 2.5 average workers per
farm; in the 10th decile, 4.5. Average land holdings, in contrast, vary substantially: in
the 1st decile, farms have 40 hectares on average, whereas in the 10th decile they have
an average of 650. Most farmers in the region, moreover, own and manage their farms.
According to data from the agricultural census of 2006, approximately 90 percent of farm
managers are land holders, as opposed to externally hired managers. Consistent with such
numbers, the demographic census of 2010 indicates that 42 percent of agricultural workers
classify themselves as a manager (as opposed to 19 percent of workers in services).
    In summary, a wide range of factors promoted worker migration to the West: changes in
migration and trade costs associated with the construction of roads and the federal govern-
ment's propaganda, reductions in the price of land associated with land grants, productivity
shocks associated with the adaptation of new crops, and the existing knowledge of workers
to take advantage of them. The spatial economy model that we formulate will incorporate
the influence of all these different shocks on the evolution of the economy.


3     Data and Motivating Facts
This section provides a brief overview of our data set and presents three empirical facts
about migration and comparative advantage that guide our modeling choices. The first two
facts describe aggregate patterns related Brazil's export specialization and the migration
of workers to the West. The third fact shows how farmers' income and choices relate to
agricultural activity in their region of origin.17


3.1    Data sources
We collect data from various sources to construct a panel with information about employ-
ment, migration, gross output, and domestic and international trade for Brazil between 1950
and 2010. Our data contains 133 meso-regions, 26 States,18 two countries (Brazil and the
of Esp´irito Santo, where robusta accounts for 30 percent of coffee output. A much smaller share comes from
Eastern states specialized in arabica beans. We find similar patterns for cacao and sugarcane. We examine
this relation rigorously in Fact 3.
   17
      Appendix A provides a detailed description of our data set and Appendix B collects additional informa-
tion and robustness tests related to our motivating facts.
   18
      Meso-region is a formal political boundary defined by the Brazilian statistical bureau, IBGE, that com-
bines municipalities according to similarities in their economic activity and labor markets. Previous re-


                                                     10
rest of the world), and 13 economic activities (11 agricultural activities, manufacturing, and
services).19
    To measure migration flows and incomes, we use state-level migration and employment
variables coming from decadal Brazilian demographic censuses from 1950 until 2010. For
1970 onward, we have micro-data at the worker level. A key feature of our micro-level data
is that we observe, along with migration variables, a worker's economic activity and income.
    We collect measures of gross output by meso-region and agricultural activity from Pro-
du¸c~
    ao Agr´ icola Municipal (PAM) and Brazilian agricultural censuses. For non-agricultural
activities, we use value added data from Instituto de Pesquisa Economica e Aplicada (IPEA)
and generate gross output using value-added shares from WIOD. We adjust the level of
value added by sector in Brazil to match the aggregate values reported in UN National
Accounts. For the rest of the world, measures of gross output and value added come from
FAO-STAT and UN National Accounts. We also include international trade flows from FAO,
and measures of domestic trade flows between Brazilian states coming from Brazilian statis-
tical yearbooks and Vasconcelos (2001). Lastly, we bring in data on land use and total labor
employment for Brazil from IPEA and for the rest of the world from FAO.


3.2     Facts about Migration and Comparative Advantage
Fact 1: Since the 1950s, Brazil's aggregate exports have specialized in crops that the West
exports more intensively than the East. Throughout the paper, we use relative bilateral
exports (RBE) to describe the changes in a region's patterns of specialization. Given a
common reference destination, which we take to be the rest of the world, we compute the
specialization of region i in activity k (relative to crop k and region i ) as follows:

                                                         XiF,k /Xi F,k
                                        RBEii ,kk                      ,                                       (1)
                                                         XiF,k /Xi F,k

where Xij,k are i s exports to j in activity k . This index of relative bilateral exports is a
useful indicator of comparative advantage for two main reasons. First, it is defined for pairs
search has also employed micro-regions, which are geographically more disaggregated (see, for example,
Ad~ao (2015)). Unfortunately, it is difficult to create a consistent panel of micro-regions starting in 1950 be-
cause new micro-regions were created, while existing ones changed boundaries. To strike a balance between
consistency over time and geographic disaggregation, we therefore constructed our data set at the meso-
region level. At a higher level of aggregation, Brazil currently has 27 states, one of them that represents the
federal district, which was created after the construction of Bras´  ilia. We merged the current federal district
to a meso-region in the state of Goias to ensure that state boundaries are consistent over time.
  19
     The 11 agricultural activities are: banana, cacao, coffee, cotton, corn, cattle, rice, soy, sugarcane, tobacco
and a residual agricultural activity which we call "rest of agriculture". Our manufacturing sector also includes
other tradeables, such as mining.



                                                        11
of regions and activities, as is the standard definition of comparative advantage based on
autarky relative costs. Second, by fixing a destination market as reference, it focuses on
supply-side sources of specialization.20
    In Table 1, we apply this measure for each activity k in our data, fixing i = Brazil,
i = Rest of the World (F), and k = Manufacturing. We sort crops by the intensity with
which Brazil's West's specializes in them in the year 2010, for which we have exports data
by Brazilian region. The table shows that by 2010, Brazil is intensively specialized in several
commodities relative to ROW, among them coffee and soybean. Leading to 2010, however,
Brazil's specialization changed substantially. For Brazil as a whole, RBE of commodities such
as soy, beef, and corn -- in which the West specializes -- grew rapidly, while it plummeted for
traditional ones such as coffee, cacao, and banana. And along with these changes in relative
specialization came a large change in Brazil's export basket, in which these three crops now
account for approximately 13 percent of total exports and 40 percent of agricultural exports.

Fact 2: Across regions and activities in the West, the participation of Eastern migrants
was large and varied substantially. The dramatic rise of the West was driven, in no small
part, by migration from the East: On average Eastern migrants account for 30 percent of
the West's workforce in 2010. This share, however, varies substantially across locations and
activities. Focusing on a statistic which in our theory will measure the impact of migration,
Figure 3 shows that the share of non-migrants in employment is quite low for some activities,
especially for soy, both in 1980 and 2010. Within activities, there is also large variation in
the non-migrant share across regions, as shown in Figure 4. These two facts suggest that
migration had a differential impact across regions and crops, and that workers followed clear
sorting patterns.

Fact 3: Upon migration, farmers originating in regions with high employment in an agri-
cultural activity are more likely to work in that activity and have higher income than
other migrants doing so. We now compare migrants working in the same activity and des-
tination, but who come from origins with different patterns of agricultural specialization,
estimating the following regressions:21
  20
     French (2017) shows that this measure maps to Haberler's definition of comparative advantage, which is
based on autarky opportunity costs, if trade costs are not sector-country specific. Appendix Table A.1 shows
that using instead the Revealed Comparative Advantage measure developed by Balassa (1965) provides a
qualitatively similar evolution in the patterns of comparative advantage. See French (2017) and Costinot,
Donaldson, and Komunjer (2012) for a detailed discussion of different empirical measures comparative ad-
vantage and how they connect to trade models.
  21
     Throughout the paper, we focus on identifying the knowledge of migrants in the agricultural sector.
We do so for several reasons, beyond the outsize importance of Brazil's agriculture in the world. Most
importantly, the census provides quite granular sector definitions within agriculture, which allows us to


                                                    12
                     log incomeij,kt = I      I      I
                                       j,kt + ij,t +  log workersi,kt-1 +
                                                                                     I
                                                                                     ij,kt ,                 (2)
                     log workersijkt = W      W      W
                                       j,kt + ij,t +  log workersi,kt-1 +
                                                                                      W
                                                                                      ij,kt ,                (3)

where i indexes the origin region, j the destination region, k the agricultural activity and t
the year. To gain precision, we stack data for the years t = 2000 and t = 2010. With an eye
toward our modeling strategy later, we use a thirty-year lag as our measure of workersi,kt-1 .22
To avoid the inclusion of the same farmer in both sides of the equation, we exclude non-
migrants from our sample.
    In equation (2), I measures the association between farmers' comparative advantage
and the size of the workforce in the origin region. In equation (3), W captures how this
comparative advantage translates into activity choice. By including destination and crop
fixed effects (W         I
               j,kt and j,kt ) in our specifications, we control for any factor that is common
across workers in destination j and activity k , including natural advantages, local institutions,
or price shocks. By including origin and destination fixed effects (W            I
                                                                        ij,t and ij,t ), we control
for common factors that are origin and destination but not activity specific, such as human
capital and bilateral migration costs.23
    Panel A in Table 2 shows estimates of equation (2). In Column 1, an increase of 1 percent
in the number of agricultural workers in the region of origin in a given activity increases the
average income of workers in the destination in this same activity by 0.016 percent. This
effect increases to 0.023 when we include destination-origin fixed effects (Column 2). Since
origin-destination-crop cells containing zero workers are frequent in our sample, we explore
three additional specifications. In Column 3 we drop observations below the bottom quartile
in the distribution of workersij,kt-1 . As one would expect if low values of our regressor make
sampling zeros more likely, this specification increases our coefficients to 0.047. We then
repeat our OLS specifications using a PPML estimator, to study the impact of bias due to
identify crop-level employment; for manufacturing, on the contrary, the sectoral classification is quite broad,
especially if one is to create consistent categories across years. This is especially problematic in constructing
gross output series, which we require for calibrating our model. Moreover, as discussed earlier, there is an
abundance of anecdotal evidence on the diffusion of knowledge in agriculture, which we rigorously map to
data here. That said, Appendix Table A.10 shows that when we focus on a sample of manufacturing workers
and sectors our results broadly concur with those in this section.
  22
     Data on a worker's meso-region of birth is unavailable. Therefore, to run the regressions in this Section,
we define migration based on a workers current and previous meso-region of residence. In Appendix B, we
present results based on state-level data in which we define migration based on state of birth and find similar
patterns.
  23
     Figure A.2 in the Appendix shows non-parametrically the variation that identifies I and W . In both
cases, a log-linear relationship provides a good approximation of the relationship between our dependent and
explanatory variables.


                                                       13
heteroskedasticity (Silva and Tenreyro, 2006). These alternative specifications increase our
point estimates up to 0.083 percent.
    Panel B shows that the elasticity of migrants' activity choice with respect to the number
of farmers in the origin rises from 0.074 to 0.131 across the same specifications. In this
panel, we can also include all zeros in our sample; doing so increases the coefficient to 0.165
(Column 6).
    Appendix B shows that our results are largely robust across specifications in which we
employ different lags for workersij,kt-1 , control for observable socioeconomic characteristics,
use finer levels of geographic disaggregation, and run regressions using individual data. To
provide more tangible evidence on these mechanisms, we additionally use data from the
GAEZ project (IIASA/FAO, 2012), to show that similarity in crop suitability between regions
is a strong predictor of migration flows. Lastly, we also show that, controlling for a series of
controls and fixed effects, yields are higher in regions and crops where a larger proportion of
farmers emigrate from origins with high-employment in that same crop.
    This evidence thus suggests that, controlling for any factors that make workers from an
origin go to a destination (e.g. distance or weather similarity) and controlling for agro-
climatic and other local work conditions (such as access to inputs or Marshallian external-
ities), workers performance is heterogeneous. The evidence also suggests that this hetero-
geneity is shaped by the employment structure of the region where migrants come from.
    To generate these reduced form elasticities in our spatial model as parsimoniously as
possible, we assume that workers acquire activity specific knowledge in their origin region,
and that this knowledge influences how they sort across destinations and activities. Doing so
also rationalizes our evidence on occupational choice because workers sort into the activities
they are better suited at doing.24


4        A Model of Migration and Comparative Advantage
In this section, building on the dynamic approach by Allen and Donaldson (2020), we develop
a quantitative model of trade and migration in which comparative advantage is driven by
regional productivity, land abundance, and the activity-specific knowledge of migrants. To
simplify our exposition, we present a stylized version of the model and a summary definition
of the equilibrium.25
    24
     This evidence is inconsistent with a model in which individuals types are fixed and independent of their
origin. Appendix B shows that such a model would tend to generate W equal to 1 in equation (3) and E
equal to 0 in equation (3).
  25
     We relegate a full description of the equilibrium and of our quantitative model, as well as the proofs to
statements in this Section to Appendix C.


                                                     14
   After describing our model, we present two analytical results about the relation between
migration and trade. The first result connects our paper to the literature studying the sources
of comparative advantage, by showing how migration costs shape regional and national
comparative advantage under free trade. The second result guides our quantitative analysis:
we derive a sufficient statistic for the impact of completely limiting migration on comparative
advantage, at any level of trade costs.


4.1    Environment
Geography and Commodities. Time is discrete and indexed by t. The world, W , consists
of many regions j = 1, . . . , I that comprise the Home country, and of a rest of the world
composite, denoted by F . There are k = 1, . . . , K activities (or goods), and each region
produces an unique variety of each good. At each time, the geography of the economy is
given by a set of natural advantages, a matrix of iceberg trade costs, a matrix of iceberg
bilateral migration costs, and a land endowment: {Aj,kt , ij,kt , µij,kt , Hj,t }. We omit time
indexes whenever unnecessary for our presentation.

Technology. In each region j , representative firms aggregate varieties of good k into ag-
gregate good output with constant elasticity of substitution k .26 Good output is like-
wise aggregated into final output, with constant expenditure shares ak . Only varieties are
                                                                                 (k -1)/k
traded. Correspondingly, the price index for activity k in region j is given by Pj,kt     =
                    (k -1)/k                                        K    ak
   iW (ij,kt pi,kt )         , while that of final output is Pj,t = k=1 Pj,kt .
    To produce q units of good k in region i, a worker with knowledge s combines land l and
final output m, according to:

                                                              k
                                     qj,k = Aj,k s1-k lk          m1-k ,

where k measures the share of value-added in production and k measures the land intensity
of good k . For non-agricultural activities, we set k = 0.

Demography and Preferences. People live two periods, young and old. An adult at time
t, upon observing her knowledge, chooses an activity-location pair and then spawns one
  26
    For simplicity, we adopt an Armington formulation within activities k . Our focus is on intersectoral
comparative advantage, which is still governed by observable differences in relative costs. Both our theoretical
and quantitative results would be identical if we adopted instead a multisector Eaton and Kortum (2002)
formulation. We do not adopt the formulation in Sotelo (2020), which sets k   for agricultural goods,
to keep our simulations quantitatively tractable, since our model features dynamics and a large number of
goods and regions.



                                                      15
child. To simplify matters, we work with non-altruistic parents. Let Ljt denote the adult
population at time t in region j .
    Adult workers born in t - 1 maximize welfare by choosing where to live and in which
activity to work at time t:
                                     max Wij,kt j,kt ,
                                                 j,k

where preference shocks are drawn i.i.d from G () = exp (-- ) and Wijkt is the systematic
component of welfare, given by:
                                              wj,kt si,kt
                                     Wij,kt =             ,                           (4)
                                              µij,kt Pj,t
where wj,kt is the wage per efficiency unit of labor (i.e., the return to a unit knowledge), µij,kt
represents iceberg migration costs that reduce utility directly, and Pj,t is the price index of
final output consumption in destination region j . Reflecting our empirical findings, si,kt is a
farmer's knowledge to produce in activity k , which depends on the region she comes from.27
Workers can migrate within the Home country, but not between Home and Foreign.

Knowledge Endowment. A child born in i at time t - 1 is characterized by a vector of
activity-specific productivities, si,kt , which depends on the employment structure in the re-
gion where she is born, si,kt = s (Li,kt-1 ) . In particular, motivated by Fact 3 in Section 3, we
assume that knowledge depends on good-specific employment in the origin region through
the following functional form:28
                                                   ¯k L
                                           si,kt = s   i,kt-1 .                                 (5)


4.2    Equilibrium
In what follows, we denote by cj,kt the cost of a unit of the input bundle, given by cj,kt =
     1-k k k     1-k
c
¯k wj,kt rj,t  Pjt   , where wj,kt are efficiency wages, rj,t are land rents and c
                                                                                 ¯k is a tech-
nology constant.
  27
      A broader interpretation of µijk is that good-specific knowledge can be lost in migration, if it is specific
to agro-climatic conditions in the origin.
   28
      This formulation captures in a transparent way the relation between heterogeneity and migrant origin
from Fact 3. Since our regressions include origin-destination fixed effects, it is unclear whether our param-
eterization of s (Li,kt-1 ) should depend on the level or the share of agricultural employment in the origin
region. Our formulation builds on a large literature emphasizing scale effects in productivity, both in growth
and international economics (Ramondo, Rodr´      iguez-Clare, and Sabor´
                                                                       io-Rodr´iguez, 2016). We show later on
that our quantitative results remain almost unchanged when considering an alternative formulation in which
                                                                                   
knowledge depends on agricultural employment shares, si,k = (Li,kt-1 /Li,t-1 ) . A substantially more in-
volved alternative would introduce forward-looking workers who make human capital accumulation decisions.
As we discuss below, the key to most of our quantitative results is that the model captures the patterns of
sorting across crops that we observe in the data, which our current formulation does.




                                                       16
    As is standard in an Armington formulation, the share of region j s sector k expenditure
going to origin i is given by ij,kt = (ci,kt ij,kt /Ai,kt )1- /Pj,kt
                                                                1-
                                                                     . Likewise, optimal worker
sorting gives the share of workers from i choosing to work in region j and activity k :
                                                          
                                                        Wij,kt
                                              ij,kt =                                                        (6)
                                                          i,t


where Wij,kt is given by equation (4) and    i,t     j            k
                                                                        
                                                                      Wij,kt .29 We define the effective units
of labor migrating from i to region j , activity k as

                                         Eij,kt  si,kt ij,kt Li,t-1 .                                        (7)

   To close the model, we assume that land rents are paid to local landowners. Total
expenditure in region j reflects final and intermediate expenditure:

                                                                   K
                         Xj,t =       wj,kt Ej,kt + rj,t Hj,t +         (1 - k ) Yj,kt ,
                                  k                               k=1


where Yj,kt denotes revenues in activity k , Yj,kt =          i   ji,kt ak Xi,t , and Ej,kt =   i   Eij,kt is the
supply of efficiency units there.

Equilibrium. Given the geography and initial labor allocations, {Li,k0 }ik ,a general equi-
librium is a sequence of factor prices and labor allocations {rj,t , wj,kt , Ej,kt }jkt , such that,
for each region j and activity k and time t: (i) Workers choosing to migrate to j, k satisfy
(6) given (5) and factor prices, (ii) the market for efficiency units of labor clears, (iii) land
markets clear for region j , and (iv) trade is balanced.

Discussion. Characterizing the properties of equilibria in spatial models with multiple ac-
tivities is a current area of work, and, to the best of our knowledge, there are no general
sufficient conditions that guarantee uniqueness. That said, our trade model satisfies the
conditions for uniqueness laid out by Kucheryavyy, Lyn, and Rodr´   iguez-Clare (2016) in the
case of free trade. Moreover, a single-activity version of this model satisfies the conditions
for period-by-period uniqueness laid out by Allen and Donaldson (2020), since our model
features no contemporaneous externalities in labor supply. In these special cases, it follows
that, given the economy's initial conditions, the equilibrium path is unique for all t.
  29
    In bringing the model to data in Section 5, migration costs µij,kt or knowledge si,kt act together to
rationalize migration data. Hence we will be able to separate the contribution of skill specificity to what
would otherwise look as migration costs.



                                                     17
    In a steady state our economy features contemporaneous externalities coming from the
effect of equilibrium labor allocations on worker heterogeneity. Because these externalities
operate by increasing the effective supply of workers, they are distinct from Marshallian
externalities or scale effects in models of imperfect competition, which instead raise the de-
mand for labor (Bartelme, Costinot, Donaldson, and Rodr´     iguez-Clare, 2019; Kucheryavyy,
Lyn, and Rodr´   iguez-Clare, 2016). Although the mechanism is different, equilibrium multi-
plicity is also a possibility in our environment. On the one hand, a closed economy lacking
internal geography will feature such corners, provided  is large enough relative to the elas-
ticity of substitution between activities. On the other hand, in the limit in which Brazil is
a small open economy, any region-activity pair with positive productivity will have positive
employment, so we can rule out corners with zero employment.30 As long as at least one
region produces a crop, next period there will be workers willing to go to any other region
to do it, given idiosyncratic shocks (Appendix C).


4.3     How Migration Costs Shape Comparative Advantage
We begin the analytical discussion of our model by studying how migration shapes com-
parative advantage, that is, autarky opportunity costs. In doing so, we connect to a long
literature studying how a country's cost structures relates to trade patterns. The general
equilibrium interactions between opportunity costs and migration in our model are, unfor-
tunately, too complex to characterize them as explicit functions of exogenous parameters.
We therefore derive analytical results using a pared down version of our model. We let labor
be the only productive factor (k = 0, k ) and impose equal value-added shares and trade
elasticities across activities (i.e., k =  and k =  , k ). Finally -- in this section only --
we zoom in on the role of spatial mobility by assuming that workers are born with a type
and only choose where to live.

4.3.1   Autarky opportunity costs

A classic definition of comparative advantage due to Haberler (1930) states that region i
has a comparative advantage in activity k (relative to region j and activity k ) if i s autarky
opportunity cost of producing k in terms of k is lower than that of j .31 To study these
  30
     In defining a small economy, we follow Alvarez and Lucas (2007) (see Appendix C.2). Intuitively, we
study the limit of our economy as we let the labor endowments of each region in the Home economy vanish,
while keeping constant for each region the ratios of total labor to sectoral productivity and total land..
  31
     The application and generalization of this definition in different comparative advantage models is dis-
cussed by Deardorff (2005). French (2017) applies it to recent quantitative frameworks, such as the one we
use, but abstracts from internal geography.



                                                    18
opportunity costs, we fix j = F and consider two different scenarios, in both of which region
i's trade costs with any other region are prohibitive.
    First, in the case in which internal migration costs are prohibitively high, µij,k  ,
i = j , stating that i has a comparative advantage in k (relative to k and F ) is equivalent
to the following inequality:
                                                                     
                               si,k L0
                                     i,k      Ai,k       sF,k L0
                                                               F,k      AF,k
                                                   >                         ,                         (8)
                               si,k L0
                                     i,k      Ai,k       sF,k L0
                                                               F,k      AF,k

where the superscript 0 denotes predetermined variables.
   Second, when internal migration is costless, µij,k = 1, i, j, k , the same statement is
equivalent to:
                                                      
                              SH,k     Ai,k     SF,k     AF,k
                                            >                 ,                        (9)
                              SH,k     Ai,k    SF,k      AF,k
where SH,k  i si,k L0  i,k .
    Expressions (8) and (9) reveal that knowledge acts as a productivity shifter in our model
and that migration determines its allocation. When migration costs are prohibitive, the
knowledge available in a location comes solely from workers born there. With free mobility,
in contrast, knowledge from all the country is available to each region, as reflected by the
term SH,k , which measures the aggregate effective supply of workers at Home, for activity
k . Migration therefore undoes any exogenous correlation between local worker productivity
and local natural productivity, and its impact on regional comparative advantage is am-
biguous: it will strengthen regional comparative advantage if high knowledge workers were
born in low productivity locations, but it will weaken it the opposite is true. In our applica-
tion, the West's rapid productivity growth in certain activities led migration to strengthen
comparative advantage.32

4.3.2   Regional and Aggregate Trade Specialization

How do autarky opportunity costs shape realized free-trade specialization, i.e., when iF,k =
F i,k = 1? We now turn to study the conditions under which RBEiF,kk > 1. It is
straightforward to show that when migration costs are prohibitive, autarky opportunity
costs fully determine trade specialization. This result is intuitive, since in this case a region
really is simply a separate economy; the elasticity of trade flows to autarky costs is exactly
  32
    Allowing workers to choose over activities, as we do in our main model, will tend to strengthen the
correlation between natural advantage and comparative advantage. The reason is that sectoral productiv-
ity differences within a region will induce differences in wages, which in turn drive the equilibrium labor
allocation.



                                                    19
( - 1) [1 +  ( - 1)]-1 (see Appendix Equation (51)).
   Under free internal migration, however, this is no longer the case. RBEiF,kk > 1 is
equivalent to the following relation between fundamentals:
                                                 -1                                                  -1
                                                                                  
                 SH,k Ai,k          Ai,k      1+( -1)
                                                                  SH,k AF,k            AF,k       1+( -1)
                                                          >                                                 ,   (10)
                 SH,k Ai,k          Ai,k                          SH,k AF,k            AF,k
                          -1                      -1
                    
                   1++( -1)
                                           
                                     1++( -1) 33
where Ai,k  Ai,k            / h Ah,k          . This inequality provides three insights into
specialization. First, just like with opportunity costs, the impact of migration on trade
specialization in equation (10) is ambiguous and captured by SH,k . Second, direct comparison
of expressions (9) and (10) reveals that autarky opportunity costs do not fully determine
specialization, since the term Ai,k is absent from the costs inequality (9). The reason is that,
with free migration, region i competes with other regions in its own country for the same
workers, and the relative payments this region can offer depends on its sales. As opposed to
autarky, having a high productivity relative to the rest of the country under free trade --i.e.,
a high Ai,k -- attracts a larger labor supply and reduces marginal costs. Thus the relation
between autarky opportunity costs and free trade specialization could even be overturned if
a region is relatively productive in a crop when compared in isolation to F , but not relative
to the rest of the country. Third, since aggregate knowledge SH,k is shared by all regions
in Home, it does not shape comparative advantage nor trade flows across regions within the
same country.
    Turning to country-wide specialization, when internal migration costs are prohibitively
high, autarky opportunity costs fully determine aggregate specialization, just as in the re-
gional case (see Appendix Equation (57)). Specifically, the Home economy specializes in
exporting sector k if a weighted average of its autarky marginal costs is low enough.
    But under free internal migration, RBEHF,kk > 1 is equivalent to
                                                       ( -1)           -1         ( -1)          -1
                                ( -1)
                                               1+( -1)  1+( -1)                  1+( -1)  1+( -1)
                     SH,k                  iH Ai,k     Ai,k                     SF,k     AF,k
                               1+( -1)

                                                    ( -1)           -1
                                                                            >     ( -1)          -1
                                                                                                        .       (11)
                     SH,k                          1+( -1)       1+( -1)         1+( -1)      1+( -1)
                                           i H   Ai,k          Ai,k             SF,k       AF,k

Expression (11) shows that aggregate knowledge SH,k also shapes aggregate specialization
-- an aggregation result that follows from the fact that every region within Home has equal
access to knowledge. Migration again has an ambiguous impact on comparative advantage,
now in the aggregate. If, on average, labor was initially allocated to regions where labor
  33
   The exponent of Ai,k in Ai,k increases in . As we let    workers become homogeneous and therefore
more elastic to wage differences across regions. In this limit, the competition for workers has its largest effect
on marginal costs.


                                                           20
productivity is low, migration will undo that correlation, and amplify relative productivity
differences. More broadly, as in Courant and Deardorff (1992) an uneven distribution of
labor can generate comparative advantage; the difference is that in our framework it comes
from the assignment of a single factor across heterogeneous regions (rather than two factors
across homogeneous regions).


4.4   A Sufficient Statistic
To interpret our quantitative results, we introduce a statistic that summarizes the impact
of migrants on specialization. We return to our framework where both location and activity
are worker's choices, but focusing on a small open economy.

Proposition 1. Assume that Home is a small open economy, and that k =  , k =  k . The
change in specialization when migration to region i becomes prohibitively costly, µij,k  ,
j = i is given by:
                          XiF,k /XiF,l                        (1- )(1- )
                                         = (Eii,k /Eii,l )- 1++(1- )(-1) ,
                          XF F,k /XF F,l
where Eij,k is the share of workers from i in j s effective labor force in activity k , i.e.,
Eij,k = Eij,k /Ej,k , and z
                          ^ denotes proportional changes in variable z .

    The proposition shows that the relative share of domestic workers in total effective labor
supply is a sufficient statistic for the impact on specialization of limiting migration from
all other regions. This result is analogous to the well-known result by Arkolakis, Costinot,
and Rodriguez-Clare (2012) on the gains from trade. In our model, exposure varies across
crops and regions for two reasons. The first is worker heterogeneity, which makes workers
with higher knowledge si,k account for a larger share of effective employment in destination-
activity pair j, k . The second is migration costs that are origin-destination-activity specific.
Without these two forces, exposure shares are equalized within region j , and migration has
no impact on intersectoral specialization.
    The results of this section provide a sharp characterization of the role of migration costs
in shaping comparative advantage and trade patterns But there are two caveats in their
application. First, observed changes in migration costs are finite. Second, sectors have
different trade elasticities, while land and intermediate-input intensities are additional drivers
of comparative advantage. Bearing such caveats in mind, we deploy these insights throughout
the rest of the paper, which quantitatively evaluates the impact of observed changes in
migration costs.




                                               21
5        Taking the Model to Brazilian Data
To simulate the impact of the migration to the West, we need to measure production and
technology parameters, trade and migration costs, and worker heterogeneity. We map the
model to Brazil's economy in 1950, 1980, and 2010, thus setting a time period to 30 years.
We thus start early enough to observe the transformation of Brazil due to the March, but
within the constraints imposed by data quality and availability. In this section, we provide
a summary of our calibration and results, but first we describe the additional features that
we introduce in the model to bring it to the data.34


5.1      The Quantitative Model
Relative to the model presented in the last section, we add three elements. First, we bring in
two-tiered CES preferences: agents choose first how much to consume of services, agriculture,
and manufacturing (s = S, A, M ), with an elasticity of substitution  , and then choose
how much to consume of each activity within the agricultural sector, with an elasticity
of substitution of A . Second, we introduce a CES technology in which farmers combine
efficiency labor and land, with an elasticity of substitution  and land intensity shifter k .
Third, we endogeneize the supply of land by allowing local governments to produce land,
using a decreasing returns technology that requires final output.. The profits from land
development are rebated to farmers proportionally to their wages. The productivity of the
technology used by local governments is bj and the elasticity of land supply to land rents is
 .35


5.2      Calibration
5.2.1     Worker heterogeneity

The preference dispersion parameter, , and the worker productivity parameter,  , map to
the reduced-form elasticities we estimated in Fact 3. Using equation (5), our model relates
the income of migrants to the employment in the origin as follows:

                        log (incomeij,kt ) = I      I                      I
                                             j,kt + ij,t +  log Li,kt-1 + uij,kt .                    (12)

To motivate the error uI
                       ij,kt , we posit measurement error in income. The fixed effects corre-
spond to I                     I
         j,kt =  log wj,kt , ij,t = log Li,t-1 --if knowledge depends on relative employment
    34
     In Appendix E, we include a thorough description of our calibration algorithm.
    35
     We abstract from other forces common in the spatial economics literature, such as amenities or produc-
tivity spillovers, to provide a clear evaluation of the new mechanisms in this paper.


                                                    22
shares -- but also absorb systematic components of measurement error in income.
   Analogously, we substitute equation (12) into (6) to obtain our regression for activity
choice:

                          log Lij,kt = L      L                      L
                                       j,kt + ij,t +  log Li,kt-1 + uij,kt ,                     (13)

where the fixed effects correspond to L                                              L
                                         ij,t = log Li,t-1 -  (log µij,t + log it ), j,kt = (log wj,kt
- log Pj,t ), and uL
                   ij,kt captures a unmeasured component migration flows or of migration costs
orthogonal to the other observables and fixed effects (e.g. as in Eaton and Kortum, 2002).
Our thus model gives a structural interpretation to Fact 3, and show that the estimated
coefficient I in regression (3) measures  , while coefficient W in regression (2) measures
 .
    The estimates for  range between 0.023 and 0.083, and the implied values for  range
between 1.58 and 3.26. Using quite different strategies, a few recent papers have estimated
similar values of , which controls the elasticity of migration with respect to real wages. For
example, using migration data for Brazil, Morten and Oliveira (2016) estimate a value of 1.9
and, using migration data from China, Tombe and Zhu (2019) find values between 1.2 and
1.6.36 Since  is new to our theory, in contrast, there is no direct benchmark with which to
compare it. But our results are comparable to those of sectoral scale economies (Antweiler
and Trefler, 2002; Bartelme, Costinot, Donaldson, and Rodr´         iguez-Clare, 2019) and of the
effect of city size on productivity: de la Roca and Puga (2017). Henceforth, we set  = 2
and  = 0.04. In robustness analysis, we also consider   {0, 0.083}.

5.2.2   Trade Costs

We need to calibrate trade costs between regions for each activity and period, which gives a
total of 134 × 134 × 13 × 3 parameters. Given the trade data we have available, this requires
us to parameterize trade costs. Akin to Ramondo, Rodr´     iguez-Clare, and Sabor´
                                                                                 io-Rodr´
                                                                                        iguez
(2016), we assume for i = j , that ij,kt = 1 and, for i = j , that

                                           1   T
                                               ij              1             1   1-T
                                                                                   ij
                               0           t                   t             t
                     ij,kt =   t   (distij )        kt (dporti ) (dportj )              ,        (14)

where Tij is a dummy variable that equals one if i and j belong to same country and zero
otherwise, distij is the travel distance between i and j , and dportij is the minimum travel
distance to the nearest port (for j = F , we set dportj = 1).
  36
    As expected, our elasticities of migration to wages are larger than those in Artu¸
                                                                                     c, Chaudhuri, and
McLaren (2010) and Caliendo, Dvorkin, and Parro (2019), who study migration at a higher frequency than
we do.


                                                     23
                   0
    We calibrate t   to match the observed share of intra-regional trade in total domestic
trade in Brazil. In particular, we construct sH Xss /XHH , where Xss are sales of state s
to itself, and XHH are sales of Brazil to itself. We target a domestic trade ratios of 0.7 for
                                                     0                                    1
1950, 0.65 for 1980, and 0.60 for 2010, which gives t  of 0.08, 0.42 and 0.58. We choose t  so
that the model matches the empirical elasticity of trade flows between states with respect to
distance. For 2010, the OLS estimate of this elasticity is 1.05; for 1980, 1.25, and for 1950,
                            1
2.5, which translates into t  of 0.22, 0.25, and 0.52 respectively. Lastly, we calibrate kt to
match Brazil's trade with the rest of the world.

5.2.3   Technology and Preferences

As for technology, we set the share of value added k to 0.30 for manufacturing, 0.55 for
agriculture and 0.6 for services according to the aggregate share of value added in the World
Input-Output Database. For non-agricultural activities, we set k = 0. For agriculture,
we set  = 0.5, which is the mid-value between Costinot, Donaldson, and Smith (2016),
who assume perfect complementarity between land and labor ( = 0), and a Cobb-Douglas
production function ( = 1), as in Restuccia, Yang, and Zhu (2008). Our main specification
sets k = 0.21 for all agricultural activities based on Dias Avila and Evenson (2010), thus
allowing for Heckscher-Ohlin forces between agriculture and manufacturing. In gauging the
strength of this channel, we experiment with their input cost-shares, separating crops from
cattle (0.17 and 0.32, respectively). Lastly, we set the land supply elasticity  to 1.5.37
    As for preferences, we set  to 0.4 based on Comin, Lashkari, and Mestieri (2015), a
to 2.5 according to Sotelo (2020), k in agriculture to 9.5, and k for other sectors to 5.5
following Caliendo and Parro (2015).38
    Having calibrated trade costs, technology and preferences, we follow the model-inversion
logic laid out by Allen and Arkolakis (2014) and calibrate Aj,kt to match observed gross
output and bj,t to match observed agricultural land use.

5.2.4   Migration Costs

With an eye toward counterfactuals, we extract a state-state component from migration
costs, and break down the remainder into a state-state-activity component and geographic
component that operates across meso-regions. Formally, we assume, for i = j , that µij,kt = 1
  37
     There is some discussion in the literature about the right elasticity of land supply over long periods
of time. We pick a number in the range between Costinot, Donaldson, and Smith (2016) and Gouel and
Laborde (2018).
  38
     We adjust preference shifters (aH,kt and aF,kt ) to match country-level apparent consumption in each
activity.



                                                    24
and, for i = j , that

                                           1   M
                                               ij                         1              1   1-M
                                                                                               ij
                                         µ
                   µij,kt = µ0
                             t (distij )            µss ,t µss ,kt (dcapi )µ (dcapj )µ                     (15)

where M ij is an indicator for whether i and j belong to the same state, µss ,t is a symmetric
interstate migration cost (i.e., µss ,t = µs s,t ), and dcapi is the travel distance between region
i and the state capital of i. As such, workers have to pass through the capital to access
meso-regions in other states.39
    To recover µss ,t , based on our parameterization in equation (15), we use OLS to estimate
the following equation:

                               log (Lss ,kt ) = s,t + s ,kt + µ
                                                              ~ss ,t +        ss ,kt ,                     (16)

where s,t and s ,kt are destination-activity and origin fixed effects, µ     ~ss ,t  - log (µss ,t )
and ss ,kt is an error term.40 Given our estimates of µss ,t , we adjust µ0
                                                                          t in the model to match
the share of workers living in their meso-region of birth and µss ,kt to match the migration
of workers between states and activities. We set µ1 to 0.05, which controls the elasticity of
migration costs with respect to distance, based on Bryan and Morten (2019).41


5.3    The March to the West as seen Through our Model
Table 4 presents selected descriptive statistics of our calibration. Each panel highlights a
different type of exogenous driver that can generate migration of workers across Brazilian
regions in our model: migration costs, productivity, and trade costs.
    Panel (a) shows that domestic migration costs declined sharply between 1950 and 1980,
in line with what we expect, given Brazil's large-scale public investments in transportation
infrastructure.42 Migration costs from the East to the West declined the most, a two-thirds
  39
     This formulation, often referred to as hub-spoke, allows us to aggregate migration flows and run gravity
equations in a theoretically consistent manner (see Appendix E). Although in our model and data an obser-
vation is a meso-region, note that we target state-state-activity flows in this calibration. The reason is these
data have a higher level of aggregation, which makes it less likely that we wrongly infer infinite migration
costs from sampling zeros.
  40
     Appendix E shows how to derive expression (16) using (15). Our estimates of µss ,t are also strongly
correlated with the Head and Ries index, which is a common measure of trade cost based on gravity models,
but applied to aggregate migration flows between states (Lss ,t = k Lss ,kt ).
  41
     Using our calibrated values for µ1 , the reduced form elasticities generated by our model at the state level
are comparable to the elasticities estimated in Morten and Oliveira (2016). We find an elasticity of state to
state migration flow with respect to distance of -1.36, whereas Morten and Oliveira (2016) find a coefficient
of -1.16.
  42
     To compute the measures of migration cost discussed in this section, we remove µss ,kt from µij,kt , since
µss ,kt can be interpreted as sectoral wedges that are not related to geography. Results are qualitatively the


                                                        25
reduction, but migration costs within the West and within the East also declined substan-
tially. Figure 5 correlates our estimates of the symmetric component of migration cost
(µss ,t ), recovered from the fixed effects from equation (16), with distance between states.
Reassuringly, migration costs are strongly correlated with distance, even though we do not
use any measure of distance in our estimation of µss,t . Consistent with increased government
investment to deepen ties between the East and the West, this correlation drops over time
as shown in Panel (a). To benchmark our migration costs with previous literature, we note
that our migration cost estimates are comparable with the ones obtained in Tombe and Zhu
(2019), who find an overall migration cost between provinces in China of 25 circa 2000.
    Panel (b) shows the evolution of productivities, Ai,kt , in the West relative to the East.
The West's agricultural productivity caught up and surpassed that of the East--a reason
for the mismatch between labor allocation and productivity that we discussed in Section
4.3. For soybeans, specifically, the upward trend in relative productivity is in line with the
research efforts from EMBRAPA to increase soybean productivity in the West in the 1970s.
Panel B also indicates that the productivity of the land supply sector, as measured by bj,t ,
increased from 1950 to 2010 in the West relative to the East, which is consistent with the
government's increasing efforts to facilitate land settlement and acquisition in the West.
    Panel (c) shows that our calibration also captures Brazil's increasing trade openness
through a reduction of international trade costs. Domestic trade costs also declined and
became less sensitive to distance, in line with the transportation policies that fostered East-
West trade integration.
    Put together, these results paint a clear picture of the forces that produced the March.
Starting in the 1950s, a series of shocks dramatically increased the West's agricultural pro-
ductivity across the board, especially in new crops such as soybean and corn. In response
to concomitant reductions in East-West migration costs, and taking advantage of these pro-
ductivity shocks and of the West's relative abundance of land, Eastern migrants sorted
throughout the West and fueled its expansion into domestic and foreign markets.


6     The Quantitative Impact of Migration on Trade
In this section, we evaluate the quantitative importance of migration as a driver of trade
specialization. Motivated by the Brazilian government's domestic integration policies, we
ask: What would have happened if these policies, as they pertain to migration costs, had
never been enacted? We examine a counterfactual economy in which migration costs between
the East and the West remain at their 1950 levels, while all other exogenous shocks evolve as
same if we incorporate µss ,kt into µij,kt .


                                               26
in the baseline economy. We then examine how worker heterogeneity and Heckscher-Ohlin
forces shape these main results. The discussion that follows focuses on our cumulative results
for 2010, but our partial results for 1980 are contained in Appendix Figure A.6.
    In the data, the share of employment in the West rose from 6.9 percent in 1950 to 15
percent in 2010. In our counterfactual economy, it only rises to 10.6 percent. Under this
metric, migration costs account for 56 percent of the migration to the West. This shows that
migration costs are a powerful driver of the allocation of population over space, although
other factors, including productivity, land supply, and trade costs shocks, also played a
critical role.


6.1    The Impact of Migration Costs on Specialization
Figure 6 plots, on the vertical axis, counterfactual changes in specialization across regions
in the West, relative to the rest of the world, using manufacturing as a reference (i.e., we
use our RBE index).43 The horizontal axis shows, for each region and activity relative to
manufacturing, the baseline share of workers born in the West in total effective labor supply
of that region-activity. With Proposition 1 in mind, the smaller this baseline share, the more
exposed is the region-activity pair to a reduction of immigration from the East, compared
to manufacturing.
    We highlight three patterns from this figure. First, most region-activity pairs fall below
zero on the vertical axis, meaning that reductions in migration costs shifted trade towards
agriculture and away from manufacturing. Second, although soybean production is the most
affected activity with specialization shifting often by more than 50 percent, the impact is
also large for other, more traditional activities. Third, there is a strong relation between
exposure to migration and changes in specialization --suggesting that the intuitions from
Proposition 1 carry over to this more general counterfactual. In sum, migration costs are a
key driver of regional comparative advantage.
    In Figure 7, we aggregate these regional changes for the West and for Brazil. Panel
(a) confirms that the decline of migration costs led to a marked expansion of the West's
agriculture relative to manufacturing. It also shows that the agricultural activities that are
more exposed to East migrants in the West are the ones that expanded the most due to
migration (recall Fact 2). Counterfactual specialization relative to the baseline is 58 percent
lower for soy and about 35 percent lower for beef and corn. In addition, among the activities
that benefited most from migration in the West are some traditional crops, such as coffee
  43
     The exposures in the East to migrants from the West are much lower in general, as suggested by Figure
4. This means that the vast majority of our aggregate results follow from the regional changes we discuss in
this section.


                                                    27
and cacao. However, as Panel (b) shows, this had little impact on the specialization of
Brazil as a whole. The reason is that, although these traditional crops grew in the West, the
West's share in the aggregate production of these traditional crops is minimal. In contrast,
aggregate counterfactual drops in soy and cattle specialization are large (29 and 25 percent)
and follow, to a large extent, the evolution of the West's agriculture.44
    Appendix Figure A.7 shows that internal migration, induced by changes in migration
costs, also accounts for up to 30 percent of the country-wide observed evolution of spe-
cialization in soy, cattle, and corn between 1950 and 2010 (or 27 percent of the observed
evolution of the export shares over the same period). For the West, migration accounts for
almost twice as much.
    In sum, through a large and heterogeneous reallocation of workers across activities and
regions, migration cost reductions had a large impact on Brazil's production costs relative
to the rest of the world and drove large changes in Brazilian agricultural specialization.


6.2     Quantifying the Margins of Comparative Advantage
We now turn to measure the contribution of factor intensity and worker heterogeneity to
our results. To do so, we recalibrate the model under several specifications and compute the
same counterfactual scenarios in which migration costs remain at their 1950 levels.

6.2.1   Factor Proportions

In our baseline calibration, agriculture is the only activity that uses land in production, so
Heckscher-Ohlin forces operate only between manufacturing and agriculture. In Figure 8 we
compare our baseline results to those in a model that recognizes that land intensity varies
within agriculture between crops and cattle. Doing so mitigates the impact of migration on
cattle specialization--almost 1.3 p.p. in the aggregate, or 5.3 percent lower. For most other
agricultural activities, the impacts are also modestly smaller.
    Underneath these aggregate counterfactual changes, East and West respond in opposite
directions. In unreported results, we find for the West as a whole a 17 percent smaller
counterfactual drop in cattle specialization, while for all other crops we observe modest
increases. The reason is that, in this new calibration, land commands a larger value-added
share in cattle, compared to other agricultural activities (0.33 vs 0.17). Hence the direct
impact of a labor shortfall on marginal costs is lower for cattle than for crops. Because
the land supply is not perfectly elastic, in equilibrium the price of land declines, which also
  44
    Cotton responds strongly to migration costs shocks both in the West and in the aggregate. As Table 1
showed, however, it is relatively unimportant in the aggregate.



                                                  28
favors land-intensive activities the most. For the East, we obtain opposite results because
that region experiences a counterfactual labor-supply increase. The aggregates in Figure 8
average regional changes according to importance of each region in the exports of each crop.

6.2.2   Worker Heterogeneity I: Impact on Specialization

Proposition 1 suggests that migration operates through variation in effective-labor exposure
across regions and activities. With the exception of sector-specific migration costs, µss ,kt , in
our model the only force generating sorting is origin-specific worker heterogeneity, si,kt . To
assess the importance of worker heterogeneity for the impact of migration, we recalibrate our
model in steps. First, we modify our base calibration to target origin-destination labor flows
and, separately, employment by activity and region.45 This first step removes the sorting
across activities that comes purely from µss ,kt (i.e., we replace µss ,kt with µss ,t and µs ,kt ).
In the second step, we recalibrate the model by additionally setting  = 0, which shuts down
sorting completely (yielding exposure Eii,k /Eii,l = 1 for any k and l).
    Starting with the West, Figure 9 (a) plots, for each crop, the counterfactual aggregate
change in specialization in our baseline calibration and compares it to those in these two
new calibrations. Completely eliminating sorting dramatically affects specialization across
the board. Among crops in which the baseline impact of migration is large, we observe largest
effects on soybean specialization, which drops by about 42 percent relative to our baseline,
but the effect is also sizable for cacao, coffee, and beef (40, 21, and 10 percent). Focusing
again on soy, about one-third of the effect of sorting comes from worker heterogeneity, as
opposed to migration costs. We conclude that knowledge, and sorting more generally, was
critical in the differential expansion of agricultural activities in the West.
    Turning to Brazil as a whole, the role of knowledge is most quantitatively important
for soybean: absent sorting, the impact of migration on specialization would be about a 29
percent smaller and, again, about one-third of this reduction is due to knowledge. Repeating
these exercises with  = 0.083 (Appendix Figure (A.10)) essentially retains the total role of
sorting unchanged, but increases the importance of knowledge heterogeneity, which moves
from one third to one half.

6.2.3   Worker Heterogeneity II: Steady state implications

We now exploit the dynamic structure of our model to examine how, matching exactly the
same data in 1950, 1980, and 2010, the paths of the economy would diverge in the long run
  45
    An indication of the importance of this mechanism is that, in our baseline calibration, a regression
of effective labor flows across origins and destination-activity pairs, Lij,k , against skill heterogeneity, si,k ,
accounts for 55 percent of the variation in 2010 and 32 percent in 1980.


                                                        29
with different values of  .46 We find that Brazil's agricultural transformation is far from
complete. Export specialization in soybean continues to intensify, as do this crop's export
and revenue shares; meanwhile all other crops ­ among them cattle and corn ­ become less
important. Aggregate export and revenue shares of soybeans continue to grow and settle
about 15 p.p. and 1 p.p. higher in the presence of worker heterogeneity, i.e., slightly more
than double their 2010 levels.
    The endogenous adjustment of knowledge, si,k , underlies these results: On the one hand,
migration makes worker knowledge available to all regions; on the other hand, in the presence
of migration costs, knowledge rises disproportionately in high-employment regions, because
workers are more likely to stay there. As Figure 10 shows, these forces play out most promi-
nently in the case of soy, for which the elasticity of international specialization to relative
productivity increases by 0.32 percentage points (8 percent). This outcome is explained by
the fact that soy is a large-employment activity and, moreover, this employment is concen-
trated in a few regions. Thus, the reallocation of knowledge quantitatively reinforces natural
advantage differences.47


7     Migration, Comparative Advantage, and the Gains from
      Trade
To complete our evaluation of the impact of migration on international trade, we assess
how it affects the gains from trade (hereafter, GFT). In our model, a natural way to study
counterfactual changes in welfare is to focus on the expected utility attained by a person
born in region i, i .48 We proceed in four steps. First, we show that, with only one activity,
there is an ex-ante sufficient statistic to compute each region's "full" GFT, i.e., the losses from
shutting down trade with every other region. Second, we highlight that migration produces
two new channels for these GFT: one related to the effects of migration on regional terms of
trade and another related to the changing value of migration opportunities. Third, we show
   46
      To obtain the steady state, we simulate the economy forward, keeping all exogenous productivity, trade,
migration, and land wedges constant at their 2010 levels, until period to period changes in wages and employ-
ment are negligible. Although dynamics are long-lived, the largest part of the steady-state transformation
occurs rapidly: the half-life of the the differential between the  = 0.04 and  = 0 calibrations is only 2
periods.
   47
      Appendix Figure A.9 collects all our results for changes in specialization at the regional and aggregate
levels, both in 2010 and the steady state, for a specification that removes the scale effects of knowledge, that
                                
is, si,k = s
           ¯ (Li,kt-1 /Li,At-1 ) and shows that this choice makes little quantitative difference.
   48
      Using this metric, we compute GFT as the welfare costs of autarky or 1 -  ^ i , where ^ i is the proportional
change in welfare from going to autarky (see Costinot and Rodr´        iguez-Clare, 2015). The results in this
section complement the approach in Galle, Rodr´    iguez-Clare, and Yi (2017) in which workers sort based on
productivity heterogeneity and geographic mobility frictions do not play a prominent role.


                                                        30
quantitatively that migration and comparative advantage are key drivers of the full GFT
across regions. Lastly, exploiting the results built in the previous steps, we investigate how
the March to the West influenced Brazil's gains from trading internationally, which we will
refer to as the "international" GFT. To obtain the analytical results presented in this section,
we return to our simplified model in which land is not a productive factor. We focus again
on 2010, but Appendix Figure A.8 shows that our conclusions hold also for 1980.


7.1    Gains from Trade with One Activity
We start with a result that, following directly from the definitions of i and of trade shares
ii , highlights that changes in expected utility depend on changes in real wages in all regions
to which workers can migrate; these changes, in turn, can be computed using observed
regional trade shares.

Proposition 2. Using observed trade shares, one can compute the losses from full trade au-
tarky, i.e. ij  ,i = j , as

                                                                                   1/
                                                                     
                                    ^ B B,A =
                                                               ij ii( -1)
                                                                                        ,                    (17)
                                      i
                                                        j


where ij are observed migration shares and ii are observed domestic expenditure shares,
and where "B " denotes baseline and "B, A" denotes trade autarky starting from B .

    Absent migration, i.e. when ii = 1 and ij = 0 for any j = i, equation (17) collapses
to the canonical formula for the GFT (see Arkolakis, Costinot, and Rodriguez-Clare, 2012).
The next proposition relates the GFT starting in our baseline to those in a situation where
migration across regions is not allowed.49

Proposition 3. For region i, the autarky losses in the baseline economy ^ B B,A and the
                                                                          i
                      ^ N N,A
no-migration economy i         are related by the following equation
                                                                                                    1/
                                                                                                    
                                                                                             
              ^ B B,A       - ^ N N,A
                                                                                    B
                                                                                                    
                                                                                            ( -1)
              i       =ii Ti  i                            +                  ij    jj              
                                                                                                         ,   (18)
                                                                       j =i                         
                                domestic contribution
                                                               migration opportunities contribution

                      1/(1- )
           B   N
where Ti = ii /ii               .
  49
   Bonadio (2020) studies the direct impact of international migration on welfare, highlighting how it
impacts market access for receiving regions.


                                                           31
    The first thing to note is that two components contribute to the baseline losses from
full autarky.50 The first component is the losses from autarky that would occur without
migration,   ^ i , whose weight is given by the fraction of workers who stay in i, ii . The
coefficient Ti corrects for the fact that migration, by itself, worsens the terms of trade for
regions that receive workers. The second component measures the contribution of migration
opportunities: Additional welfare losses also arise from migration destinations in which real
wages drop when there is no trade. Note that if region i is a large receiver of migrants --
and hence Ti is small -- the losses from autarky tend to be smaller in the baseline economy
than in the economy without migration, and so migration attenuates the losses from autarky
(i.e., migration reduces the gains from trade).


7.2    Gains from Trade with Multiple Activities
We now return to our baseline simulation to study the welfare cost of autarky quantitatively.
We emphasize that the forces we have uncovered in Section 7.1--which state how migration
opportunities shape the full GFT with one activity--carry over to a model with multiple
activities. Namely, (i) changes in real wages in other regions contribute to the GFT, and (ii)
migration by itself induces changes in local real wages via changes in the terms of trade.51
    With multiple activities, these migration-related forces interact with comparative advan-
tage. For one thing, larger proportions of workers sort into region-activity combinations
with high efficiency relative to the rest of the world, governing the initial ij,k shares. For
another, comparative advantage activities tend to experience larger reductions in real wages
from going to trade autarky.
    Figure 11 (a) presents the full GFT. The gains are large, (on average 26 percent), but
also vary substantially across regions. Using equation (18), we can compute the share of the
full GFT accounted for exclusively by migration opportunities (i.e., the welfare loss from real
wage losses in migration destinations).52 Figure 11 (b) plots this share against the fraction of
  50
     We continue to write changes in real wages as a function of domestic trade shares ii although the first
term is not directly observable, to both keep the symmetry with equation (17) and emphasize that some of
these components are directly observable.
  51
     Dix-Carneiro and Kovak (2017) have shown that exposure to a trade liberalization shock has protracted,
negative effects across Brazilian labor markets. Our results in this section show that negative outcomes in a
local labor market also impact welfare for workers who could potentially migrate to that labor market.
                                     
  52
     That is, we set T -   ^ N N,A      equal to 1 in Equation (18) and divide by the full GFT. Appendix D
                     i      i
shows the equivalent of expression (18) in a model with many activities, which we use to make these calcu-
lations. Although a decomposition such as (18)--which exactly links welfare losses in the two scenarios--is
not available in a model with multiple activities, one can still easily separate the contribution of migration
opportunities to the total gains from trade, as we do in this exercise. The correction term T adds little
quantitatively to our results. The average Ti- across meso-regions is approximately 1.01 with a standard
deviation of 0.06.


                                                     32
people leaving each region. The contribution of migration opportunities ranges from minimal
to, for a large number of regions, almost the full losses from trade, with an average of 61
percent. The migration-opportunity contribution is correlated with the fraction of people
who leave when migration is available, 1 - k ii,k , as one expects from Equation (18). But
the correlation is far from perfect, which highlights that comparative advantage and regional
heterogeneity are also key determinants of the importance of migration opportunities. Since
the West tends to receive workers from the East, the migration-opportunity contribution is
smaller on average for the former than the latter (49 percent and 62 percent; see Panel (c)).
This share is particularly low in large urban centers in the East and expanding agricultural
regions in the West.
    To assess the direct impact of comparative advantage on the full GFT, we compute the
ratio of the GFT in a model with one activity relative to a model with multiple ones.53
As panels (d) and (e) show, the contribution of multiplicity of activities to the GFT is
strongly associated with comparative advantage in agriculture relative to the rest of the world
(measured as autarky relative price indexes). For many regions in the West, in particular,
including heterogeneity across activities almost doubles the GFT. Since it is inherently a
local characteristic, comparative advantage operates chiefly by strengthening the response
of local real wages to trade (i.e., the domestic component in equation (18)), and less so by
shifting migration opportunities (the second component in equation (18)).
    Lastly, we study in Panel (f) how migration and comparative advantage interact to deter-
mine the GFT. On the y-axis, we measure how the contribution of migration opportunities
changes, when going from a one-activity model to one with multiple activities. On the x-axis
we measure again the GFT with many activities relative to the GFT with one activity. The
figure shows a clear negative relation, with a slope of -0.51, which means that the larger the
role of comparative advantage in the GFT, the smaller the share of migration opportunities
in the GFT (relative to a one activity model). Hence, although migration opportunities
create further gains from trade in a many-activity model (relative to a one activity one),
these further gains do not rise as fast as the additional gains coming from domestic markets.


7.3    The Impact of East to West Migration on the International GFT
Having established the contribution of different economic mechanisms in the case of full
GFT and full migration autarky, we now return to our main counterfactual and study the
international GFT. We concentrate on the core mechanisms and provide additional discussion
in Appendix F.
  53
     We calculate the one-sector losses using equation (17). Levchenko and Zhang (2016) perform a similar
comparison underscoring the quantitative importance of comparative advantage.


                                                   33
    Figure 12 (a) maps the international GFT across regions. For Brazil as a whole, the
international GFT are 5.0 percent, reflecting that it is a relatively closed economy. Within the
country, nevertheless, there are regions for which international trade is crucial, and limiting
it can cut down welfare by as much as 11 percent. Panel (b) presents the impact of limiting
East-West migration on the gains from international trade. The average international GFT
drops by a modest 3.1 percent (0.15 percentage points out of the 4.9 percent baseline), but
again, across regions, the differentials range from -19 to 7 percent. The impact of migration
is particularly large for the Central-West region, which hosts a large production share of
Brazil's new export activities, and which also received the majority of Eastern migrants. We
now proceed to disentangle the forces behind these international GFT differentials.
    Echoing our previous results, we begin by computing the contribution of East-West mi-
gration to international GFT in our baseline economy. Across regions, on average 22 percent
of the international GFT are associated with East-West migration opportunities. In the
counterfactual economy, these opportunities are not available to workers, which tends to
lower the international GFT across the board.
    To understand the regional variation in Panel (b), the interaction between migration
and comparative advantage is key. Consider first what happens to real wages in each re-
gion. From Fact 2, we know that Eastern workers sort disproportionately into agriculture
when they migrate to the West and, especially, the Central-West. This means that East-
ern migrants sort according to the West's international comparative advantage, which makes
Western sales more reliant on international markets, rather than domestic ones. In the West,
therefore, the drop in real wages from going to international trade autarky is larger in the
baseline, when migration is allowed. The exact opposite happens (i) in a few regions in the
northeast--which also have a comparative advantage in agriculture relative to ROW, but
instead receive the Eastern agricultural workers in the no-migration counterfactual--and (ii)
in the manufacturing regions in the Amazon, such as Manaus. In the rest of the East, be-
cause changes in labor supply are small, these effects are quite muted. Finally, note that
an additional consequence of limiting migration is to make local real wages, relative to the
ones associated with migration opportunities, have a larger weight in the expected welfare
of workers born in each region.
    Putting these forces together, we conclude that the international GFT in high-employment
regions in the East were not greatly affected by migration, which explains why aggregate
GFT are insensitive to it. But the large heterogeneity we observe across other regions is
driven by how migration interacts with the forces of comparative advantage.




                                              34
8    Conclusions
Labor allocation within a country shapes regional and aggregate comparative advantage. In
the Brazilian experience, the decline in East-West migration costs started in 1950 was an
important driver of the March to the West and, as we showed in this paper, encouraged the
development of new industries, such as soy, cattle, and corn, ultimately helping to transform
Brazil's agriculture. Key to these new developments was that workers from the East, where
these commodities were already being produced, took advantage of rapid productivity growth
in new sectors in the West through migration.
    Previous research--including ours--often takes comparative advantage as an unchanging
feature of the world. This paper shows that comparative advantage evolves to reflect the
way migration interacts with, and sometimes amplifies, natural advantage. We have also
shown how policies to improve spatial labor mobility complement other policies whose im-
pact is localized, such as boosting regional productivity, or country-wide, such as tariffs, to
determine their ultimate impact.


References
  ~ o, R. (2015): "Worker heterogeneity, wage inequality, and international trade: Theory
Ada
 and evidence from brazil," Unpublished paper, MIT.

Allen, T., and C. Arkolakis (2014): "Trade and the Topography of the Spatial Econ-
 omy," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(3), 1085­1140.

Allen, T., and D. Atkin (2016): "Volatility and the Gains from Trade," Working Paper
 22276, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Allen, T., and D. Donaldson (2020): "Persistence and Path Dependence in the Spatial
 Economy," .

Alvarez, F., and R. J. Lucas (2007): "General equilibrium analysis of the Eaton-Kortum
 model of international trade," Journal of Monetary Economics, 54(6), 1726­1768.

Amann, E., C. Azzoni, and W. Baer (2018): The Oxford handbook of the Brazilian
 economy. Oxford University Press.

Antweiler, W., and D. Trefler (2002): "Increasing Returns and All That: A View
 from Trade," American Economic Review, 92(1), 93­119.



                                              35
Arkolakis, C., A. Costinot, and A. Rodriguez-Clare (2012): "New Trade Models,
 Same Old Gains?," American Economic Review, 102(1), 94­130.

Arkolakis, C., S. K. Lee, and M. Peters (2018): "European Immigrants and the
 United States' Rise to theTechnological Frontier in the 19th Century," .

    c, E., S. Chaudhuri, and J. McLaren (2010): "Trade Shocks and Labor Adjust-
Artu¸
 ment: A Structural Empirical Approach," American Economic Review, 100(3), 1008­45.

Baer, W. (2001): Brazilian Economy, The: Growth and Development: Growth and Devel-
 opment. ABC-CLIO.

Bahar, D., and H. Rapoport (2016): "Migration, knowledge diffusion and the compar-
 ative advantage of nations," The Economic Journal.

Balassa, B. (1965): "Trade liberalisation and revealed comparative advantage 1," The
 manchester school, 33(2), 99­123.

Bartelme, D. G., A. Costinot, D. Donaldson, and A. Rodr´           iguez-Clare (2019):
 "The textbook case for industrial policy: Theory meets data," Discussion paper, National
 Bureau of Economic Research.

Bazzi, S., A. Gaduh, A. D. Rothenberg, and M. Wong (2016): "Skill Transferabil-
 ity, Migration, and Development: Evidence from Population Resettlement in Indonesia,"
 American Economic Review, 106(9), 2658­2698.

Becker, S. O., I. Grosfeld, P. Grosjean, N. Voigtlander, and E. Zhuravskaya
 (2020): "Forced migration and human capital: evidence from post-WWII population trans-
 fers," American Economic Review, 110(5), 1430­63.

Bird, J., and S. Straub (2020): "The Bras´   ilia experiment: The heterogeneous impact of
  road access on spatial development in Brazil," World Development, 127, 104739.

Bombardini, M., G. Gallipoli, and G. Pupato (2012): "Skill Dispersion and Trade
 Flows," American Economic Review, 102(5), 2327­2348.

Bonadio, B. (2020): "Migrants, Trade and Market Access," .

Browder, J. O., M. A. Pedlowski, R. Walker, R. H. Wynne, P. M. Summers,
 A. Abad, N. Becerra-Cordoba, and J. Mil-Homens (2008): "Revisiting theories of
 frontier expansion in the Brazilian Amazon: a survey of the colonist farming population
 in Rondonia's post-frontier, 1992­2002," World Development, 36(8), 1469­1492.

                                           36
Bryan, G., and M. Morten (2019): "The aggregate productivity effects of internal mi-
 gration: Evidence from indonesia," Journal of Political Economy, 127(5), 2229­2268.

Buera, F. J., and E. Oberfield (2016): "The Global Diffusion of Ideas," Working Paper
 21844, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Burchardi, K. B., T. Chaney, and T. A. Hassan (2019): "Migrants, Ancestors, and
 Foreign Investments," Review of Economic Studies, 86(4), 1448­1486.

Bustos, P., B. Caprettini, and J. Ponticelli (2016): "Agricultural productivity and
 structural transformation: Evidence from Brazil," American Economic Review, 106(6),
 1320­65.

Bustos, P., J. M. Castro Vincenzi, J. Monras, and J. Ponticelli (2020): "Indus-
 trialization without Innovation," .

Cai, J., N. Li, and A. M. Santacreu (2019): "Knowledge Diffusion, Trade, and Innova-
 tion across Countries and Sectors," .

Caliendo, L., M. Dvorkin, and F. Parro (2019): "Trade and Labor Market Dynamics:
 General Equilibrium Analysis of the China Trade Shock," Econometrica, 87(3), 741­835.

Caliendo, L., and F. Parro (2015): "Estimates of the Trade and Welfare Effects of
 NAFTA," Review of Economic Studies, 82(1), 1­44.

Cardoso, M., and A. Ramanarayanan (2019): "Immigrants and Exports: Firm-level
 Evidence from Canada," .

Chor, D. (2010): "Unpacking sources of comparative advantage: A quantitative approach,"
 Journal of International Economics, 82(2), 152­167.

Comin, D. A., D. Lashkari, and M. Mestieri (2015): "Structural change with long-run
 income and price effects," Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Cosar, A. K., and P. D. Fajgelbaum (2016): "Internal Geography, International Trade,
 and Regional Specialization," American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 8(1), 24­56.

Costinot, A., and D. Donaldson (2014): "How Large are the Gains from Economic
 Integration? Theory and Evidence from U.S. Agriculture, 1880-1997," .

Costinot, A., D. Donaldson, and I. Komunjer (2012): "What Goods Do Countries
 Trade? A Quantitative Exploration of Ricardo's Ideas," Review of Economic Studies,
 79(2), 581­608.

                                          37
Costinot, A., D. Donaldson, and C. Smith (2016): "Evolving Comparative Advantage
 and the Impact of Climate Change in Agricultural Markets: Evidence from 1.7 Million
 Fields around the World," Journal of Political Economy, 124, 205­248.

Costinot, A., and A. Rodr´   iguez-Clare (2015): "Chapter 4 - Trade Theory with Num-
 bers: Quantifying the Consequences of Globalization," in Handbook of International Eco-
 nomics, ed. by K. R. Elhanan Helpman, and G. Gopinath, vol. 4 of Handbook of Interna-
 tional Economics, pp. 197 ­ 261. Elsevier.

Courant, P. N., and A. V. Deardorff (1992): "International Trade with Lumpy
 Countries," Journal of Political Economy, 100(1), 198­210.

Crosby, A. W. (1973): The Columbian Exchange. Biological and Cultural Consequences
 of 1492, no. 2 in Contributions in American Studies. Greenwood.

de la Roca, J., and D. Puga (2017): "Learning by working in big cities," The Review of
  Economic Studies, 84(1), 106­142.

Deardorff, A. V. (2005): "How Robust is Comparative Advantage?," Review of Interna-
 tional Economics, 13(5), 1004­1016.

Dias Avila, A. F., and R. E. Evenson (2010): Total Factor Productivity Growth in Agri-
 culture: The Role of Technological Capital vol. 4 of Handbook of Agricultural Economics,
 chap. 72, pp. 3769­3822. Elsevier.

Dix-Carneiro, R., and B. K. Kovak (2017): "Trade Liberalization and Regional Dy-
 namics," American Economic Review, 107(10), 2908­46.

Eaton, J., and S. Kortum (2002): "Technology, Geography, and Trade," Econometrica,
 70(5), 1741­1779.

        (2012): "Putting Ricardo to Work," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 26(2), 65­90.

Fajgelbaum, P., and S. Redding (2014): "External Integration and Internal Devel-
  opment: Evidence from Argentina, 1870-1914," NBER Working Papers 20217, National
  Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Farrokhi, F., and H. S. Pellegrina (2020): "Global Trade and Margins of Productivity
  in Agriculture," Working Paper.

French, S. (2017): "Revealed comparative advantage: What is it good for?," Journal of
 International Economics, 106(C), 83­103.

                                           38
Fujiwara, T., E. Morales, and C. Porcher (2020): "A Revealed-Preference Approach
 to Measuring Information Frictions in Migration," .

Galle, S., A. Rodr´ iguez-Clare, and M. Yi (2017): "Slicing the Pie: Quantifying the
 Aggregate and Distributional Effects of Trade," Working Paper 23737, National Bureau of
 Economic Research.

Gouel, C., and D. Laborde (2018): "The Crucial Role of International Trade in Adapta-
 tion to Climate Change," Working Paper 25221, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Grossman, G. M., and G. Maggi (2000): "Diversity and Trade," American Economic
 Review, 90(5), 1255­1275.

Haberler, G. (1930): "Die Theorie der komparativen Kosten und ihre Auswertung f¨
                                                                               ur die
 Begr¨
     undung des Freihandels," Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv, pp. 349­370.

Hanson, G. H., N. Lind, and M.-A. Muendler (2015): "The Dynamics of Comparative
 Advantage," Working Paper 21753, National Bureau of Economic Research.

IIASA/FAO (2012): Global Agro-ecological Zones (GAEZ v3.0). IIASA, Laxenburg, Austria
  and FAO, Rome, Italy.

Ireland, C. T., and S. Kullback (1968): "Contingency tables with given marginals,"
  Biometrika, 55(1), 179­188.

                                    iguez-Clare (2016):.
Kucheryavyy, K., G. Lyn, and A. Rodr´

Levchenko, A. A. (2007): "Institutional Quality and International Trade," Review of
  Economic Studies, 74(3), 791­819.

Levchenko, A. A., and J. Zhang (2016): "The evolution of comparative advantage:
  Measurement and welfare implications," Journal of Monetary Economics, 78(C), 96­111.

Lind, N., and N. Ramondo (2018): "Innovation, Knowledge Diffusion, and Globalization,"
  Working Paper 25071, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Manova, K. (2013): "Credit Constraints, Heterogeneous Firms, and International Trade,"
 Review of Economic Studies, 80(2), 711­744.

Marcolan, A. L., and M. C. Espindula (2015): Caf´
                                                e na Amaz^
                                                         onia. Bras´
                                                                   ilia, DF:
 Embrapa, 2015.



                                          39
Morrow, P. M. (2010): "Ricardian-Heckscher-Ohlin comparative advantage: Theory and
 evidence," Journal of International Economics, 82(2), 137­151.

Morten, M., and J. Oliveira (2016): "The Effects of Roads on Trade and Migration:
 Evidence from a Planned Capital City," NBER Working Paper, 22158.

Nehring, R. (2016): "Yield of dreams: Marching west and the politics of scientific knowl-
 edge in the Brazilian Agricultural Research Corporation (Embrapa)," Geoforum, 77, 206­
 217.

Nunn, N. (2007): "Relationship-Specificity, Incomplete Contracts, and the Pattern of
 Trade," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(2), 569­600.

Ohnsorge, F., and D. Trefler (2007): "Sorting It Out: International Trade with Het-
 erogeneous Workers," Journal of Political Economy, 115(5), 868­892.

Olmstead, A. L., and P. W. Rhode (2008): "Creating Abundance," Cambridge Books.

Olmstead, A. L., and P. W. Rhode (2011): "Adapting North American wheat produc-
 tion to climatic challenges, 1839­2009," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
 108(2), 480­485.

Pellegrina, H. S. (2020): "Trade, Productivity, and the Spatial Organization of Agricul-
 ture: Evidence from Brazil," Working paper.

Porcher, C. (2020): "Migration with Costly Information," .

Porteous, O. (2019): "High Trade Costs and Their Consequences: An Estimated Dynamic
 Model of African Agricultural Storage and Trade," American Economic Journal: Applied
 Economics, 11(4), 327­66.

         (2020): "Trade and agricultural technology adoption: Evidence from Africa," Jour-
  nal of Development Economics.

Ramondo, N., A. Rodr´      iguez-Clare, and M. Sabor´     io-Rodr´ iguez (2016): "Trade,
 domestic frictions, and scale effects," American Economic Review, 106(10), 3159­84.

Redding, S. J. (2016): "Goods trade, factor mobility and welfare," Journal of International
 Economics, 101(C), 148­167.

Redding, S. J., and E. Rossi-Hansberg (2017): "Quantitative Spatial Economics,"
 Annual Review of Economics, 9(1), 21­58.

                                            40
Restuccia, D., D. T. Yang, and X. Zhu (2008): "Agriculture and aggregate produc-
 tivity: A quantitative cross-country analysis," Journal of Monetary Economics, 55(2),
 234­250.

Sabel, C., E. Fernandez-Arias, R. Hausmann, A. Rodriguez-Clare, and
  E. Stein (2012): Export Pioneers in Latin America.

Scoville, W. C. (1951): "Minority migrations and the diffusion of technology," The Journal
  of Economic History, 11(4), 347­360.

Silva, J. S., and S. Tenreyro (2006): "The log of gravity," The Review of Economics
  and statistics, 88(4), 641­658.

Sotelo, S. (2020): "Domestic Trade Frictions and Agriculture," Forthcoming Journal of
  Political Economy.

Sviatschi, M. M., et al. (2018): "Making a narco: Childhood exposure to illegal labor
  markets and criminal life paths," Manuscript, Department of Economics, Princeton Uni-
  versity. https://rpds. princeton. edu/sites/rpds/files/sviatschi making-a-narco march2018.
  pdf.

Tombe, T. (2015): "The Missing Food Problem," American Economic Journal: Macroeco-
 nomics, 7(3), 1­33.

Tombe, T., and X. Zhu (2019): "Trade, migration, and productivity: A quantitative
 analysis of china," American Economic Review, 109(5), 1843­72.

Vargas, G. (1938): A nova politica do Brasil - Vol V.

Vasconcelos, J. R. d. (2001): "Matriz do fluxo de com´
                                                     ercio interestadual de bens e
 servi¸
      cos no Brasil-1999," Discussion paper.

Villas Bo ^ as, O., and C. Villas Bo^ as (1994): "A marcha para o oeste," A epop´
                                                                                eia da
  Expedi¸
        c~ao Roncador-Xingu. S~
                              ao Paulo: Editora Globo.

Watson, A. M. (1983): "Agricultural innovation in the early Islamic world; the diffusion
 of crops and farming techniques, 700-1100," .

World Bank (1981): Brazil: Northwest Region Development Program: First Phase,
 Agricultural Development and Environmental Protection Project: Staff Appraisal Report.
 World Bank.


                                            41
9     Figures and Tables

Figure 1: The Share of Population, Agricultural Land Use, and Agricultural Value Added
in Brazil's West

                                                   Population




                                                                                                                                           45
                           15
                                                   Agricultural land
                                                   Agricultural VA




                                                                                                                                           Agricultural VA and land (%)
                           13




                                                                                                                                                                   35
                    Population (%)
                            11




                                                                                                                                                        25
                    9




                                                                                                                                           15
                           7
                           5




                                                                                                                                           5
                                     0

                                           0

                                                  0

                                                         0

                                                                0

                                                                       0

                                                                              0

                                                                                     0

                                                                                            0

                                                                                                   0

                                                                                                          0

                                                                                                                 0

                                                                                                                        0

                                                                                                                               0

                                                                                                                                      0
                               7

                                            8

                                                   9

                                                          0

                                                                 1

                                                                        2

                                                                               3

                                                                                      4

                                                                                             5

                                                                                                    6

                                                                                                           7

                                                                                                                  8

                                                                                                                         9

                                                                                                                                0

                                                                                                                                       1
                            18

                                         18

                                                18

                                                       19

                                                              19

                                                                     19

                                                                            19

                                                                                   19

                                                                                          19

                                                                                                 19

                                                                                                        19

                                                                                                               19

                                                                                                                      19

                                                                                                                             20

                                                                                                                                    20
Notes: This figure shows the evolution of the the share of population, agricultural land, and agricultural
value added in the West. The "March to the West" was first announced in 1937, but changes are only
noticeable after 1950, following a series of economic and policy shocks.



    Figure 2: The Spatial Distribution of the Brazilian Population between 1950 and 2010
                  (a) 1950                                                         (b) 1980                                            (c) 2010




Notes: The figure shows the division of Brazil into meso-regions, which is the geographic unit used in our
analysis. The red contour shows the meso-regions we classify as the West. The West incorporates the North
and the Central-West, two of the five official regions defined by the Brazilian statistical bureu (IBGE).




                                                                                     42
 Figure 3: The Share of Workers in the West who were born there, by Economic Activity

                                                                                                                                                                                                 1.00




                           1
                                                        1980                                                                                                                                  0.95
                                                        2010
           Share of workers from the West                                                                                                                                            0.84
                                                                                                                                                                          0.79
                                     .8                                                                                                                                      0.77 0.78
                                                                                                                                                         0.70      0.72
                                                                                                                                0.69         0.69
                                                                                                       0.63        0.65
                                                                                                               0.58       0.58                      0.59
                             .6



                                                                                            0.56    0.56                                                        0.56
                                                                                               0.53
                                                                                                                                       0.47
                                                                                     0.41
                    .4




                                                           0.32         0.33
                                               0.30
                                            0.29
                                                      0.22
           .2




                                                                               0.15
                                                                  0.07
                           0


                                             y


                                                       o


                                                                   e


                                                                                n


                                                                                             e


                                                                                                     e

                                                                                                               re


                                                                                                                           g


                                                                                                                                        e

                                                                                                                                                    es


                                                                                                                                                                rn

                                                                                                                                                                          ag


                                                                                                                                                                                    na


                                                                                                                                                                                               o
                                            so


                                                      ca


                                                                  ffe


                                                                               tto


                                                                                            an


                                                                                                   ttl




                                                                                                                          rin


                                                                                                                                       ric




                                                                                                                                                                                              cc
                                                                                                              tu




                                                                                                                                                            co
                                                                                                                                                    ic




                                                                                                                                                                       of

                                                                                                                                                                                na
                                                                                                 ca




                                                                                                                                                                                          ba
                                                 ca


                                                             co


                                                                          co


                                                                                       rc




                                                                                                                      tu
                                                                                                           ul




                                                                                                                                               rv




                                                                                                                                                                       st

                                                                                                                                                                               ba
                                                                                     ga




                                                                                                         ric


                                                                                                                    ac




                                                                                                                                             se




                                                                                                                                                                                         to
                                                                                                                                                                     re
                                                                                                      ag


                                                                                                                   uf
                                                                                 su




                                                                                                               an
                                                                                                            m


Notes: The figure presents the fraction of the total employment in the West, in each year, comprised by
workers born in the West.


Figure 4: The Share of Workers born in the West across all States in 2010, for Selected
Activities
                                             (a) soy                                                       (b) cattle                                                        (c) corn




Notes: Each region is a state. For each state we present the fraction of the total employment in 2010
comprised by workers born in the West. The red contour shows the states we classify as the West.




                                                                                                                43
                  Figure 5: Correlation between Migration Costs and Distances

                                                                           1950




                                                                 7.5
                         Log of migration cost (symmetric component)
                                                                           2010




                           1.5    2.5    3.5    4.5
                                                .5   5.5    6.5




                                                                       5          5.5   6       6.5         7      7.5   8   8.5
                                                                                            Log of travel distance


Notes: This figure plots the log of the symmetric component of migration costs between states (µss ,t ) against
travel distance between states. We estimate migration costs based on the fixed effects of gravity equations
of migration in which we use no information on distance. Lines in the figure show the best linear fit and the
95 percent confidence interval.


Figure 6: Regional Exposure to Migrants and Changes in Export relative to Manufacturing
(2010), across regions in the West




Notes: Each observation is a region-activity pair in the West. The horizontal axis measures the fraction of
effective employment comprised by workers born in the West itself. The vertical axis shows the counterfactual
change in exports relative to manufacturing (as a percentage of the baseline exports). The size of the markers
represents the magnitude of exports in the baseline as a fraction of Brazil's total in that activity.




                                                                                                 44
Figure 7: Counterfactual Change in Exports relative to Manufacturing (2010), for the West
and Brazil as a whole
                    (a) West                                                    (b) Brazil




Notes: Panel (a): Each observation is an activity aggregate. The horizontal axis measures the fraction of
effective employment in the West comprised by workers born in the West. The vertical axis measures the
counterfactual change in West's exports relative to manufacturing (as a percentage the baseline value). The
size of the markers represents the magnitude of exports in the baseline. Panel (b): Each observation is
an activity aggregate. The horizontal axis measures the fraction of effective employment born in the same
region where they work, weighted by baseline exports. The vertical axis shows the counterfactual change in
Brazil's exports relative to manufacturing (as a percentage of the baseline value). The size of the markers
represents the magnitude of exports in the baseline.




                                                    45
                Figure 8: Measuring the Contribution of Factor Intensity (2010)




Notes. Each row is an activity aggregate at the country level. The hollow circle presents the counterfactual
change in export specialization in our baseline calibration. The cross presents the counterfactual change in
specialization in a calibration that gives different land intensities in production to crops and cattle. The
numbers represent the drop in the second counterfactual relative to the baseline, in percentage terms.




                                                    46
                   Figure 9: Measuring the Contribution of Knowledge (2010)
                                               (a) In the West




                                                (b) In Brazil




Notes. Each row is an activity aggregate. The hollow circle presents the counterfactual change in export
specialization in our baseline calibration, which targets state-state-employment flows. The cross presents the
counterfactual change in specialization in a calibration that targets state-state migration and state-activty
employment, separately. The square corresponds to a calibration in which, additionally,  = 0. For each
activity we present the drop in each calibration relative to the baseline, as a percentage. Panel (a) presents
results for the West; Panel (b), for the Brazil as a whole.




                                                     47
          Figure 10: Measuring the Contribution of Knowledge in the Steady State




Notes. Each panel corresponds to a crop and each observation is a region in Brazil. In each panel, the
horizontal axis is the productivity of that crop (relative to manufacturing and relative to ROW, in logs) and
the vertical axis shows exports in that crop (relative to manufacturing and relative to ROW,in logs). For
each calibration we also report regression lines.




                                                     48
    Figure 11: Comparative Advantage, Migration, and the Losses from Autarky (2010)
                                                             (b) The Contribution of Migra-
                  (a) The Full Gains from Trade              tion Opportunities




                  (c) Mapping the Contribution               (d) Comparative Advantage
                  of Migration Opportunities                 and the GFT




               (e) Mapping the Contribution                (f) The Interaction of Migration and
               of Comparative Advantage                    Comparative Advantage




Notes: All simulations are for 2010 and each observation is a region. Panel (a) shows the welfare losses from
letting each region go to full trade autarky, as a percent of baseline welfare. Panel (b): The horizontal axis
the fraction of workers leaving that region in the baseline simulation. The vertical axis measures the ratio
of the welfare cost that results solely from migration opportunities (i.e. setting the domestic contribution
to zero) to the total costs and taking the ratio of ^ i . Panel (c): shows the vertical axis of Panel (b). Panel
(d): The vertical axis plots the ratio of the GFT with many activities to the GFT with one activity, both
as percent of baseline. The horizontal axis shows the autarky opportunity cost of manufacturing relative to
agriculture. Panel (e) shows the horizontal axis in Panel (d). Panel (f): The vertical axis is the same as in
in Panel (d). The horizontal axis shows the change in the contribution of migration opportunities in going
from a one-activity to a many-activity version of our model.
                                                      49
     Figure 12: The March to the West and the International Gains from Trade (2010)
     (a) The Gains from International Trade              (b) Counterfactual Changes in International GFT




Notes: Panel (a) shows for each region the gains from trade with the rest world, defined as the welfare cost
of prohibiting foreign trade only (but allowing domestic trade). Panel (b) subtracts the baseline gains from
trade from the gains from trade in the counterfactual scenario (no East-West migration).




                                                    50
             Table 1: The Evolution of Brazil's Trade Specialization (1950-2010)

                                     Brazil                  East     West     Exports (%)
                              1950     1980      2010        2010      2010     1950 2010
                               (1)      (2)       (3)         (4)       (5)      (6)    (7)
             corn             2.12     0.52      4.56        1.45     25.43     1.35   3.93
             beef             1.12     1.77      5.69        3.40     21.05     2.17   6.89
             soy              0.00    60.88     69.74       44.85    237.02     0.00 29.43
             cotton           9.41     0.72      3.28        2.16     10.83     6.23   1.79
             restofag         1.01     2.19      2.51        2.52      2.47    13.66 28.40
             sugarcane       18.82    27.91     52.28       57.32     18.36     5.70 16.13
             rice             0.19     0.07      0.43        0.48      0.06     0.44   0.56
             coffee         655.55   339.56    166.11      190.24      3.95    59.22   8.01
             cocoa          273.44   299.89     15.00       17.22      0.11     8.98   0.40
             tobacco          6.70    19.92     64.27       73.84      0.00     1.76   4.39
             banana           5.09     1.81      0.38        0.44      0.00     0.49   0.06
             agriculture      4.98     5.08      6.14        5.35     11.50    79.77 31.96
             mfg              1.00     1.00      1.00        1.00      1.00    20.23 68.04
Notes: Columns (1) through (3) present our index of bilateral specialization for each activity (relative to
manufacturing and relative to the rest of the world) for 1950, 1980, and 2010. Columns (4) and (5) present
the same index broken down by East and West of Brazil, for 2010. Columns (6) and (7) present the share of
each activity in Brazil's agricultural exports in 1950 and 2010.




                                                    51
      Table 2: The Relation between Farmers' Income, Choices, and Region of Origin
                                 OLS         OLS          OLS        PPML         PPML        PPML
                                 (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)
       a: Income (logs)
       Farmers in origin    0.016*** 0.023**            0.047***    0.045***    0.083***         -
                             (0.005)    (0.010)          (0.016)     (0.012)     (0.020)         -
       R 2                    0.342      0.702            0.729         -           -            -
       Obs                    6794       6794             5180        6794        5180
       b. Farmers in destination (logs)
       Farmers in origin    0.074*** 0.075***           0.101***    0.120***    0.131***     0.165***
                             (0.007)    (0.014)          (0.022)     (0.013)     (0.023)      (0.011)
       R 2                    0.183      0.751            0.774         -           -            -
       Obs                    7375       7375             5609        7375        5609        127950
       c. Worker heterogeneity parameters
                              4.625      3.260            2.148       2.666       1.578
                              0.016      0.023            0.047       0.045       0.083
       Dest-Act-Year FE         Y          Y                Y           Y           Y            Y
       Dest-Orig-Year FE                   Y                Y           Y           Y            Y
       Above Q1                                             Y                       Y
       Include zeros                                                                             Y
Notes: * / ** / *** denotes significance at the 10 / 5 / 1 percent level. Standard errors clustered at
the destination-crop-year level in parenthesis. The unit of observation is a destination-activity-origin-year
cell. Column 3 and 5 drop the sample in the bottom quartile in the distribution of the dependent variable.
"Farmers in origin" is the log of farmers in the same activity in the region of origin lagged by thirty years.
Column 6 includes zeros in all bilateral migration pairs for destination regions with at least one producing
farmer. Our sample excludes return migrants and non-migrants.




                                                     52
                                                                  Table 3: Parameter Values

     Parameter Description                                                    Source
     a. Preferences
     k                Armington Trade elasticities                            Caliendo and Parro (2015)
     A                Elasticity of substitution between agricultural goods   Sotelo (2020)
                      Elasticity of substitution between sectors              Comin, Lashkari, and Mestieri (2015)
     aHk,t , aF k,t   Preference shifters                                     Observed apparent consumption
     b. Technology
     k                Share of value added                                    WIOD
     k                Land-intensity                                          Dias Avila and Evenson (2010)
                      Elasticity of substitution between land and labor       Costinot, Donaldson, and Smith (2016) and Restuccia, Yang, and Zhu (2008)




53
                      Land supply elasticity                                  Costinot, Donaldson, and Smith (2016) and Gouel and Laborde (2018)
     Aj,t , bj,t      Supply shifters                                         Land use and Gross output
     c. Trade costs
     1
     t                Elasticity of trade cost with respect to distance       Reduced form trade elasticity
     0
     t                Intercept of trade cost                                 Domestic trade flows
     kt               International trade cost                                International trade flows
     d. Migration costs
     µ1               Elasticity of migration cost wrt to distance            Bryan and Morten (2019)
     µ0
      t               Intercept of migration cost                             Workers living in region of birth
     µss ,t           State-to-state migration cost                           Migration gravity equation
     µss ,kt          Residual migration shifters                             Migration flows between states and sectors
              Table 4: Description of the Parameters Recovered in the Calibration

                                                                                       Year
                                                                                  1950 1980         2010
                                                                                   (1)   (2)         (3)
      a. Migration costs
      Average migration costs                                                    33.62     20.49   18.38
      Migration costs within states                                               2.21      1.91    1.78
      Migration costs between states: East versus West                          103.04     42.61   37.84
      Migration costs between states: within the West                            60.85     24.36   21.45
      Migration costs between states: within the East                            58.04     29.41   26.19
      Elast. of migration costs w.r.t. travel distance                            1.00      0.80    0.72
      b. Productivity
      Productivity in manufacturing in the West relative to the East               0.48     0.75     0.82
      Productivity in agriculture in the West relative to the East                 0.95     1.25     1.56
      - Soybeans                                                                   0.40     1.86     1.67
      - Livestock                                                                  1.34     0.87     0.80
      - Corn                                                                       1.01     0.97     2.04
      Productivity of land supply in the West relative to the East                 0.31     0.52     1.31
      c. Trade costs
      Trade cost between Brazil and RoW - manufacturing                            8.83     5.13     3.96
      Trade cost between Brazil and RoW - agriculture                              9.70     5.42     4.06
      Elast. of trade cost w.r.t. travel distance                                  0.15     0.14     0.12
Notes: This table shows results from the calibration of the model. Migration costs are presented in terms
of its harmonic average. Productivity is averaged using employment weights. International trade costs are
averaged using trade-flow weights. The elasticity of migration cost with respect to travel distance is the
slope of a regression of the log of estimated migration costs between states against the log of travel distance.




                                                      54
