                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 THE EFFECTS OF NEGATIVE EQUITY ON CHILDREN'S EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES

                                         Vicki Been
                                         Ingrid Ellen
                                       David N. Figlio
                                        Ashlyn Nelson
                                        Stephen Ross
                                      Amy Ellen Schwartz
                                        Leanna Stiefel

                                       Working Paper 28428
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28428


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2021




We appreciate the financial support of the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation, and
are grateful to the Florida Department of Education for providing the confidential student-level
data used in this research. All opinions are our own and do not reflect the opinions of the Florida
Department of Education. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Vicki Been, Ingrid Ellen, David N. Figlio, Ashlyn Nelson, Stephen Ross, Amy Ellen
Schwartz, and Leanna Stiefel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
The Effects of Negative Equity on Children's Educational Outcomes
Vicki Been, Ingrid Ellen, David N. Figlio, Ashlyn Nelson, Stephen Ross, Amy Ellen Schwartz,
and Leanna Stiefel
NBER Working Paper No. 28428
February 2021
JEL No. I2,R3
                                         ABSTRACT
This study examines the effects of negative equity on children's academic performance, using
data on children attending Florida public schools and housing transactions from the State of
Florida. Our empirical strategy exploits variation over time in the timing of family moves to
Florida in order to account for household sorting into neighborhoods and schools and selection
into initial mortgage terms. In contrast to the existing literature on foreclosure and children's
outcomes, we find that Florida students with the highest risk of negative equity exhibit
significantly higher test score growth. These effects are largest among Black students and
students who qualify for free or reduced-priced lunch. We find evidence supporting two
underlying mechanisms: (1) consumption patterns suggest that families in negative equity may
reduce the impact of income losses on consumption by forgoing mortgage payments, and (2)
mobility patterns suggest that families exposed to high levels of negative equity may move to
schools that are of higher quality on average. While negative equity and foreclosure are
undesirable, the changing incentives in terms of mortgage delinquency may have helped families
manage the economic shocks caused by the great recession, as well as temporarily reduced the
housing market barriers faced by low income households when attempting to access educational
opportunities.

Vicki Been                                              Stephen Ross
New York University School of Law                       University of Connecticut
40 Washington Square South, 314H                        Department of Economics
New York, NY 10012                                      341 Mansfield Road, Unit 1063
vicki.been@nyu.edu                                      Storrs, CT 06269-1063
                                                        stephen.l.ross@uconn.edu
Ingrid Ellen
New York University                                     Amy Ellen Schwartz
Robert F. Wagner Graduate School                        Maxwell School of Citizenship
of Public Service                                       and Public Affairs
295 Lafayette Street                                    Center for Policy Research
New York, NY 10012                                      Syracuse University
ingrid.ellen@nyu.edu                                    426 Eggers Hall
                                                        Syracuse, NY 13244
David N. Figlio                                         amyschwartz@syr.edu
School of Education and Social Policy
Northwestern University                                 Leanna Stiefel
2120 Campus Drive                                       New York University
Evanston IL 60208                                       Robert F. Wagner Graduate School
and NBER                                                of Public Service
figlio@northwestern.edu                                 295 Lafayette Street
                                                        New York, NY 10012
Ashlyn Nelson                                           leanna.stiefel@nyu.edu
School of Public and Environmental Affairs
Indiana University
1315 E. Tenth St., Office 410D
Bloomington, IN 47405
ashlyn@indiana.edu
I.    Introduction

        The extraordinary increase in housing values early in the 2000s, followed by the bursting of the

housing bubble in 2006, led to large losses in housing wealth for many American families. Indeed, from

peak to trough, housing prices fell by an average of 34 percent across the nation, 1 and left over one quarter

of all households in negative equity (owing more on the mortgage than the value of the house) at the end

of 2009. 2 When combined with the resulting recession, these high levels of negative equity led to

unprecedented rates of mortgage delinquencies and home foreclosures in numerous metropolitan areas.

While markets in many areas began strengthening in 2012, over 10 percent of mortgages in 2016 were

still underwater. 3

        The plight of underwater households may extend well beyond household finances, affecting other

domains of family and individual well-being. For example, negative equity and the risk of foreclosure

have the potential to increase stress and reduce children's sense of security and stability. This study

examines the effects of negative equity, as measured by the loan-to-value or LTV ratio, on children's

academic performance. We apply a novel identification strategy to a unique dataset combining a statewide

panel of student data on children attending Florida public schools with housing transactions data from the

State of Florida for the years 2002 through 2011.

        Theoretically, negative equity could have positive or negative effects on families and children. On

one hand, large financial losses may lead to reduced consumption and change resource allocation decisions

within the family (Bostic et al., 2009; Disney et al. 2010; Case et al., 2013). Financial losses may create

stress between family members, affecting children's well-being and outcomes (Wood et al., 2012; Ananat


1
  Case Shiller - Standard and Poor's, Home Price Index Levels, Historical Price, available at:
http://www.corelogic.com/research/hpi/september-2013-hpi-national-historic-data.pdf
2 Core Logic Reports Negative Equity Decreases in First Quarter of 2012, available at

http://www.corelogic.com/about-us/news/asset_upload_file365_22192.pdf. Zillow estimates an even higher number:
15.7 million, or 31.4 percent, of all mortgaged residential properties in negative equity in the first quarter of 2012.
Zillow Negative Equity Report Quarter 1 2012, available at http://www.zillow.com/blog/research/reports/and
Zillow Negative Equity Report Quarter 3, 2013, available at
http://www.zillow.com/blog/research/2013/11/20/zillow-negative-equity-q3-2013/
3
  Zillow Negative Equity Report Quarter 3, 2016, available at https://www.zillow.com/research/q3-2016-negative-
equity-report-13954/
                                                          2
et al., 2011; Rege et al., 2011). Negative equity may trigger foreclosure, forcing families out of their

current residence and into new--and likely lower quality--schools and poorer neighborhoods (Been et

al., 2011; Comey & Grosz, 2011; Cordes et al., 2019; Kachura, 2012; Schwartz et al., 2017). Residential

and school mobility will have negative effects on student performance (Hanushek et al., 2004; Pribesh &

Downey, 1999; Pettit & McLanahan, 2003; Rumberger & Larson, 1998; Swanson & Schneider, 1999).

Renters also may face housing instability due to landlords entering into foreclosure (Johnson, 2010; Been

& Glashausser, 2009). 4     5



        On the other hand, negative equity may also produce some surprising benefits for children's well-

being. For example, negative equity may reduce a family's mobility because they would have insufficient

savings to pay the outstanding mortgage balance after their house is sold (Chan, 2001; Engelhardt, 2003;

Ferreira et al., 2010). 6 Thus, being underwater might actually benefit the household's children

academically by reducing mobility. Further, the long foreclosure timelines in many states, including

Florida, 7 may actually help some households in negative equity to maintain consumption levels in the face

of income losses through defaulting on their mortgage (Zhang, 2017). By contrast, households that

experience income losses with positive equity in their homes have a strong incentive to make their

mortgage payments and in normal times may reallocate scarce financial resources away from children in

order to do so.8 Finally, another potential positive impact of the price declines and negative equity is that

this widespread reduction in housing costs may have allowed poorer families, especially renters who did


4
  Desmond and Shollenberger (2015) show that evicted renters tend to move to poorer and higher crime neighborhoods than
voluntary movers. See Vásquez-Vera et al. (2017) for a review of the literature on the health effects of eviction.
5
  The Protecting Tenants at Foreclosure Act of 2009 (PTFA) occurs in the middle of our sample, but many have argued that
the PTFA was regularly violated in the years that followed (National Law Center on Homelessness and Poverty, 2012).
6
  As mentioned above, a great deal of descriptive evidence--and limited causal evidence--suggests that residential and
school moves can be detrimental to children's academic and social outcomes. See Schulhofer-Wohl (2012) and Gerardi
(2011) for alternative views on the question of whether negative equity reduces mobility, and Schwartz et al. (2017) for
recent evidence on mobility.
7
  Past research documents a strong, positive and monotonic relationship between LTV and delinquency (Bayer et al., 2016).
Further, at the end of 2011, the average time between the issuance of the first foreclosure notice and new ownership was over
1,000 days in New York and in New Jersey it was over 900 days. Florida boasted the third-longest foreclosure timeline, at
806 days (RealtyTrac, 2012).
8
  A large literature documents the positive effect of income on children's outcomes. For example, see Dahl and Lochner
(2012) on the impacts of EITC expansions; Berger and Black (1992) on the impacts of child care subsidies; and Morris et al.
(2001) on the impacts of welfare reform experiments.
                                                             3
not experience equity losses, to afford housing in wealthier neighborhoods with access to better schools.

In fact, Ihlanfeldt and Mayock (2018) find that racial segregation in Florida schools fell during the housing

crisis as housing prices fell in predominantly white neighborhoods.

        The empirical literature on the effects of the housing crisis has generally focused on the effects of

foreclosures, with several studies documenting a negative relationship between foreclosure and children's

outcomes. Been et al. (2011), Comey and Grosz (2011), and Kachura (2012) examine the mobility effects

of foreclosure and find that foreclosures often result in residential moves, which often take families to

different neighborhoods and different schools. Dastrup and Betts (2012) and Bradbury et al. (2013)

examine the effects of foreclosure notices in San Diego and Boston. Both find that students who

experienced a mortgage default scored lower on standardized tests and exhibited higher absenteeism.

Similarly, Swain (2013) finds that increases in county foreclosure rates over time lead to lower student

test scores in North Carolina counties. In related research, Currie and Tekin (2015) find that living in a

neighborhood that experiences an increase in foreclosures is associated with greater rates of emergency

room visits and hospitalization. 9

        The fundamental problem faced by any study that hopes to untangle the relationship between the

housing crisis and children's outcomes is that negative equity and foreclosure are influenced by the

attributes or choices of the family. For example, many studies document the role of subprime lending in

the foreclosure crisis (Mian & Sufi, 2009; Reid & Laderman, 2009; Gerardi & Willen, 2009), as well as

the systematic concentration of subprime lending in low-income and non-white neighborhoods and among

non-white borrowers (Mayer & Pence, 2008; Reid & Laderman, 2009; Fisher et al., 2010; Bayer et al.,

2018). In terms of negative equity, families choose where to live and the terms of their mortgage contract.

Families that faced large declines in housing prices or bought homes with little or no down payments pre-

crisis may be different from households that obtained mortgages with large down payments or lived in


9
 Also see Yilmazer et al. (2015) on the negative relationship between declines in housing prices during the Great Recession
and the psychological health of adult homeowners. Downing (2016) provides a complete review of the literature on health
impacts of the foreclosure crisis.
                                                             4
locations experiencing lower home appreciation rates prior to the crisis. Analyses presented later in this

paper show a strong correlation between household observables and both initial levels of LTV and

selection into housing markets with rapid housing price appreciation for three large counties in Florida.

         We address these endogeneity concerns by employing a reduced-form instrumental variables triple

difference identification strategy to estimate the effects of negative equity on children's academic

performance. Our empirical strategy accounts for the endogenous selection of households into

neighborhoods and school communities, as well as into the initial terms of their mortgage contracts. First,

we develop a proxy for the risk of negative equity (predicted LTV) based on county-level housing price

changes, the purchase quarter by county-level distribution of initial LTV ratio, and the timing of student

arrivals in the period leading up to the crisis. This proxy incorporates neither changes in housing prices at

the neighborhood level nor the individual borrower's original LTV ratio. Second, we focus on recent in-

movers to the state of Florida. Specifically, we use a sample of students who moved into the state before

the start of the housing crisis (in the 2003-04 through 2005-06 school years). Families who move from

out of state plausibly have less information than local movers about local housing markets, and their

locational (purchase) decisions are more likely to be driven by labor market opportunities, rather than by

an interest in housing market investment opportunities.

         Third, we estimate student outcome models that include initial school by current year, arrival

quarter by current academic year, and student fixed effects. 10 Our instrument varies at the county by

arrival/purchase quarter by current year level, and the fixed effects yield triple-differenced estimates. 11

The inclusion of student fixed effects subsumes county by arrival/purchase quarter and means that we

compare the test score growth for students exposed to different predicted LTV based on the quarter the

student arrived in the county. The inclusion of school by current year fixed effects subsumes county by


10
   Purchase quarter is the same as the quarter in which families move (arrive) to Florida, and we alternatively label the quarter
arrival or purchase.
11
   Schools are located within counties and all students in the same school are assigned to the same county so that initial
school by current year fixed effects absorb county by current year fixed effects. Student fixed effects capture arrival quarter
by county (or initial school fixed effects) because these outcomes are constant for the student over all years in the sample. We
also construct all current year fixed effects using academic (rather than calendar) years.
                                                               5
current year fixed effects and eliminates variation associated with simple comparisons of test score growth

between schools or counties, and the inclusion of arrival/purchase quarter by current year fixed effects

eliminates any unique, statewide secular trends in test score growth across cohorts of students moving inot

the state. Therefore, our model is identified by calculating differences in test score growth rates across

arrival cohorts and comparing these differences between counties with high and low levels of housing

price declines during the crisis.

       Florida provides a relatively unique and empirically appealing setting for examining this

phenomenon. Florida was hit hard by the Great Recession and was one of the states that saw the greatest

volatility in housing prices during the housing crisis. Metropolitan area housing prices rose by as much as

88 percent between the between the third quarter of 2003 and the second quarter of 2006 (our relevant

pre-period) and fell by up to 54 percent between the beginning of the crisis and the second quarter of 2011

(our sample period); see Figure 1. Florida is also one of a select group of states that provides longitudinal

student data across all school districts in the state from 2000 forward, and for which quality housing

transaction data are available that identify all liens used to purchase the home, allowing the calculation of

a combined loan-to-value ratio.

       In contrast to the existing literature that documents adverse effects of foreclosure on children's

education outcomes, we find that Florida students with the highest risk of negative equity exhibit

significantly higher test score growth. In fact, the relative test score gains are practically monotonic in the

predicted level of negative equity. These effects are largest among disadvantaged groups, such as Black

students and students who qualify for free or reduced-priced lunch. These effects are also largest in the

locations with the lowest initial housing prices, which are locations where non-white and low-income

households are most likely to enter the market for owner-occupied housing.

       The relationship that we uncover with our triple-difference model is also observed in simple

descriptive analyses examining later cohorts that bought in at a higher price level and so faced larger

losses. Comparing test scores across newcomer cohorts between 2003 and 2006 reveals that the most

                                                      6
recent cohorts exhibit the largest test score gains over time during the crisis; further, the across-cohort

differences are relatively small in counties with small shocks to housing prices and significantly larger in

the counties with the largest housing price shocks. Also, while there are large test score differences

between households that move into high- and low-shock counties, we find no trends in these differences

over cohorts. Our findings are robust to a wide variety of alternative specifications.

        We find evidence supporting two of the mechanisms discussed above. First, we find evidence

consistent with financially-constrained households in negative equity maintaining consumption levels by

skipping mortgage payments. We examine data from the Consumer Expenditure Survey during this period

and find that homeowners in Florida were better able than homeowners in other states to maintain their

expenditures as a share of income relative to renters. Further, while declines in housing wealth by

themselves are associated with reductions in consumption (Browning et al., 2013; Iacoviello, 2011), these

declines in consumption were mitigated among homeowners in states and years where the unemployment

rate was highest suggesting a reversal in the effects of housing price declines when households face

income shocks. Similar to our test score effects, these consumption effects are largest among homeowners

who were Black and who did not have a four-year college degree. Second, we also find evidence consistent

with families being able to move to neighborhoods with better schools. Specifically, we find that exposure

to high levels of predicted negative equity leads to moves between schools that raise school quality on

average, as measured by pre-determined Florida school report card grades. This second mechanism might

help explain the larger effects for Blacks given Ihlanfeldt and Mayock's (2018) finding of falling school

segregation in Florida during this time. 12

        While our analysis does not yield obvious policy prescriptions, we believe that the study offers

some important lessons. First, while a considerable literature documents the importance of income for



12
   Unlike the consumption mechanism, the effect of negative equity on school quality are similar in magnitude across student
race and income. However, the higher test score effects of negative equity for non-white and low-income students could still
arise if the same improvement in school quality has a larger effect on Black and free and reduced-price lunch students,
perhaps because these students experience lower quality schools on average and improvements in school quality matter more
at schools with the lowest initial quality.
                                                             7
children's outcomes, this study points to the large potential gains for children that might arise from

stabilization policies that help families weather shocks to income. This finding would seem to be

especially relevant given evidence on the especially large impacts of economic downturns on non-white

and low education workers (Hoynes et al., 2012) and important when considering recent eviction and

foreclosure moratoriums during the Covid-19 pandemic (Goodman et al., 2020; Benfer, 2020). Second,

the positive impacts associated with falling housing prices and increased access to higher quality schools

provide further evidence of the role housing markets can play in educational achievement (Rivkin, 1994;

Bayer et al., 2014).

II.    Methodology and Identification Strategy

       As noted above, the central challenge to identifying the impact of negative equity on student

academic performance is the endogenous selection of households into neighborhoods and school

communities, and into the initial terms of their mortgage contracts. Put simply, this selection means a

parsimonious regression model linking student performance to current LTV, negative equity, or

foreclosure is likely to yield biased impact estimates.

       We address this challenge through several strategies. First, we focus on a sample of new entrants

to the state of Florida under the premise that their housing location decisions are less likely to be driven

by housing price appreciation in local housing markets. Table 1 present the fraction of households by

reason for moving for households with children ages 6-11, as well as all households (including single

individuals) using the March Current Population Survey (CPS) from 1996 to 2007. Columns 1 and 2

present the fractions for moves into the state of Florida, and Columns 3 and 4 present the fractions for

within statae moves. For moves to Florida, job reasons are much more important, and moves related to

the housing market are much less important than for moves within Florida. This finding is especially true

for families with young school-age children: 54 percent of moves to Florida relate to job and only 14

percent relate to housing, as opposed to 16 and 63 percent, respectively, for within-state moves.



                                                     8
        A second way that our identification strategy limits bias is that we develop a proxy for risk of

negative equity, which does not depend upon either the endogenous change in housing prices at the

neighborhood level, or the individual borrower's endogenously chosen LTV (mortgage terms) at purchase.

Finally, we estimate the impact of predicted negative equity on student outcomes using a reduced-form

instrumental variables triple difference identification strategy.

A Proxy for Negative Equity

        We develop a proxy for the risk of negative equity for new students by predicting the household

LTV of the student's family, based upon the timing and destination of the student's move into the state.

We create this proxy for all students regardless of whether their family owns a home, because

homeownership is unobserved in the student data, as well as endogenous to family unobservables. 13

        We use Florida housing transactions data on sales prices and all lien amounts used for home

purchases to calculate the combined loan-to-value ratio (LTV) for each housing purchase. For

computational purposes, we measure the fraction of home purchases within five-point LTV bins (e.g., 0.5-

0.55 or 0.9-0.95) for each county c and purchase quarter-year p. 14 Put differently, we characterize the LTV

distribution non-parametrically for each county c by quarter and year the housing unit was purchased p as

the fraction of home purchases, j, falling in specific LTV bins. The fraction is measured as:

                                        = (-1 <   
                                                   )

where Fr represents the fraction of sales and  is the upper bound of each LTV bin b.

        Next we use a set of county-purchase quarter-year specific fixed effects ( ) within a hedonic

sales price model to create a county-level price index and to normalize LTVs over time and counties.




13 As noted earlier, we focus on students who are new to the state of Florida because their families are likely to have
relatively limited information about local housing markets and their location decisions are most likely to be motivated by
labor market opportunities within the area, rather than by housing market investment opportunities. To be clear, this
interpretation assumes that a household moves to the county in which their child's new school is located at approximately the
same time that the child becomes a student in the State of Florida for the first time.
14
   Results are insensitive to alternative specifications of bin number or size.
                                                             9
Specifically, we estimate a hedonic sales price model, using the population of home purchase transactions

in every county in Florida as follows:

                                                   =   +  + 

where j indexes housing units, c counties, and t purchase quarters (that is, quarter by year). 15  is the

logarithm of the sales price of house j in county c and quarter by year t, and  is a vector of that house's

attributes. We then construct a smoothed county-level price index ( ) for county c and quarter by year t

based on a moving average as:

                                                               (5 )
                                                        =
                                                                5 )
                                                               (01

where  5 is a five-quarter moving average of  centered on t.

         Then, for each purchase quarter and year, p, each academic year during the crisis, y, and county,

c, we create a measure of the average LTV for all relevant housing. To do so, we calculate the current

                                                           
LTV for all units in a bin as the midpoint of the LTV bin ( ) multiplied by the ratio of the current

                                                   
                                                                
                                                               
year price index to purchase quarter price index ( 
                                                    ) to adjust for changes in price levels. Note that we
                                                                


define academic years to run from the third quarter of one year to the second quarter of the next. 16 We

then calculate the average of the current LTV for that county, purchase quarter and year, and current

academic year, weighting by the county-purchase quarter bin frequencies,  , as follows:

                                                          
                                                    
                                                    
                                             =       
                                                    
                                                          =1




15
   The transactions data contain the sales price, the sales date, the amounts of up to three mortgages, and an indicator for
whether the transaction is arm's length. These data can be linked to a cross-sectional assessor's file that contains housing
attributes including the number of bedrooms, number of baths, number of square feet, age of structure, and property type at
the time that the data was purchased at the end of the first quarter of 2011. Arm's length purchases are dropped for all
analyses using the transaction data.
16
   While an academic year typically runs from September to June, the academic year that we define for these purposes runs a
full calendar year, but the quarters are aligned so that the third quarter of a traditional calendar year is the first quarter of an
academic year beginning in that calendar year, and the second quarter of the next calendar year is the last quarter of the
academic year.
                                                                10
where B is the number of bins and  is a fixed quarter during the current academic year, e.g. the quarter in

which standardized tests are administered.

Student Performance and the Triple Difference Identification Strategy

       We estimate a regression model relating student academic performance to predicted LTV and a

full complement of fixed effects that condition on unobserved differences across students, schools, and

years, and the timing and location of the student move into the state. The intuition of triple differences

models is often hard to convey, but the best way to see the identification is to consider the difference

between two difference-in-differences estimators. In this case, a simple difference-in-differences

estimator might involve comparing changes in students' standardized test scores (difference) between

students who moved to a county early in the crisis and those who moved into the county late in the crisis.

Those late-moving families lost substantially more equity between the date of home purchase and the

depth of the housing crisis (differences). While this variation is absorbed by the county by purchase quarter

fixed effects, the triple difference model will be identified in part because this resulting difference-in-

differences estimate is expected to be larger in the counties that experienced the greatest declines in

housing prices and the largest accompanying increases in predicted LTV across cohorts.

       We first link student educational outcomes (Y) to predicted LTV based upon the county of

residence implied by their initial school, the quarter and year in which they moved into that school from

out of state, which we match to the purchase quarter in the housing data, and the current academic year.

We also include a set of arrival quarter by current academic year fixed effects ( ), school (when first

observed in the state) by current year fixed effects ( ), and student fixed effects ( ), to implement

a triple difference identification strategy. Note that school by current year fixed effects ( ) subsume the

county by current year fixed effects, and student fixed effects ( ) subsume the county by arrival quarter

fixed effects. The resulting equation is

                              =  +  +  +  + 


where  represents the idiosyncratic variation in the equation.
                                                     11
       The fixed effects eliminate many possible sources of bias. The arrival quarter by current year fixed

effects  capture any heterogeneity specific to the performance in period y of students who arrived in

period p. As an example, there may be heterogeneity in the timing of how student test score performance

recovers from a move. We allow that heterogeneity to vary by move-in quarter so that each combination

of the quarter that a student moved into the school and the year in which they are tested has its own

intercept. Therefore, our estimates are not influenced by a spurious correlation between student recovery

from a move and the way in which the crisis developed and proceeded in Florida.

       The school by current year fixed effects,  , allow for non-parametric trends in the quality of

the school and the overall county environment. These fixed effects capture any direct effect of the crisis

and the following recession on the operation of each school, the performance of students in that school,

or the general labor market environment for the family.

       Finally, the student fixed effects,  , control for both the level of student performance and any

unobservables associated with the school to which the student moved initially and the arrival quarter and

year. For example, if parents with certain unobserved attributes were unable to afford to move into

expensive neighborhoods late in the pre-crisis period, but could afford to make such moves early in the

crisis, any effects of those static, unobserved attributes would be captured by the student fixed effects.

Thus, our estimated impacts are not biased by time-invariant unobserved differences in students or their

families.

III.   Data and Descriptive Statistics

       The analyses in this paper rely on a universe of statewide longitudinal student data provided by

the Florida Department of Education and housing transactions data obtained from Dataquick, Inc. Our

panel of students runs from 2002 through 2011, spanning much of the housing boom and bust. Florida is

one of a select group of states that collect longitudinal student data across all school districts from 2000

onward and for which quality housing transactions data are available. Further, unlike most other states,

students in Florida can be linked to a school as early as kindergarten, allowing us to observe students for
                                                    12
several years before the crisis and to observe their test scores in 3rd through 8th grades several years into

the crisis. 17 The housing transactions data report both sales prices and all lien amounts used for home

purchase, enabling the calculation of a combined loan-to-value ratio (LTV). To our knowledge, Florida is

the only state that meets all these data requirements, and as noted earlier Florida was affected heavily by

the housing crisis.

         The initial dataset is a panel of students for all schools in Florida, with one observation for every

grade between kindergarten and 8th grade during years 2002-2011. The sample contains quarterly

information on the school attended, test scores for grades 3-8, attendance, suspensions, race/ethnicity, and

free and reduced-price lunch status. We identify a subsample of children observed in grades 1-7 who are

new to the state (i.e., out-of-state movers) in academic years 2003-04, 2004-05, and 2005-06, where "new

to the state" is defined as not being observed in any school in the state in any previous academic year.

Our analysis sample includes one observation for every observed test score for those same students during

the 2006-07 through 2010-11 academic years, and students with no test scores during this period are

dropped from the sample. To simplify our analyses, we use the average of each student's math and reading

scores, although we also analyze effects on math and reading test scores separately. 18

         Table 2 illustrates the structure of this sample. The first column identifies a panel for each cohort,

or equivalently the academic year for which the student appears in the state education data. The second

column identifies the academic year in which tests scores are observed for inclusion in the analysis sample;

these years are associated with the rows in each panel. The third through the eighth columns represent the

student's grade when they first appeared in Florida schools, and the cells in these columns identify the

tested grades observed for each combination of cohort, academic year and student's initial grade in the

state. In total, 229,648 children moved in during one of these three years and remained in Florida public


17
  The use of kindergarten attendance, rather than 1st grade, raises the prospect of misclassification of new to the state 1st
graders who in fact resided in Florida, but either attended private kindergartens or did not attend kindergarten. However,
results are robust to dropping 1st graders and basing our sample only on students observed initially between 2nd and 8th grade.
18 The direction of the signs, and the significance of the findings generally are the same for math and reading. The
effects of negative equity generally are larger for reading scores than for math (see Table 6).
                                                              13
schools until the 2006-07 academic year, the first year in the analysis. Of these students, 192,513 were in

tested grades of 3-8 in 2006-07, and 174,248 (90.5%) of these students reported test scores in 2006-07.

Further, 67,113 of these newcomers were in tested grades in 2010-11, and 62,240 (93.7%) have test scores

in 2010-11. We also create a balanced panel of 41,218 students by selecting newcomers who appear in

tested grades for all five years of the analysis sample. This can only happen if students were in grade 1 in

the 2003-04 cohort, grades 1 or 2 in the 2004-05 cohort, or grades 2 or 3 in the 2005-06 cohort, or

equivalently students in 3rd or 4th grade in our first analysis year of 2006-07.

           We purchased housing transactions data for Florida from 1998 through the first quarter of 2011

from Dataquick, Inc. Dataquick provides information on all 1-4 family housing transactions in the state

during this time period. The data include the address of the housing unit, the date of the sale, the sale price,

the loan amounts for up to three liens recorded at the time of home purchase, and indicators for whether

each loan is an adjustable rate or fixed rate mortgage. The detailed property attributes include whether the

unit is a single family property, a multi-family unit, condominium, or mobile home with an owned lot; the

number of bedrooms and baths; the square feet of living space; age of the structure; and lot size. We use

these data to estimate county-level housing price indices, to calculate combined LTV ratios, and to create

a measure of expected LTV for each county, purchase (arrival) quarter and year and current academic

year. 19 As discussed above, the expected LTV in any academic year from 2006-07 to 2010-11 is based on

the county distribution of initial LTVs in each arrival quarter and year and the change in the county

housing price index between the arrival quarter/year and the current academic year. For most regressions,

the price index for the academic year is based on the first quarter of the calendar year, January to March,

when Florida tests are administered, but we also estimate models where the expected LTVs are based on

price indices between one and three quarters prior to testing.

           Table 3 shows the attributes of our sample of newcomer students overall and those of newcomers

to low, middle and high housing shock counties, which we partition into terciles by housing price


19
     Our results are not sensitive to the inclusion of condominiums, multifamily buildings, or mobile homes.
                                                               14
appreciation between the first quarter of 2002 and the second quarter of 2006. (Note that the number of

observations varies depending on the variable considered; there are more observations for suspensions

and absences than for test scores because suspensions and absences are observed in every grade but test

scores are only observed beginning with third grade.) Test scores are lower and the populations are more

disadvantaged among newcomers to the high-shock counties. The newcomers in the high-shock counties

tend to be less likely to be homeowners based on a constructed index that regresses homeownership on

free and reduced price lunch status and PUMA. These differences are driven by newcomers both residing

in Public Use Micro Areas with lower homeownership rates and being more likely to be free or reduced-

price lunch recipients. 20 Turning to the predicted LTV ratios at the bottom of Table 3, LTVs increase

dramatically for all cohorts between 06-07 and 10-11, but they start at much lower levels for the earliest

newcomer cohorts because those households gained the most equity in the run-up to the housing crisis.

Therefore, the earlier cohorts are exposed to much lower rates of negative equity during the housing crisis.

IV. Empirical Evidence on Identification

         In order to illustrate our concerns about the endogeneity of foreclosure and negative equity, we

use a sample of home purchase mortgages from 2004 to 2006 from Miami-Dade, Broward and Palm Beach

Counties, for which we have considerably more information about the homebuyers and their mortgages. 21

Tables 4 and 5 present key borrower attributes, such as race/ethnicity, income, age, and credit score

(Vantage score) by LTV and by housing price appreciation at the Public Use Microdata Area (PUMA)

level between the first quarter of 2002 and the second quarter of 2006. Table 4 indicates that mortgages

with high initial LTV's are associated with a higher share of homebuyers who are Black, higher share who

are Hispanic, as well as being associated with younger, lower income, and lower credit score borrowers.

Table 5 indicates that Black homebuyers, lower income households, and lower credit score individuals




20
   The likelihood of homeownership is based on homeownership rates from the 2006 American Community Survey (ACS)
using both PUMA and predicted eligibility for free and reduced-price lunch cells. We calculate eligibility using self-reported
income and family structure in the ACS.
21
   See Bayer et al. (2016) for more details on this sample.
                                                             15
were disproportionately represented among individuals moving into PUMAs with high rates of housing

price appreciation during the lead up to the crisis. These tables provide clear evidence that exposure to

negative equity and risk of foreclosure during the crisis are strongly associated with systematic mortgage

and location choices made by households.

       Our identification strategy addresses many of the concerns raised by the patterns shown in Tables

4 and 5. The prediction for negative equity is constructed so that it does not depend upon either the changes

in housing prices at the neighborhood level or the individual borrower's original LTV. The focus on recent

movers assures that student fixed effects capture both student-level unobservables and any factors

associated with the timing of when households moved into the neighborhood/school. The restriction of

the sample to new state residents limits the information that households had concerning local housing

markets and increases the likelihood that location decisions within Florida were driven by more general

labor market factors. The school by county by academic year fixed effects should absorb these factors.

       Further, we conduct several analyses to assure that relying on variation across newcomer cohorts

is unlikely to bias our analysis. Figure 2 presents graphs representing average student demographics on

race/ethnicity and free and reduced-price lunch status, by purchase cohort, i.e., the quarter and year when

the students are first observed in Florida Schools. The arrival cohort is presented along the horizontal axis,

with later arrival quarters represented further to the right. The graphed lines depict the percent of students

in our sample who are Black (solid), Hispanic (dashed), and who are eligible for free or reduced-price

lunch (short-dashed). Arrival cohort only seems to matter in terms of whether the newcomer was present

at the beginning of the school year (third quarter) or moved to the school in the middle of the school year,

as illustrated by changes in the share of students eligible for free or reduced-price lunch among the sample

of movers (and, to a lesser extent, the share of Black students). Other than changes in demographics

associated with the third quarter of each year when school begins, newcomer demographics are constant

across cohorts. This third quarter variation is captured by student fixed effects that subsume county by



                                                     16
purchase quarter effects and any unique time trends associated with this third quarter variation are

absorbed by the purchase quarter by current year fixed effects.

       Next, Figure 3 presents newcomer student test scores by purchase cohort for the full sample (solid

lines) and for subsamples in low (dotted line), medium (short-dashed line), and high (dashed line) price

shock counties. Figure 3 mirrors Table 3 in that significant test score differences exist between newcomers

both across arrival counties and across cohorts based on whether they arrived at the beginning of the

school year; however, for all three subsamples there is no time trend in test scores over newcomer cohorts.

In summary, the only systematic differences across arrival time that we observe in our sample is between

students who arrived at the beginning of the year and those who did not. Later in the paper, we demonstrate

that our results are robust to both subsamples of newcomers who were present at the beginning of the

school year, and subsamples of newcomers who were not.

       Figure 4 illustrates the identifying variation in our sample by plotting the cumulative density

distribution of predicted LTV in each year for our newcomer sample by predicted LTV in 2006-07 using

20-point LTV bins. The horizontal axis depicts predicted LTV in 2010-11. The cumulative density graphs

represent initial predicted LTV levels in 2006-07 for LTV below 0.5 (solid line), between 0.5-0.7 (dashed

line), between 0.7-0.9 (short dashed line) and between 0.9-1.1 (dotted line). For students with predicted

LTV below 0.5 in 2006-07, which is near the mean LTV in 2006-07 for the 2003-04 cohort as shown in

Table 3, the vast majority of students have either positive or at most modestly negative expected equity in

2010-11. However, as predicted LTV increases in 2006-07--primarily due to loans from later cohorts)--

the fraction of students exposed to high levels of expected negative equity in 2010-11 increases

dramatically.

       Finally, we use housing transactions between the third quarter of 2003 and the second quarter of

2006 to demonstrate the power of our instrument. Specifically, we regress current LTV from the third

quarter of 2006 through second quarter of 2011 on predicted LTV and three vectors of fixed effects:

housing transaction, Zip Code by county by current year (defined as 3rd to 2nd quarter of the next calendar

                                                    17
year), and purchase quarter by current year. This specification is nearly identical to the test score equation

in terms of fixed effects structure, except that Zip Code takes the place of school. Both predicted and

actual LTV ratios are based on county-level price indices in the first quarter of the calendar year, when

standardized tests are administered in Florida. The first panel of Table 6 presents the estimates resulting

from regressing current LTV, an indicator for whether LTV is above 1.3, and an indicator for whether

LTV is above 1.5, on predicted LTV for that county, purchase quarter, and current year, together with the

three vectors of fixed effects. The second panel presents estimates that allow the relationship to be non-

parametric by regressing these variables on a set of dummy variables for 20-point intervals associated

with predicted LTV. The estimates shown in Table 6 suggest that our instrument is very powerful, as

predicted LTV has a strong positive relationship with all three variables.

        The predicted LTV bin coefficients are also strongly predictive for higher levels of predicted LTV,

with coefficient estimates increasing across bins beginning around the bin for LTV between 0.9 and 1.1.

The failure of our instrument to explain low levels of LTV is not unexpected. When predicted LTV is low

early in the crisis, much of the variation in LTV arises from variation in household down payment choices,

which our instrument intentionally excludes. However, as the crisis proceeds, declines in housing prices

create substantial additional variation in LTV that is explicitly captured by predicted LTV. 22

V. Results

        We begin by showing graphically that our results arise in a simple difference-in-differences

framework, i.e., by demonstrating differences in test scores over time by differences in purchase quarter.

Figure 5 shows test scores by arrival quarter and year for all newcomer cohorts separately for newcomers

moving into high-shock (Panel A) and low-shock counties (Panel B). The figures are based on a subsample

of students who are in 1st grade in 2003-04, 1st or 2nd grade in 2004-05, and 2nd or 3rd grade in 2005-06,

so that the entire subsample is in a tested grade from the 2006-07 through the 2010-11 school year



22
   Note that negative estimates for lower predicted LTV bins arise in part because the omitted predicted LTV bin (below 0.5)
represents a much smaller, more idiosyncratic set of transactions.
                                                            18
regardless of the newcomer's cohort. As in figures 2 and 3, the arrival quarters are shown along the

horizontal axis, but in this case the graphed lines represent the academic year in which the test was

administered. In both the high- and low-shock subsamples, test scores increase steadily between the

academic years 2006-07 and 2010-11 (comparing across the lines), with the largest gains accruing to the

later cohorts (comparing from left to right). These later cohorts faced the largest increases in negative

equity over the housing crisis. Our difference-in-differences comparison is simply the difference in the

test score growth between earlier and later academic years for the early and later cohorts, which suggest

strong positive effects of exposure to negative equity on test scores. Note that we also observe a regular

dip in test score gains in the third quarter of each calendar year, associated with the compositional

differences between newcomer students who enter Florida schools at the beginning of each school year

and those who enter in other quarters. However, as in Figures 2 and 3, this dip has no impact on the

observed differential trends.

       Further, a comparison of Figures 5A and 5B helps to illustrate the variation uncovered by the triple

differences model specification. The difference-in-differences effects illustrated by Figure 5A for the

high-shock county subsample, where increases in the magnitude of negative equity will be quite large, are

much larger than the comparable effects for the low-shock county subsample in Figure 5B. Figure 5C

depicts the difference between these two figures by calculating the differences in average gains between

the high- and low-shock counties for each academic year over all cohorts. For the early cohorts, the

differences over academic years between the counties are small, and there is no systematic relationship

between academic year and differences between the two samples. For later cohorts, however, the

differences are much larger and increase monotonically with the academic year as the housing crisis

worsens.

       Having found descriptive evidence of a positive effect of exposure to negative equity on student

outcomes, we next present results based on our reduced form instrumental variable, triple-difference

identification strategy. Table 7 presents the estimates arising from regressing standardized math and/or

                                                   19
reading scores on the predicted level of negative equity, plus the three sets of fixed effects. The columns

present the estimates for different predictions of negative equity, which differ according to whether the

current housing prices are based on price indices for the quarter of the test (quarter 1) or one to three

quarters before the test. The first row reports the effects for reading test scores, the second row for math,

and the third row for the average of the two exams. All estimates are positive and statistically significant,

suggesting improved test scores from exposure to high LTV ratios; these results are robust to the quarter

used to create the current year price index. Using column 1 estimates, an increase in predicted LTV from

0.79 to 1.89--the average increase experienced by 2005-06 cohort households residing in high-shock

counties (see Table 3 Column 4)--is associated with a 0.205 standard deviation increase in combined

math and reading test scores. In comparison, the raw test score gains between the 2006-07 and 2010-11

academic years (comparing the solid line to the horizontal axis in Figure 5A) for our last cohort in the

second quarter of 2006 in high-shock counties is 0.561 standard deviations. Thus, our estimated effect

explains 37 percent of the observed test score gains during this time period. For low-shock counties, the

increase in predicted LTV during the period is 0.62, implying effects of 0.116 standard deviations, or 73

percent of the test score growth during this period using the maximum of 0.159 standard deviations

observed in the first quarter of 2006 in Figure 5B (again comparing the solid line to the horizontal axis on

the far right hand side of the figure). These are substantively significant effects.

       Figure 6 depicts the non-parametric relationship between predicted LTV ratio and the average

score on the two exams. Specifically, we regress average test score on dummy variables associated with

predicted LTV falling in 20-point bins and our three vectors of fixed effects. For predicted LTV ratios

between 50 and 110, which would be observed early in the crisis throughout the state and in the low-shock

counties through the entire period, test scores are relatively unrelated to predicted LTV. Beyond that point,

however, test scores improve steadily as predicted LTV increases. The lack of effects for low predicted

LTV may arise because effects only exist for substantial levels of negative equity or because of the weak

power of predicted LTV at low values, as seen in Table 6.

                                                     20
         The fourth and fifth rows of Table 7 report the effects on suspensions and attendance. We find no

association with attendance, and the effect of high predicted LTV on suspensions works in the opposite

direction from test score results, suggesting some disruptive effects of exposure to negative equity. The

estimates are only marginally significant at the 10 percent level, however. The magnitude of the

suspension estimates are relatively stable, declining only slightly as we use earlier quarters for the price

index, but the estimates lose significance for two and three quarters before test administration. The effect

of negative equity on attendance is positive, consistent with the effects on test score, but smaller and

statistically insignificant. Thus, it seems unlikely that the positive effect of negative equity is operating

through effects on intermediate outcomes such as student attendance or adverse disciplinary events.

         The remaining rows of Table 7 contain a series of robustness tests using the average of the math

and reading test scores. The first two rows of the bottom panel split the sample between students who

attend a full year of school in their arrival year and those who enter school after the school year has begun,

following our observation that students who enter mid-year exhibited lower test scores and more

disadvantaged demographics. The results are robust, but larger for students who enter mid-year. 23 The

next three rows address concerns arising from the structure of our sample. Namely, as seen in Table 2, the

sample is triangular in student's initial grade and in the analysis academic year, with test scores observed

for either early initial grades and/or early analysis years. First, we re-run the analysis dropping test scores

in the latest analysis years, i.e., 2010-11 in row 4 and both 2009-10 and 2010-11 in row 5. Alternatively,

we eliminate students in the highest arrival grades. Specifically, in row 6, we restrict our sample to students

in 3rd or 4th grade in 2006-07 so that the students are in tested grades for our entire sample period. In row

7, we restrict the sample to 3rd, 4th and 5th grades so that students are tested in the first four years and then

drop the last year, 2010-11. The estimated magnitudes are very stable. Finally, we estimate the model




23
   Note that the design assures that our regression sample only contains test scores from the year after the student first appears
in Florida schools, so that the student has a full year in Florida schools for every test score included in the regressions.
                                                               21
dropping one purchase quarter at a time. Figure 7 presents these estimates, and they are stable across

purchase quarter omissions.

        Table 8 examines these effects by selected subsamples. While we find that exposure to high levels

of predicted LTV increases relative test score performance for all groups, Table 8 indicates that estimated

effects are much larger for free and reduced-price lunch students and for Black students, and moderately

larger for Hispanic students. 24 An increase in LTV of 1.10, the change over the entire period for the most

affected cohort in the high-shock counties, implies an increase in test scores for free and reduced-price

lunch students of 0.303 standard deviations and an increase for full-priced lunch students of 0.105. The

same increase in predicted LTV for Black students, Hispanic students, and white students implies

increases of 0.281, 0.083 and 0.056, respectively. The implied effects for low-shock counties are about

half this size.

        While we cannot identify whether children's parents are homeowners or renters in our statewide

education dataset, our largest estimates are for minority and low-income groups that have below-average

homeownership rates. It is somewhat surprising that the groups least likely to own their home experience

larger average test score gains from the exposure to high predicted LTV. One possible explanation for

larger effects on populations that are less likely to own is that students from households in rental housing

also saw increased test scores during the housing crisis. One of the mechanisms that we will test below is

that falling housing prices during the crisis allowed households with less financial resources to access

better schools. This mechanism could operate for renter households as well, especially if they took

advantage of lower housing prices to buy housing in neighborhoods with better schools Finally, as noted

in the introduction, rental households may be impacted negatively by evictions following foreclosures

against landlords, or impacted positively as falling housing prices make higher quality neighborhoods and

schools more accessible. 25


24
  Note that these estimates use predicted loan-to-value ratios based on price indices measured for the quarter of the test.
25
  Another possible mechanism could have been failure to collect rent when rental units were in foreclosure, especially given
federal limitations on the eviction of renters during the foreclosure process.
                                                            22
           However, low income and minority homeowners could in principle be driving the stronger effects

for these groups. Notably, when we divide the sample of free and reduced price lunch students based on

average housing prices (last three rows of Table 8), we find the largest effects in the lowest housing price

PUMA's where owner-occupied housing is likely to be most affordable for these lower income families.

Specifically, the effect size for free and reduced price lunch students in the lowest housing price tercile of

PUMA's is more than double the size of the effect in the top tercile, 0.36 vs 0.16. Similarly, back-of-the-

envelope calculations suggest that a free and reduced price lunch family could afford a mortgage on

$200,000 home. Splitting our sample by PUMA's where half or more of the owner-occupied housing is

below $200,000 versus less than half is below $200,000, we similarly find a large estimate of 0.23 for the

PUMA where half or more of the housing meets this criteria of being affordable, and a smaller estimate

of only 0.15 for the other PUMA's.

           Further, in the second column of Table 8 we restrict our sample to students who live in Public Use

Microdata Areas (PUMAs) in which data from the 2006 American Community Survey (ACS) indicates

that at least two-thirds of households with children who belong to the subgroup identified in each row are

owner-occupants. Additionally, we restrict subgroups to newcomers to the state with school-aged children

and divide the sample into cells based on PUMA, race, ethnicity, and free and reduced price lunch status.26

While the magnitude of our estimates decline, our core results are robust to imposing this restriction, again

with larger effects for blacks and free and reduced price lunch students especially in the lower housing

price PUMA's.

           A key potential reason for larger effects among Blacks and free and reduced price lunch students

is that these groups are typically more vulnerable than white and higher-income households to the housing

crisis and economic downturns (Bayer et al., 2016; Hoynes et al., 2012). Therefore, even though

homeownership rates are lower for these groups, the larger economic shocks they experience may lead to

larger effects on student outcomes. Table 9 establishes the differential effects of recession for our sample


26
     We also restrict the sample to residents of PUMAs that are completely contained within a single county.
                                                               23
and time period. We use the CPS to show a much greater decline in employment rates in Florida for prime-

age Black males than either white or Hispanic males, and a large decline in income for households in the

20th percentile of household income during the period (the 60th and 80th percentiles exhibited no income

losses). This idea of higher vulnerability may also explain why the estimated effects for blacks and free

and reduced price lunch students fall in the likely homeowner sample. When we focus on locations with

higher rates of homeownership for each group we almost certainly restrict ourselves to places where low-

income and Black or Hispanic households are relatively well off compared to the rest of the subsample.

VI. Mechanisms

         We earlier identified three potential mechanisms by which the decline in housing equity might

raise test scores. The first mechanism works through potential reductions in mobility. While negative

equity can lead to default and foreclosure when associated with an economic shock like a job loss, it may

reduce mobility for the majority of households who continue making housing payments because they are

unwilling or unable to sell their homes at a loss. If mobility negatively affects student test scores, then

declines in home equity may raise test scores.

         In order to examine this phenomenon, we use our housing transactions data to estimate a model

similar to the loan-to-value regressions in Table 6. The dependent variable is whether households sell their

home in any given academic year. The sample includes all housing transactions during our pre-crisis

period for the academic years of 2003-04, 2004-05, and 2005-06 where the household had not sold the

home by the beginning of 2006-07, and includes one observation for each year between 2006-07 and

2009-10, dropping years after a housing unit has already been sold. The model includes the controls for

predicted loan-to-value ratio and three sets of fixed effects: zip code by county by purchase quarter and

year, zip code by county by current academic year, and purchase quarter and year by current year. 27 The




27
   Predicted LTV is based on the price level in the 1st quarter of the calendar year. Models using other quarters before the test
is administered yield similar results. The model includes zip code by purchase quarter and year fixed effects rather than
housing unit fixed effects because only one mobility event is included in the sample per pre-crisis transaction.
                                                              24
second column adds controls for mortgage terms. 28 The first panel of Table10 contains the estimates for

a model including predicted LTV, and the second panel includes estimates for the same model where we

replace predicted LTV with 20-point LTV bins. The coefficient on predicted LTV is consistently positive,

counter to our suggested mechanism of declines in home equity reducing mobility. When we examine the

results for LTV bins, we find very similar results, with housing mobility increasing strongly with predicted

LTV.

         In Table 11, we present the estimates of the relationship between student mobility across schools

and predicted LTV. Specifically, we regress an indicator for whether the student moved from their initial

school in each year of the crisis on predicted LTV and the standard set of fixed effects used in Tables 7

and 8. The rows present the estimates for the full sample and then separately for those eligible and not

eligible for free and reduced-price lunch. The second column presents the estimates for a further reduced

sample restricted to likely homeowners, as defined above. In all cases, the relationship between moving

from the initial school and predicted LTV is positive. Therefore, we do not find any evidence of reduced

mobility on average arising from higher levels of negative equity exposure.

         The second mechanism through which negative equity might lead to test score improvements

arises through households' use of mortgage delinquency to preserve consumption and spending on

children during a job loss or other reductions in income. When households have equity in their home, they

may sacrifice current consumption to make mortgage payments. But when the household owes more on

the home than it is worth and foreclosure is a long, drawn-out process, mortgage delinquency may present

an opportunity to live rent-free for an extended period of time, providing them with a buffer to mitigate

income losses. Indeed, Bayer et al. (2016) find a strong positive correlation between LTV ratio and

delinquency that is especially large in high unemployment counties. We might expect this effect to be

even more pronounced in states like Florida with long foreclosure timelines. Further, Zhang (2017) finds



28
  These terms include original LTV bins, adjustable rate mortgage indicators, and indicators for whether the initial purchase
included a second and/or third subordinate mortgage.
                                                             25
that the length of the foreclosure process decreases the incidence of short sales. He argues that the free

rent received during the foreclosure process is more attractive to many borrowers than using a short sale

to eliminate the obligations associated with an underwater mortgage. Similarly, Herkenhoff and Ohanian

(2015) postulate that delinquent mortgages operate as a credit line to unemployed households leading to

lower rates of re-employment and higher wages (job match quality) in slow foreclosure states. Calem et

al. (2017) show that delinquent credit card cure rates are higher for longer foreclosure time frames.

          To examine the possibility of such consumption smoothing, we turn to the Consumer Expenditure

Survey between the years 2006 and 2010. We calculate the ratio of current annual consumption spending

to income. Using simple state averages, we show that Florida was ranked 3rd among states in 2006 in the

ratio of consumption to income for both owner-occupants and renters. Florida's rank declines modestly to

6th for owner-occupants between 2006 and 2009, but falls to 21st for renters who do not have the option

of mortgage delinquency. Next, we regress the consumption to income ratio on indicator variables for

residing in Florida, being an owner-occupant and the interaction of these variables (Table 12). 29 In panel

1 of column 1 in Table 12, we show that in 2006, the coefficient on Florida is positive and the coefficient

on the interaction between owner and Florida is near zero. Results from 2009 in panel 2, however, show

that the coefficient on Florida falls as residents reduce consumption. Yet the coefficient on the interaction

is positive, implying smaller reductions for homeowners. The last row displays the differences between

the 2006 and 2009 estimates. The next four columns present estimates for subsamples of Black

individuals, non-Black individuals, individuals with four-year college degrees or more, and individuals

without four-year college degrees, which plays the role as a proxy for low income. As with the student

test score effects, our largest effects are observed for Black individuals and individuals without a college

degree.




29
   The model also includes controls for race and ethnicity, education, marital status, and number of children. The inclusion of
these controls has virtually no effect on the estimates.
                                                              26
         We generalize the above analysis by pooling data across all years between 2006 and 2010 and

including annual data on state unemployment rates from the Bureau of Labor Statistics and state housing

price indices from the Federal Housing Finance Agency. We then regress the consumption to income ratio

on housing price indices, unemployment rates, and the interaction separately for owners and renters plus

standard individual controls and state and year fixed effects. In column 1 of Table 13, we report that falling

housing prices are associated with reduced consumption for owner-occupants, presumably due to the

wealth shock, but the coefficient on the interaction between the housing price index and unemployment

is negative and significant. This implies that falling housing prices, which may make mortgage

delinquency more attractive, are associated with higher consumption to income ratios when

unemployment rates are high. As in Table 12, these effects are largest for Black individuals and individuals

without a college degree, again consistent with our test score effects. 30

         For our third potential mechanism, we consider whether families residing in high-shock counties

who move residences were more likely to move to neighborhoods with better schools, potentially because

those neighborhoods had become more affordable. We first document that rents increased less in high-

shock counties in the aftermath of the housing bust. Using the American Housing Survey, which is a panel

survey of housing units, we calculate average changes in rents for individual units in high-shock, medium-

shock, and low-shock counties. The sample sizes are relatively small, but we generally find that rent

increases between 2005 and 2011 were more modest in high-shock counties. Specifically, the average

rental unit saw an increase in rents of just 1.3 percent in the high-shock counties, as compared to 22.1 and

17.1 percent in the medium- and low-shock counties, respectively.

         We then examine whether school children were likely to move to better schools as the prevalence

of negative equity in their county increased. Specifically, we regress the 2005 state-assigned letter grade




30
  In principle, one might predict that our estimated test score effects will be larger in the counties that faced the largest
employment shocks during the crisis. However, the employment shocks were in large part caused by the housing crisis, and
employment growth is a prime driver of housing prices. We did attempt to estimate a model where we allowed the effects to
vary with predicted employment growth based on a Bartik style index, but those estimates were statistically insignificant.
                                                             27
(chosen to represent the school's pre-crisis grade) of a student's current school, and the probability of

moving to a higher- and lower-letter grade school, on the predicted LTV ratio conditional on the same

fixed effects and using the same sample as in Table 7.31 The inclusion of student fixed effects assures that

in column 1 we are capturing the effect of changes in exposure to school quality during the crisis. In row

1 of Table 14, we report positive and significant coefficients on predicted LTV for school letter grade.

Improvements in school quality operate in both directions: increasing the probability of moving to a

higher-graded school, and decreasing the probability of moving to a lower-graded school. The latter result

arises in spite of the increased mobility among students exposed to high levels of negative equity. We next

estimate these models for subsamples of students eligible for free and reduced-price lunch and Black

students. The magnitudes of the subsample estimates, especially the overall effects in column 1, are

relatively uniform across the subsamples, even though the estimates for the Black subsample are

statistically indistinguishable from zero.

         In short, students attend better-quality schools on average as predicted LTV increases. Our results

are consistent with families walking away from their underwater homes to rent in more desirable

neighborhoods, possibly because they have less time in their current location time so are less attached to

the neighborhood or school, and/or because they face a higher incentive to walk away from an underwater

mortgage. Alternatively, our effects may be driven by renters who did not face a shock to home equity,

and who now that rents or housing prices are more affordable have the opportunity to find homes in more

desirable school zones. Given the school by current year fixed effects, however, our findings can only

arise from children of renters if the later cohort renters are more likely to move to take advantage of

improving educational opportunities.




31
   Florida assigns a letter grade from A-F to each school as part of its school accountability program. For elementary school
grades, schools receive at least a C if 60 percent of students receive a 2 or better on both their FCAT reading and math tests
and 50 percent receive a level 3 or above on the writing test. Schools receive a D if they fail one or more, but an F if they fail
all three standards. Schools can receive a B if these standards are met by six different subgroups of students or an A if
additional criteria are met related to absence rates, share of students taking the test and test score improvements.
                                                               28
VII.   Conclusion and Policy Implications

       We examine children's educational outcomes in the State of Florida during the housing crisis

among children whose families moved to the state during the years leading up to the crisis and were

exposed to different levels of negative equity. Our findings are starkly different than the current literature

that relies on estimating conditional correlations between foreclosure or foreclosure rates and children or

family outcomes. Unlike those studies, we find positive test score effects for students in years when they

are exposed to large declines in housing prices soon after moving to the state, or equivalently, high

predicted LTV ratios. The estimated effects for predicted LTV ratios in our main specification are largest

for relatively disadvantaged groups, including Black students and students eligible for free or reduced-

price lunch. Further, these effects are concentrated in locations where housing prices are relatively low,

which should have made it easier for disadvantaged populations to enter the owner-occupied housing

market. While we cannot identify students living in owner-occupied housing, our results are robust to

restricting our analysis to locations where two-thirds of the households in a demographic group were

owner occupants, although point estimates are somewhat smaller in magnitude. Finally, we find no effects

of high LTV on attendance, and a positive relationship between LTV and suspensions, so improvements

in test scores cannot operate through these intermediate outcomes.

       The differences between our findings and the previous literature may be driven by our attempts to

address bias from family unobservables that correlate with either initial loan-to-value ratios or selection

into housing markets with high levels of appreciation. Alternatively, these differences may arise because

our proxy captures both the direct effect of a family's exposure to negative equity and the indirect effect

of belonging to a cohort where many families are in negative equity. We find evidence of both direct and

indirect effects. Owner occupants in Florida--and in states with large declines in housing prices and high

unemployment rates, more generally--tend to maintain consumption during the crisis better than renters.

These findings are consistent with families in negative equity reducing the impact of income loss on

consumption by forgoing mortgage payments. In terms of indirect effects, we show that rents rose much

                                                     29
less in the aftermath of the housing boom in the high housing price shock counties, and that exposure to

predicted negative equity is associated with greater mobility and with moves to higher-quality schools.

While no one would recommend a financial crisis as a way to improve school performance, the results of

our study illustrate both the potential gains for students from policies, such a eviction or foreclosure

moratoriums, that insulating low-income and non-white families from income shocks and the significance

of the barriers that housing markets place on the educational opportunities of low-income and non-white

families.

References

Ananat, E. O., Gassman-Pines, A., Francis, D.V., & Gibson-Davis, C. (2011). Children left behind: the
effects of statewide job loss on student achievement (NBER Working Paper No. 17104). National
Bureau of Economic Research. https://www.nber.org/system/files/working_papers/w17104/w17104.pdf

Bayer, P., Fang, H., & McMillan, R. (2014). Separate when equal? Racial inequality and residential
segregation. Journal of Urban Economics 82, 32­48.

Bayer, P., Ferreira, F., & Ross, S. (2016). The vulnerability of minority homeowners in the housing
boom and bust. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 8(1), 1-27.

Bayer, P., Ferreira, F., & Ross, S. (2018). What drives racial and ethnic differences in high cost
mortgages? The role of high risk lenders. Review of Financial Studies, 31(1), 175­205.

Been, V., Ellen, I.G., Schwartz, A.E., Stiefel, L., & Weinstein, M. (2011). Does losing your home mean
losing your school?: Effects of foreclosures on the school mobility of children. Regional Science and
Urban Economics, 41(4), 407-414.

Been, V., & Glashausser, A. (2009). Tenants: innocent victims of the nation's foreclosure crisis. Albany
Government Law Review, 2(1): 1-27.

Benfer, E. (2020). COVID-19 eviction moratoria by state, commonwealth, and territory. Wake Forest
University School of Law. https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/e/2PACX-
1vTH8dUIbfnt3X52TrY3dEHQCAm60e5nqo0Rn1rNCf15dPGeXxM9QN9UdxUfEjxwvfTKzbCbZxJ
MdR7X/pubhtml.

Berger, M., & Black, D. (1992). Child care subsidies, quality of care, and the labor supply of low-
income, single mothers. Review of Economics and Statistics, 74(4), 635-642.

Bostic, R., Gabriel, S., & Painter, G. (2009). Housing wealth, financial wealth, and consumption: New
evidence from micro data. Regional Science and Urban Economics, 39(1), 79-89.

Bradbury, K., Burke, M.A., & Triest, R.K. (2013). The effect of foreclosure on Boston Public School
student academic performance. (Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Working Paper No. 13-12). Federal

                                                    30
Reserve Bank of Boston. https://www.bostonfed.org/publications/research-department-working-
paper/2013/the-effect-of-foreclosure-on-boston-public-school-student-academic-performance.aspx

Browning, M., Gørtz, M., & Leth-Petersen, S. (2013). Housing wealth and consumption: A micro panel
study. The Economic Journal, 123(568), 401-428.

Calem, P.S., Jagtiani, J., & Lang, W.W. (2017). Foreclosure delay and consumer credit performance.
Journal of Financial Services Research, 52(3), 225­251.

Case, K.E., Quigley, J.M., & Shiller, R.J. (2013). Wealth effects revisited: 1975-2012. (NBER Working
Paper No. 18667). National Bureau of Economic Research. https://www.nber.org/papers/w18667

Chan, S. (2001). Spatial lock-in: Do falling house prices constrain residential mobility? Journal of
Urban Economics, 49(3), 567­586.

Comey, J., & Grosz, M. (2011). Where kids go: The foreclosure crisis and mobility in Washington, D.C.
Urban Institute. https://www.urban.org/research/publication/where-kids-go-foreclosure-crisis-and-
mobility-washington-dc

Cordes, S.E., Schwartz, A.E., & Stiefel, L. (2019). The effect of residential mobility on student
performance. American Educational Research Journal, 56(4), 1380-1411.

Currie, J., & Tekin, E. (2015). Is there a link between foreclosure and health? American Economic
Journal: Economic Policy, 7(1), 63-94.

Dahl, G.B., & Lochner, L. (2012). The impact of family income on child achievement: Evidence from
the Earned Income Tax Credit. American Economic Review, 102(5), 1927-1956.

Dastrup, S., & Betts, J. (2012). Elementary education outcomes and stress at home: Evidence from
mortgage default in San Diego [Unpublished manuscript].

Desmond, M., & Shollenberger, T. (2015). Forced displacement from rental housing: Prevalence and
neighborhood consequences. Demography, 52(5), 1751­1772.

Disney, R., Gathergood, J., & Henley, A. (2010). House price shocks, negative equity and household
consumption in the United Kingdom. Journal of the European Economic Association, 8(6), 1179-1207.

Downing, J. (2016). The health effects of the foreclosure crisis and unaffordable housing: A systematic
review and explanation of evidence. Social Science & Medicine, 162, 88­96.

Engelhardt, G.V. (2003). Nominal loss aversion, housing equity constraints, and household mobility:
Evidence from the United States. Journal of Urban Economics, 53(1), 171­195.

Ferreira, F., Gyourko, J., & Tracy, J. (2010). Housing busts and household mobility. Journal of Urban
Economics, 68(1), 34­45.

Fisher, L., Lambie-Hanson, L., & Willen, P.S. (2010). A profile of the mortgage crisis in low and
moderate income neighborhoods (Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Research Department Public Policy
Discussion Paper No. 10-6). Federal Reserve Bank of Boston.

                                                    31
https://www.bostonfed.org/publications/public-policy-discussion-paper/2010/a-profile-of-the-mortgage-
crisis-in-a-low-and-moderate-income-community.aspx

Gerardi, K. (2011, April 18). What effect does negative equity have on mobility? Federal Reserve Bank
of Atlanta. https://www.frbatlanta.org/blogs/real-estate-research/2011/04/18/what-effect-does-negative-
equity-have-on-mobility

Gerardi, K.S., & Willen, P. (2009). Subprime mortgages, foreclosures, and urban neighborhoods. BE
Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy, 9(3).

Goodman, L., Kaul, K., & Neal, M. (2020, April 2). The CARES Act eviction moratorium covers all
federally financed rentals--that's one in four rental units. Urban Institute. https://www.urban.org/urban-
wire/cares-act-eviction-moratorium-covers-all-federally-financed-rentals-thats-one-four-us-rental-units.


Hanushek, E., Kain, J., & Rivkin, S. (2004). Disruption versus Tiebout improvement: The costs and
benefits of switching schools. Journal of Public Economics, 88(9), 1721­46.

Herkenhoff, K.F., & Ohanian, L.E. (2015). The impact of foreclosure delay on US employment
(NBER Working Paper No. 21532). National Bureau of Economic Research.
https://www.nber.org/papers/w21532

Hoynes, H., Miller, D.L., & Schaller, J. (2012). Who suffers during recessions? Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 26(3), 27-48.

Iacoviello, M.M. (2011). Housing wealth and consumption (Federal Reserve Board International
Finance Discussion Paper No. 1027). Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
https://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/ifdp/2011/1027/ifdp1027.pdf

Ihlanfeldt, K., & Mayock, T. (2018). School segregation and the foreclosure crisis. Regional Science
and Urban Economics, 68, 277-290.

Johnson, C. (2010). Renters evicted en masse: Collateral damage arising from the subprime foreclosure
crisis. Florida Law Review, 62(4), 975-1008.

Kachura, M. (2012). Children and foreclosures in Baltimore City: Foreclosure crisis and mobility.
National Neighborhood Indicators Partnership.
https://www.neighborhoodindicators.org/library/catalog/children-and-foreclosures-baltimore-city-
foreclosure-crisis-and-mobility

Mayer, C., & Pence, K. (2008). Subprime mortgages: What, where and to whom? (NBER Working
Paper No. 14083). National Bureau of Economic Research. https://www.nber.org/papers/w14083

Mian, A., & Sufi A. (2009). The consequences of mortgage credit expansion: Evidence from the U.S.
mortgage default crisis. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(4), 1449­1496.

Morris, P., Huston, A., Duncan, G., Crosby, D., & Bos, J. (2001). How welfare and work policies affect
children: A synthesis of research. MDRC. https://www.mdrc.org/publication/how-welfare-and-work-
policies-affect-children

                                                   32
National Law Center on Homelessness and Poverty. (2012). Eviction (without) notice: Renters and the
foreclosure crisis. National Law Center on Homelessness and Poverty. https://nlchp.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/10/Eviction_Without_Notice.pdf

Pettit, B., & McLanahan, S. (2003). Residential mobility and children's social capital: Evidence from an
experiment. Social Science Quarterly, 84(3), 632-649.

Pribesh, S., & Downey, D.B. (1999). Why are residential and school moves associated with poor school
performance? Demography, 36(4), 521-534.

RealtyTrac. (2012, January 9). 2011 year-end foreclosure report: Foreclosures on the retreat.
RealtyTrac. https://www.realtytrac.com/news/2011-year-end-foreclosure-report-foreclosures-on-the-
retreat/

Rege, M., Telle, K., & Votruba, M. (2011). Parental job loss and children's school performance. The
Review of Economic Studies, 78(4), 1462-1489.

Reid, C., & Laderman, E. (2009). The untold costs of subprime lending: Examining the links among
higherpriced lending, foreclosures and race in California (Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
Community Development Working Paper No. 2009-09). Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.
https://www.frbsf.org/community-development/files/wp2009-09.pdf

Rivkin, S.G. (1994). Residential segregation and school integration. Sociology of Education, 67(4), 279-
292.

Rumberger, R.W., & Larson, K.A. (1998). Student mobility and the increased risk of high school
dropout. American Journal of Education, 107(1), 1-35.

Schulhofer-Wohl, S. (2012). Negative equity does not reduce homeowners' mobility. Federal Reserve
Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 35(1), 2-14.

Schwartz, A.E., Stiefel, L., & Cordes, S. (2017). Moving matters: The causal effect of school mobility
on student performance. Education Finance and Policy, 12(4), 419-446.

Swain, W. (2013). "F" is for foreclosed: The effects of the housing crash on North Carolina student
achievement. Sanford Journal of Public Policy, 4, 3-23.

Swanson, C.B., & Schneider, B. (1999). Students on the move: Residential and educational mobility in
America's schools. Sociology of Education, 72(1), 54-67.

Vásquez-Vera, H., Palència, L., Magna, I., Mena, C., Neira, J., & Borrell, C. (2017). The threat of home
eviction and its effects on health through the equity lens: A systematic review. Social Science &
Medicine, 175, 199­208.

Wood, J.N., Medina, S.P., Feudtner, C., Luan, X., Localio, R., Fieldston, E.S., & Rubin, D.M. (2012).
Local macroeconomic trends and hospital admissions for child abuse, 2000­2009.
Pediatrics, 130(2), e358-e364.

Yilmazer, T., Babiarz, P., & Liu, F. (2015). The impact of diminished housing wealth on health in the
United States: Evidence from the Great Recession. Social Science & Medicine, 130, 234-241.
                                                   33
Zhang, C. (2017). A shortage of short sales: Explaining the under-utilization of a foreclosure alternative
(Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Research Department Working Paper No. 19-13). Federal
Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. https://www.philadelphiafed.org/-/media/frbp/assets/working-
papers/2019/wp19-13.pdf?la=en




                                                   34
Table 1: Reasons for Moves to and within Florida

Type of Move                              Moves to Florida            Moves within Florida
                                      Kids age 6-       Any         Kids age 6-      Any
Family type                               11         Movers             11         Movers
Job Related Reasons
  New job or transfer                    0.478          0.271          0.149           0.174
  To look for work or lost job           0.022          0.042          0.000           0.020
  Other job-related reason               0.043          0.052          0.011           0.041
Housing Related Reasons
  Wanted to own home, not rent           0.054          0.024          0.034           0.099
  Wanted new or better housing           0.043          0.054          0.195           0.166
  Wanted better neighborhood             0.000          0.021          0.172           0.081
  For cheaper housing                    0.011          0.027          0.046           0.041
  Other housing reason                   0.043          0.054          0.195           0.166
Other Reasons
  Change in marital status               0.022          0.041          0.092           0.046
  To establish own household             0.011          0.034          0.046           0.039
  Other family reason                    0.152          0.145          0.115           0.132
  For easier commute                     0.000          0.011          0.057           0.057
  Retired                                0.000          0.031          0.023           0.005
  Attend/leave college                   0.000          0.043          0.000           0.007
  Change of climate                      0.054          0.090          0.000           0.003
  Health reasons                         0.011          0.033          0.000           0.008
  Other reasons                          0.022          0.032          0.000           0.010
  Natural disaster                       0.022          0.003          0.000           0.000
Sample Size                               92            2,134           87             2,178

Notes. The table presents the fraction of households by the reason for moving for individuals
identified in the 1996-2007 March Current Population survey as having moved in the last year.
Columns 1 and 2 are shares for moves to Florida with column 1 showing the results for families
with kids age 6-11 and column 2 showing results for all families including single individuals.
Columns 3 and 4 are shares for moves within Florida with column 1 showing the results for
families with kids age 6-11 and column 2 showing results for all families.




                                                 35
Table 2: Tested grades in analysis sample

 Arrival           Academic                     Grade first observed in Florida schools
 Year              Year             1st        2nd      3rd       4th      5th      6th                7th
 2003-04
                   06-07            4th        5th          6th       7th        8th
                   07-08            5th        6th          7th       8th
                   08-09            6th        7th          8th
                   09-10            7th        8th
                   10-11            8th
 2004-05
                   06-07            3rd        4th          5th       6th        7th        8th
                   07-08            4th        5th          6th       7th        8th
                   08-09            5th        6th          7th       8th
                   09-10            6th        7th          8th
                   10-11            7th        8th
 2005-06
                   06-07                       3rd          4th       5th        6th        7th        8th
                   07-08            3rd        4th          5th       6th        7th        8th
                   08-09            4th        5th          6th       7th        8th
                   09-10            5th        6th          7th       8th
                   10-11            6th        7th          8th

Notes: Each panel represents the year that a newcomer student first appears in Florida schools. Each newcomer
student can appear in the sample multiple times once for each year during the sample that they are in a tested
grade. The rows within each panel list the academic years included in our sample. The columns list the grades for
which a student might first appear in Florida schools and still be contained within our sample. Each cell in these
columns identifies the tested grade for each academic year that is associated with both the student's arrival year
and their grade in that arrival year. Blank cells imply that such a student would typically not be tested in that
academic year.




                                                       36
Table 3: General table of descriptive statistics

                                                   Samples by Housing Price Appreciation
Variable                              Overall        Low shock   Medium shock High shock

Average test score                    0.034          0.109             0.076                -0.080
(reading+math)                        (0.950)        (0.922)           (0.949)              (0.972)
Initial test score                    -0.145         0.011             -0.093               -0.355
                                      (1.067)        (0.992)           (1.044)              (1.132)
Suspension                            0.181          0.177             0.193                0.174

Percentage of days absent             5.837          6.061             5.631                5.778
                                      (8.181)        (8.694)           (7.888)              (7.865)
Eligible for free or reduced          0.469          0.405             0.439                0.570
price lunch in first year
White                                 0.433          0.618             0.407                0.262
Black                                 0.173          0.131             0.221                0.168
Hispanic                              0.309          0.159             0.278                0.498
Born in the USA                       0.799          0.890             0.795                0.705
Likelihood of being                   0.682          0.727             0.701                0.615
homeowner                             (0.209)        (0.186)           (0.203)              (0.223)

2003 newcomers: predicted             0.522          0.546             0.523                0.497
LTV in 2006-07                        (0.051)        (0.065)           (0.039)              (0.031)
2003 newcomers: predicted             1.090          0.960             1.110                1.193
LTV in 2010-11                        (0.134)        (0.133)           (0.067)              (0.071)
2004 newcomers: predicted             0.641          0.658             0.648                0.617
LTV in 2006-07                        (0.068)        (0.074)           (0.058)              (0.064)
2004 newcomers: predicted             1.331          1.160             1.372                1.469
LTV in 2010-11                        (0.188)        (0.159)           (0.112)              (0.132)
2005 newcomers: predicted             0.811          0.820             0.818                0.792
LTV in 2006-07                        (0.064)        (0.064)           (0.053)              (0.069)
2005 newcomers: predicted             1.685          1.440             1.718                1.889
LTV in 2010-11                        (0.240)        (0.184)           (0.121)              (0.147)
Observations (test scores)            614,377        203,244           204,564              206,569
Observations (suspensions)            1,098,177      365,272           365,088              367,817

Notes: Means of variables with standard errors in parentheses for continuous variables only. The first column
presents means for the entire student sample. The next three columns present means by terciles ordered by
county level housing price appreciation in the period leading up to the crisis, in order bottom, middle and top
tercile. Likelihood of being a homeowner is predicted using the 2006 American Community Survey (2006) based
on free and reduced lunch eligibility status and PUMA. Predicted Loan to Value ratio is based on a price index for
the quarter the test is administered. Number of observations varies for different variables; the table lists test
scores and suspensions as two examples.




                                                       37
Table 4: Borrower attributes by initial Loan to Value (LTV) ratio

  LTV                                  <0.8           0.8-0.9         0.9-0.95           >0.95

  Borrower Black                      0.061           0.088             0.153            0.174
  Borrower Hispanic                   0.307           0.404             0.435            0.554
  Coborrower on mortgage              0.443           0.358             0.296            0.235
  1st income quintile                 0.185           0.136             0.159            0.201
  2nd income quintile                 0.165           0.185             0.229            0.276
  3rd income quintile                 0.179           0.194             0.258            0.245
  4th income quintile                 0.179           0.215             0.216            0.172
  5th income quintile                 0.292           0.270             0.137            0.106
  Vantage score <700                  0.190           0.274             0.352            0.465
  Vantage score 700-800               0.274           0.348             0.391            0.387
  Vantage score >800                  0.536           0.378             0.257            0.148
  Observations                        1890            3214              1348             3564

  Borrower age <40                    0.219           0.328             0.422            0.444
  Borrower age 40-49                  0.299           0.338             0.315            0.310
  Borrower age >50                    0.482           0.335             0.263            0.246
  Observations                        1240            1811               730             1897

Notes: Means of subsamples based on Loan to Value (LTV) ratio at mortgage origination for a sample of home
purchase mortgages in Miami-Dade, Broward and Palm Beach Counties. Race, ethnicity and coborrower
identified from Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) data. Income quintiles based on sample incomes LTV
calculated using purchase price and all liens recorded in public records transaction data (Dataquick Inc.). Vantage
score is a proprietary credit score developed by the major credit reporting repositories. The Vantage score and
age are made available by matching a subsample from a match between HMDA and transaction data to credit
repository data.




                                                        38
Table 5: Borrower attributes by PUMA housing price appreciation

Housing Price                        Low           Medium             High
Appreciation                        Shock          Shock             Shock

Borrower Black                      0.075           0.132            0.157
Borrower Hispanic                   0.418           0.459            0.417
Coborrower on mortgage              0.384           0.308            0.292
1st income quintile                 0.111           0.169            0.263
2nd income quintile                 0.177           0.232            0.244
3rd income quintile                 0.206           0.217            0.204
4th income quintile                 0.216           0.202            0.151
5th income quintile                 0.290           0.180            0.139
Vantage score <700                  0.283           0.339            0.368
Vantage score 700-800               0.336           0.359            0.362
Vantage score >800                  0.381           0.302            0.270
Observations                        2750            3431             2711

Borrower age <40                    0.314           0.363            0.364
Borrower age 40-49                  0.352           0.311            0.284
Borrower age >50                    0.334           0.326            0.352
Observations                        1587            1983             1531

Notes: Means of subsamples based on housing price terciles at the PUMA level for a sample of home purchase
mortgages in Dade, Broward and Palm Beach Counties. Race, ethnicity and coborrower identified from Home
Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) data. Income quintiles based on sample incomes. Vantage score is a
proprietary credit score developed by the major credit reporting repositories. The Vantage score and age made
available by matching a subsample from a match between HMDA and transaction data to credit repository data.




                                                      39
Table 6: Relationship between current LTV and predicted LTV
                                                    Current LTV
 Variables                          LTV               LTV>1.3               LTV>1.5

 Predicted LTV                1.006***        1.213***         2.586***
                              (0.013)          (0.442)         (0.200)
 Observations                3,202,257       3,202,257        3,202,257
 Coefficient Estimates on predicted Loan to Value (pLTV) bins

 pLTV 50-70                        -0.0294***           -0.031**            -0.020***
                                     (0.006)             (0.013)             (0.007)
 pLTV 70-90                        -0.0436***          -0.048***            -0.020***
                                     (0.006)             (0.009)             (0.005)
 pLTV 90-110                       -0.0469***          -0.123***            -0.053***
                                     (0.007)             (0.015)             (0.009)
 pLTV 110-130                      -0.0265***            0.080**            -0.083***
                                     (0.009)             (0.035)             (0.011)
 pLTV 130-150                         0.017             0.282***             0.200***
                                     (0.010)             (0.047)             (0.017)
 pLTV 150-170                       0.080***            0.375***             0.436***
                                     (0.013)             (0.059)             (0.031)
 pLTV 170-190                       0.171***            0.346***             0.578***
                                     (0.016)             (0.068)             (0.032)
 pLTV >190                          0.254***            0.242***             0.583***
                                     (0.018)             (0.085)             (0.039)
 Observations                      3,202,257           3,202,257            3,202,257


Notes: Regressions with a dependent variable of the current Loan to Value (LTV) ratio, whether the LTV is above
1.3 and whether the LTV is above 1.5 for the sample of home purchase mortgages originated during the pre-crisis
period between the third quarter of 2003 and the second quarter of 2006. The regression model includes the
predicted LTV ratio or dummy variables associated with predicted LTV bins plus the three vectors of pairwise
fixed effects: transaction, zip code by county by crisis year, and purchase quarter by crisis year. The dummy
variables capture whether predicted LTV falls within a specific 20 point LTV bin with current LTV below 0.5 as the
omitted category. Predicted LTV ratio is based on a price index for the quarter in which the test is administered.
Standard errors are clustered at the county by home purchase year level.




                                                       40
 Table 7: Estimated effects of loan to value (LTV) ratio on student test scores

Variables                Quarter in which LTV is measured
                         Quarter of     One quarter Two quarters Three quarters                           Sample
                         tests (Q1)     before (Q4)   before (Q3) before (Q2)                             Size

Reading              0.210***      0.210***       0.202***                         0.196***               585,530
                     (0.039)       (0.037)        (0.033)                          (0.031)
Math                 0.162***      0.160***       0.148***                         0.139***               585,928
                     (0.022)       (0.020)        (0.020)                          (0.020)
Reading+math         0.187***      0.186***       0.175***                         0.168***               585,298
                     (0.028)       (0.026)        (0.024)                          (0.023)
Suspended during 0.019*            0.018*         0.017                            0.015                  969,335
academic year        (0.010)       (0.010)        (0.011)                          (0.012)
Percentage of        0.091         0.140          0.210                            0.314                  962,146
days absent          (0.225)       (0.232)        (0.243)                          (0.256)
Robustness tests for Standardized reading + math score

Eliminating              0.194***           0.195***            0.186***           0.180***               429,696
students who             (0.032)            (0.030)             (0.027)            (0.025)
spent the full year
in year 1
Only students who        0.113***           0.111***            0.107***           0.104***               155,602
spent the full year      (0.026)            (0.025)             (0.025)            (0.026)
in year 1
Test scores              0.187***           0.185***            0.174***           0.165***               524,667
through 09-10 only       (0.029)            (0.027)             (0.025)            (0.024)
Test scores              0.190***           0.188***            0.174***           0.161***               435,554
through 08-09 only       (0.030)            (0.028)             (0.026)            (0.024)
Balanced panel:          0.212***           0.194***            0.163***           0.151***               267,486
scores in 06-07          (0.055)            (0.052)             (0.048)            (0.048)
through 10-11
Balanced panel:          0.213***           0.219***            0.207***           0.201***               204,254
scores in 06-07          (0.054)            (0.052)             (0.048)            (0.048)
through 09-10


 Notes: Regression of the student outcomes from newcomers to the state during the pre-crisis period on predicted
 Loan to Value ratio and the three vectors of pairwise fixed effects: student, school by county by crisis year, and
 arrival quarter and year by crisis year. The first panel shows estimations for different dependent variables in each
 row, and the second panel varies the sample across rows for the combined math and reading test score
 regressions. Each column represents estimates using price indices that are based on a different quarter during
 the crisis year. Standard errors are clustered at the county by newcomer arrival year level. Samples sizes listed
 are for the first-column specification (Q1 tests). Sample sizes differ slightly for Q4, Q3, and Q2 test specifications,
 but by less than one percent of the total number of observations.




                                                           41
Table 8: Estimated effects by student lunch status, race/ethnicity, and housing costs


 Variables                                          All students                Likely homeowners*

 Black                                              0.256***                    0.165***
                                                    (0.026)                     (0.045)
 Hispanic                                           0.075*                      0.055
                                                    (0.039)                     (0.048)
 White                                              0.051***                    0.045***
                                                    (0.017)                     (0.017)
 Not free or reduced-price lunch                    0.095***                    0.093***
                                                    (0.022)                     (0.021)
 Free or reduced-price lunch                        0.275***                    0.138***
                                                    (0.041)                     (0.052)
 Free or reduced-price lunch, PUMAS                 0.362***                    0.163*
 with lowest-priced housing                         (0.059)                     (0.084)
 Free or reduced-price lunch, PUMAS                 0.198***                    -0.123
 with middle-priced housing                         (0.040)                     (0.090)
 Free or reduced-price lunch, PUMAS                 0.163***                    0.142
 with highest-priced housing                        (0.071)                     (0.136)

Notes: Regression of the student outcomes from newcomers to the state during the pre-crisis period on predicted
Loan to Value (LTV) ratio and the three vectors of pairwise fixed effects: student, school by county by crisis year,
and arrival quarter and year by crisis year. The first column shows estimates for the full sample, and the second
column restricts the sample to residents of PUMA's for whom at least two-thirds of newcomers of this type in the
PUMA report being homeowners in the 2006 American Community Survey (ACS). Each row represents
regressions for specific subsamples. Predicted LTV ratio is based on a price index for the quarter the test was
administered. Standard errors are clustered at the county by newcomer arrival year level.




                                                        42
Table 9: Changes in Economics Circumstances during Housing Crisis

               Fraction Employed Prime Age Males                       Fraction of 2006 Income
          Non-Hispanic                                                        Percentiles
Year         White           Black         Hispanic                 20th     40th    60th    80th
2006         0.854           0.703          0.848                  1.000 1.000 1.000 1.000
2007         0.846           0.677          0.837                  1.000 1.000 1.040 1.041
2008         0.844           0.683          0.847                  1.029 1.040 1.094 1.094
2009         0.809           0.620          0.817                  0.909 0.945 1.000 1.058
2010         0.791           0.607          0.786                  0.871 0.909 1.025 1.003
2011         0.774           0.552          0.768                  0.809 0.891 1.000 1.049

Notes. Based on CPS March sample for each year. The fraction non-employed is the number of males
in each the group between ages 30 and 55 who report holding a job in the March CPS divided by the
total number of males in this group and age category. Fraction by percentile is the income of the
specific percentile income for households in a given year and with children in specific age ranges from
the March CPS divided by the income for that same percentile in the 2006 March CPS. The age range
is 5-9 for 2006 and increments by one year for each year afterwards in order to compare similar
cohorts over time.




                                                 43
Table 10: Estimated effects of LTV on housing mobility

  VARIABLES              Baseline           Controls

  Predicted            0.078036***        0.078775***
  LTV                    (0.016)            (0.016)
  Observations          3,252,768          3,252,768
  R-squared               0.012              0.015

  ltv5070                0.009***           0.009***
                         (0.003)            (0.003)
  ltv7090                0.007**            0.007**
                         (0.003)            (0.003)
  ltv90110               0.008**            0.007**
                         (0.003)            (0.003)
  ltv110130              0.010***           0.010***
                         (0.004)            (0.003)
  ltv130150              0.014***           0.014***
                         (0.003)            (0.003)
  ltv150170              0.021***           0.021***
                         (0.004)            (0.004)
  ltv170190              0.036***           0.032***
                         (0.004)            (0.004)
  Ltv>190                0.037***           0.037***
                         (0.004)            (0.004)
  Observations          3,252,768          3,252,768

Notes: Regressions with a dependent variable of whether the home was sold for the first time during the crisis
period for the sample of home purchase mortgages originated during the pre-crisis period between the third
quarter of 2003 and the second quarter of 2006. The regression model includes the predicted LTV or dummy
variables associated with predicted LTV bins plus three vectors of pairwise fixed effects: zip code by county by
purchase quarter and year, zip code by county by crisis year, and purchase quarter by crisis year. The dummy
variables capture whether predicted LTV falls within a specific 20 point LTV bin with current LTV below 0.5 as the
omitted category. Predicted LTV ratio is based on a price index for the quarter in which the test is administered.
Standard errors are clustered at the county by home purchase year level.




                                                       44
Table 11: Estimated effects of LTV on student mobility

 Sample                                             All students                Likely homeowners*

 All students                                       0.077***                    0.065***
                                                    (0.018)                     (0.020)
 Black                                              0.109***                    0.092**
                                                    (0.023)                     (0.045)
 Not Black                                          0.071***                    0.062***
                                                    (0.020)                     (0.021)
 Not free or reduced-price lunch                    0.071***                    0.063***
                                                    (0.021)                     (0.021)
 Free or reduced-price lunch                        0.078***                    0.113***
                                                    (0.019)                     (0.028)

Notes: Regression of whether the student moved from her initial school for newcomers to the state during the
pre-crisis period on predicted LTV and the three vectors of pairwise fixed effects: student, school by county by
crisis year, and arrival quarter and year by crisis year. The first column shows estimates for the full sample, and
the second column restricts the sample to residents of PUMA's in which at least two-thirds of newcomers of this
type in the PUMA report being homeowners in the 2006 ACS. Each row represents estimates for regressions
using specific subsamples. Predicted LTV ratio is based on a price index for the quarter the test is administered.
Standard errors are clustered at the county by newcomer arrival year level.




                                                         45
Table 12: Estimated Effects of Residence in Florida and Owner-Occupancy Status on
the Ratio of Consumption to Income


                                                                          4 Yr
 Samples                  Full           Black         Not Black         College          No 4 Yr

 Year 2006

 Florida               0.903***        0.521***         1.024***        1.281***         0.812***
                       (0.077)         (0.147)          (0.078)          (0.129)         (0.088)
 Owner-                 0.004           0.436            -0.050          -0.094           0.046
 Occupant              (0.100)         (0.261)          (0.093)          (0.138)         (0.116)
 Florida*Own            0.112           0.032             0.028         -0.371***        0.266**
                       (0.091)         (0.246)          (0.093)          (0.131)         (0.106)

 Observations           15,549           2,062           13,487           5,067           10,455
 R-squared              0.0135          0.0210           0.0117          0.0152           0.0148

 Year 2009

 Florida               0.419***        0.378***         0.412***        0.607***         0.344***
                       (0.069)         (0.092)          (0.069)         (0.099)          (0.075)
 Owner-                 0.082           0.189            0.058           -0.002           0.091
 Occupant              (0.061)         (0.181)          (0.075)         (0.100)          (0.088)
 Florida*Own           0.755***        1.389***         0.692***        0.214**          1.032***
                       (0.059)         (0.193)          (0.069)         (0.083)          (0.090)

 Observations           15,020           1,957           13,063           5,174           9,815
 R-squared              0.0127          0.0329           0.0116          0.0174           0.0167

 Interaction           0.643***        1.357***         0.664***        0.585***         0.702***
 Difference            (0.108)         (0.312)          (0.116)         (0.155)          (0.139)

Notes. The dependent variable is the logarithm of the ratio of four times a household's quarterly non-housing
consumption divided by annual household income. The samples for panels one and two include all respondents
identifying as residing in owner-occupied housing or paying cash rent in the 2006 and the 2009 Surveys of
Consumer Expenditures (CEX), respectively, and in the 39 states identified in the public release version of the
CEX. The first column is for the full sample, and the following columns present estimates for subsamples. Each
row presents OLS estimates of coefficients on dummy variables for residing in Florida, being an owner-occupant
and the interaction of those two variables. The regressions also include dummy variables for racial identity, years
of education, marital status and the number of individuals under the age of 18 residing in the household. The
estimates on the interaction of Florida and Owner-Occupancy are robust in both significance and magnitude for
models that just include Florida, owner-occupancy and their interaction excluding all of the additional control
variables. Standard errors are clustered at the state level.




                                                        46
Table 13: Estimated Effects of Statewide Unemployment and Housing Prices on the
Ratio of Consumption to Income


                                                                                    4 Yr
 Samples                             Full          Black          Not Black        College          No 4 Yr

 Owners

 Unemployment Rate                0.162**         0.399**          0.148*           0.162           0.177**
                                  (0.077)          (0.178)         (0.081)         (0.104)          (0.081)
 Housing Price                    0.530**           1.160          0.493*           0.377           0.641**
 Index*100                        (0.262)          (0.781)         (0.282)         (0.421)          (0.289)
 Unemployment*Housing            -0.070***        -0.213**        -0.063**         -0.040          -0.095***
 Price                            (0.022)          (0.092)         (0.024)         (0.028)          (0.029)

 Renters

 Unemployment Rate                  0.064          0.030            0.068           0.157            0.031
                                   (0.063)        (0.109)          (0.072)         (0.137)          (0.057)
 Housing Price                      0.143         -0.079            0.174           0.180            0.155
 Index*100                         (0.217)        (0.332)          (0.254)         (0.564)          (0.227)
 Unemployment*Housing              -0.028          0.015           -0.035          -0.043           -0.029
 Price                             (0.020)        (0.044)          (0.024)         (0.051)          (0.021)

 Observations                      71,622           9,470          62,152          24,190           47,273
 R-squared                         0.0241          0.0377          0.0232          0.0263           0.0268

 Interaction Difference            -0.042         -0.228**         -0.028          -0.003           -0.066**
                                   (0.025)         (0.107)         (0.029)         (0.056)           (0.030)


Notes. The dependent variable is the logarithm of the ratio of four times a household's quarterly non-housing
consumption divided by annual household income. The sample includes all respondents identifying as residing in
owner-occupied housing or paying cash rent in the 2006, 2007, 2008 and 2009 Surveys of Consumer
Expenditures (CEX), and in the 39 states identified in the public release version of the CEX. The table presents
OLS estimates from a single regression where the first panel presents the estimates for the subsample of owner-
occupants and the second panel presents the estimates for the subsample of renters. The unemployment rate is
based on the annual unemployment rate for each state averaged across all counties and weighted by county
labor force using data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics, and the housing price index for each state is taken
from the FHFA repeat sales price index based on home purchase mortgages averaged across all four quarters.
The regressions also include dummy variables for racial identity, years of education, marital status, the number of
individuals under the age of 18 residing in the household, the state of residence and the survey year. Standard
errors are clustered at the state level.




                                                        47
Table 14: Estimated effects of loan to value ratio on grade of school attended


 Dependent Variable                        School grade (4-        Pr(better-graded          Pr(worse-
                                           point scale)            school than 2005          graded school
                                                                   school?)                  than 2005
                                                                                             school?)
 Full Sample                               0.122***                0.019**                   -0.055***
                                           (0.036)                 (0.009)                   (0.019)
 Black                                     0.127                   0.013                     -0.049
                                           (0.088)                 (0.034)                   (0.031)
 Not Black                                 0.122***                0.018**                   -0.058***
                                           (0.040)                 (0.009)                   (0.021)
 Not free or reduced-price lunch           0.125**                 0.025*                    -0.051**
                                           (0.053)                 (0.013)                   (0.023)
 Free or reduced-price lunch               0.140***                0.012                     -0.071***
                                           (0.041)                 (0.008)                   (0.025)

Notes: Regression of the student outcomes from newcomers to the state during the pre-crisis period on predicted
LTV and the three vectors of pairwise fixed effects: student, school by county by crisis year, and arrival quarter
and year by crisis year. Predicted LTV is based on a price index for the quarter the test is administered. Standard
errors are clustered at the county by newcomer arrival year level.




                                                        48
                         Figure 1: Metropolitan Area Housing Prices
 100.0%
  90.0%
  80.0%
  70.0%
  60.0%
  50.0%
  40.0%
  30.0%
  20.0%
  10.0%
   0.0%

                                                                                                                                                 Tampa-St....
                                                                                                                                                                Miami-M. Beach-...


                                                                                                                                                                                                   Deltona-Daytona...
                                                                                                                            Lakeland-Winter...




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Naples-Marco...
                                      Pensacola-Ferry...




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ft. Lauderdale-...




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 North Port-...
                                                                                                Crestview-Fort...
                                                           Panama City-Lynn...




                                                                                                                                                                                     Orlando-...



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             West Palm Beach-...



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Palm Bay-...
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Sebastian-Vero...




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Cape Coral-Fort...
                                                                                 Jacksonville




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Palm Coast




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Port St. Lucie
          Tallahassee
                        Gainesville




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Punta Gorda
                                                                                                                    Ocala




              Increases Q3YR03-Q2YR06                                                                                                                                                                 Decreases Q2YR06-Q2YR11


Notes: The figure presents the percentage increase (decrease) in housing prices between the third quarter of
2003 and the second quarter of 2006 (second quarter 06 and second quarter 11) as shaded (black) bars for
Florida metropolitan areas based on repeat sales price indices from the Federal Housing Finance Agency.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             49
                                Figure 2. Average demographic attributes of first
                             school attended by newcomers to Florida by quarter of
                                                move to Florida
                        0.6
  Average demographic attributes of first




                        0.5

                        0.4

                        0.3

                        0.2
                school




                        0.1

                              0
                                            2003:3 2003:4 2004:1 2004:2 2004:3 2004:4 2005:1 2005:2 2005:3 2005:4 2006:1 2006:2
                                                                       Quarter of move to Florida

                                                   school %black            school %Hispanic           school %FRL


Notes: The figure presents the fraction of newcomers to Florida schools between kindergarten and eighth grade
that are black (solid), Hispanic (dashed) and free or reduced price lunch eligible (short dashed) by the quarter and
year that the newcomers first appeared on the roster of Florida school students where the third quarter contains
students who are first observed at the beginning of the school year or anytime in the month of September and the
second quarter contains students who are observed at the end of the school year in April, May or June.




                                                                                        50
                                          Figure 3. Average initial test scores of newcomers
                                         by house price shock and quarter of move to Florida
                    0.4
  First observed test score in Florida




                    0.2

                           0
                                         2003:3 2003:4 2004:1 2004:2 2004:3 2004:4 2005:1 2005:2 2005:3 2005:4 2006:1 2006:2
                 -0.2

                 -0.4

                 -0.6

                 -0.8

                        -1
                                                                     Quarter of move to Florida

                                           all newcomers         highest shock         middle shock         lowest shock


Notes: The figure presents the average of the first observed Florida standardized test score for newcomers to
Florida schools between kindergarten and eighth grade where the average for the full sample is represented by a
solid line, the subsamples in the counties facing the highest, middle and lowest housing price shocks are shown
by the dashed, short dashed, and dotted lines, respectively. The average at each point along the horizontal axis is
based on the quarter and year that the newcomers first appeared on the roster of Florida school students where
the third quarter contains students who are first observed at the beginning of the school year or anytime in the
month of September and the second quarter contains students who are observed at the end of the school year in
April, May or June.




                                                                                      51
                       Figure 4. Variation in predicted loan-to-value ratio in
                       2010-11, by predicted loan-to-value ratio in 2006-07
         100
          90
          80
  Cumulative density




          70
          60
          50
          40
          30
          20
          10
           0
                        <0.5      0.5-0.7   0.7-0.9   0.9-1.1   1.1-1.3    1.3-1.5      1.5-1.7   1.7-1.9     >1.9
                                             Predicted loan-to-value ratio in 2010-11

                         initial <0.5         initial 0.5-0.7         initial 0.7-0.9             initial 0.9-1.1


Notes: The figure presents the fraction of associated with a predicted Loan to Value (pLTV) ratio in the 2010-11
academic year at or below the range shown on the horizontal axis. These cumulative density functions are
calculated for four subsamples: 2006-07 pLTV below 0.5 (solid), 2006-07 pLTV between 0.5 and 0.7 (dashed),
2006-07 pLTV between 0.7-0.9 (short dashed) and 2006-07 pLTV 0.09-1.1 (dotted).




                                                                          52
                                                Figure 5A: Over-time test score changes, by newcomer
                                                     cohort; high-shock counties, balanced panel
                                         0.7
Average test score relative to 2006-07



                                         0.6
                                         0.5
                                         0.4
                                         0.3
                                         0.2
                                         0.1
                                           0
                                                 2003:3 2003:4 2004:1 2004:2 2004:3 2004:4 2005:1 2005:2 2005:3 2005:4 2006:1 2006:2
                                         -0.1
                                                                                  Quarter of move to Florida

                                                       2006-07         2007-08            2008-09           2009-10           2010-11




                                                 Figure 5B: Over-time test score changes, by newcomer
                                                       cohort; low-shock counties, balanced panel
                                                0.7
Average test score relative to 2006-07




                                                0.6

                                                0.5

                                                0.4

                                                0.3

                                                0.2

                                                0.1

                                                  0
                                                        2003:3 2003:4 2004:1 2004:2 2004:3 2004:4 2005:1 2005:2 2005:3 2005:4 2006:1 2006:2
                                                -0.1
                                                                                    Quarter of move to Florida

                                                       2006-07          2007-08           2008-09           2009-10           2010-11




                                                                                                    53
                                                           Figure 5C: Over-time test score changes, by newcomer
                                                          cohort: Difference-in-difference between high-shock and
                                                                     low-shock counties, balanced panel
                                                           0.7
  Difference in average test score relative to 2006-07:




                                                           0.6
         high-shock vs. low-shock communities




                                                           0.5

                                                           0.4

                                                           0.3

                                                           0.2

                                                           0.1

                                                            0
                                                                   2003:3 2003:4 2004:1 2004:2 2004:3 2004:4 2005:1 2005:2 2005:3 2005:4 2006:1 2006:2
                                                          -0.1
                                                                                               Quarter of move to Florida

                                                                 2006-07          2007-08          2008-09           2009-10           2010-11


Notes: The figure presents the changes in average standardized test scores between the 2006-07 academic year
(light solid horizontal line at zero) and later years during the crisis including 2007-08 (dashed), 2008-09 (short
dashed), 2009-10 (dotted) and 2010-11 (dark solid) for newcomers to Florida schools between kindergarten and
eighth grade. Each point along the horizontal axis represents the change in average test scores for a subsample
of newcomers who arrive in Florida schools in that particular quarter and year where the third quarter contains
students who are first observed at the beginning of the school year or anytime in the month of September and the
second quarter contains students who are observed at the end of the school year in April, May or June. The first
two panels present these changes for the high and low housing price shock counties, respectively, and the last
panel presents the difference between the differences shown in the first two panels of the figure.




                                                                                                          54
                                   Figure 6. Non-parametric estimates of the effect of
                                     predicted current LTV on test scores (95% CI)
                 0.14

                 0.12
  Estimated effect on test score




                     0.1

                 0.08

                 0.06

                 0.04

                 0.02

                           0

              -0.02

              -0.04

              -0.06
                                                Cohort predicted current loan-to-value ratio


Notes: The figure presents the coefficient estimate and 95 percent confidence intervals for the same triple
differenced model as used in Table 6 except that the linear control for predicted LTV is replaced by a series of
predicted LTV bins as shown on the horizontal axis.




                                                                         55
                                      Figure 7. Estimated effects of loan to value ratio, omitting one
                                                        move-in quarter at a time
                0.35


                    0.3
  Estimated effect of loan to value




                0.25


                    0.2


                0.15


                    0.1


                0.05


                           0
                                      2003:3 2003:4 2004:1 2004:2 2004:3 2004:4 2005:1 2005:2 2005:3 2005:4 2006:1 2006:2
                                                                    Omitted move-in quarter


Notes: The figure presents the coefficient estimates and 95 percent confidence intervals for the predicted LTV
variable using different samples where each sample drops a single cohort of newcomers where cohorts dropped
are defined based on the quarter and year of arrival, as shown along the horizontal axis.




                                                                            56
