                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     A GROWTH MODEL OF THE DATA ECONOMY

                                      Maryam Farboodi
                                      Laura Veldkamp

                                     Working Paper 28427
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28427


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   February 2021




Thanks to Rebekah Dix and Ran Liu for invaluable research assistance and to participants at the
2019 SED plenary, Kansas City Federal Reserve, 2020 ASSA and Bank of England annual
research conference for helpful comments and suggestions. Maryam Farboodi receives research
support from MIT Sloan school of management. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Maryam Farboodi and Laura Veldkamp. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
A Growth Model of the Data Economy
Maryam Farboodi and Laura Veldkamp
NBER Working Paper No. 28427
February 2021
JEL No. O3,O4

                                         ABSTRACT

The rise of information technology and big data analytics has given rise to "the new economy."
But are its economics new? This article constructs a growth model where firms accumulate data,
instead of capital. We incorporate three key features of data: 1) Data is a by-product of economic
activity; 2) data is information used for prediction, and 3) uncertainty reduction enhances firm
profitability. The model can explain why data-intensive goods or services, like apps, are given
away for free, why many new entrants are unprofitable and why some of the biggest firms in the
economy profit primarily from selling data. While our transition dynamics differ from those of
traditional growth models, the long run still features diminishing returns. Just like accumulating
capital, accumulating predictive data, by itself, cannot sustain long-run growth.


Maryam Farboodi
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-627
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
m.farboodi@gmail.com

Laura Veldkamp
Columbia University
3022 Broadway, Uris 421
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
lv2405@columbia.edu
                          A Growth Model of the Data Economy

                                  Maryam Farboodi* and Laura Veldkamp

                                                  January 26, 2021



                                                        Abstract

           The rise of information technology and big data analytics has given rise to "the new econ-
       omy." But are its economics new? This article constructs a growth model where firms accumulate
       data, instead of capital. We incorporate three key features of data: 1) Data is a by-product
       of economic activity; 2) data is information used for prediction, and 3) uncertainty reduction
       enhances firm profitability. The model can explain why data-intensive goods or services, like
       apps, are given away for free, why many new entrants are unprofitable and why some of the
       biggest firms in the economy profit primarily from selling data. While our transition dynamics
       differ from those of traditional growth models, the long run still features diminishing returns.
       Just like accumulating capital, accumulating predictive data, by itself, cannot sustain long-run
       growth.



1     Introduction

Does the new information economy have new economics? In the information age, production

increasingly revolves around information and, specifically, data. Many firms, particuarly the most

valuable U.S. firms, are valued primarily for the data they have accumulated. Collection and use of

data is as old as book-keeping. But recent innovations in data-intensive prediction technologies (AI)

allow us to use more data more efficiently. How will this new data economy evolve? Because data

is non-rival, increases productivity and is freely replicable (has returns to scale), current thinking
    *
      MIT Sloan School of Business, NBER, and CEPR; farboodi@mit.edu.
    
    Columbia Graduate School of Business, NBER, and CEPR, 3022 Broadway, New York, NY 10027; lv2405@columbia.edu.
Thanks to Rebekah Dix and Ran Liu for invaluable research assistance and to participants at the 2019 SED plenary, Kansas City
Federal Reserve, 2020 ASSA and Bank of England annual research conference for helpful comments and suggestions. Keywords:
Data, growth, digital economy, data barter.


                                                             1
equates data growth with idea or technological growth. This article uses a simple framework to

argue that data accumulation has forces of increasing and decreasing returns, as well as returns to

specialization. But in the long run, data accumulation is more like capital accumulation, which, by

itself, cannot sustain growth.

   Data is information that can be encoded as a binary sequence of zeroes and ones. That broad

definition includes literature, visual art and technological breakthroughs. We are focusing more

narrowly on big data, defined as that data which is being analyzed by machine learning, AI or

new big data technologies. The reason we focus on big data is because of claims that new big

data technologies will spawn a new information age or economy, and the fact that an explosion

of data accumulation has coincided with the arrival of this technology. Big data technologies, like

machine learning and artificial intelligence, are prediction algorithms. Such algorithms predict the

probability of a high demand for a good on a day, a picture being a cat, or advertisement resulting

in a sale. Much of the data firms use for these predictions is transactions data. It is personal

information about online buyers, satellite images of traffic patterns near stores, textual analysis

of user reviews, click through data, and other evidence of economic activity. Such data is used to

forecast sales, earnings and the future value of firms and their product lines. Big data is also used

to advertise, which may create social value or might simply steal business from other firms. We

will consider both possibilities. But the essential features of the data production economy modeled

in Section 1 are user-generated data that is a long-lived asset, used to predict uncertain future

outcomes.

   Section 2 performs a thought experiment, which is a data parallel to the question Solow (1956)

asks about capital: Can data sustain growth, in the absence of any technological progress? To

answer this question, the model will shut down all sources of technological change. Of course, this

is unrealistic. Of course, data can be an input into research, just like capital can be an input into

research, and thereby boost growth. But understanding whether data alone can sustain growth

shapes our understanding of data, just like Solow's finding shaped our understanding of investment's

role in economic development.

   We prove and trace out the consequences of three properties of data as an asset: 1) decreasing

returns, 2) increasing returns, and 3) returns to specialization. Diminishing returns comes from

data's role in improving predictions. Prediction errors can only be reduced to zero. That places a

                                                 2
natural bound on how much prediction error data can possibly resolve. In addition, unforecastable

randomness limits how much firms can benefit from better data and better predictions. Both of

these forces ensure that, when data is abundant, it must have diminishing returns, in a broad class

of models.

   However, when data is scarce, it may have increasing returns, which arise because of the way in

which data is produced. Our model features what is referred to as a "data feedback loop." More data

makes a firm more productive, which results in more production and transactions, which generate

more data, further increasing productivity and data generation. This force is the dominant force

when data is scarce, before the diminishing returns to forecasting set in and overwhelm it. One

reason this increasing returns force is significant is that it can generate a data poverty trap. Firms,

industries, or countries may have low levels of data, which confine them to low levels of production

and transactions, which make profits low, or even negative.

   Because data is a long-lived asset, firms may choose to produce goods with negative profits,

because goods production will also produce data, which is an asset with long-lived value. This

rationalizes the commonly-observed practice of data barter. Many digital services, like apps, which

were costly to develop, are given away to customers at zero price. This is not generosity. Firms

are exchanging these services for their customers' data. The exchange of data for a service, at a

zero monetary price, is a classic barter trade. Such trades can arise in our model: Firms give away

their goods, as a form of costly investment in data.

   Finally, a data economy may feature specialization. In some circumstances, large firms that

have a comparative advantage in data production, derive most of their profit from data sales.

Meanwhile, small firms have a comparative advantage in high-quality goods production. Therefore,

the large firms produce high volumes of low-price goods, in order to produce data and sell it to

small firms, that produce higher-quality goods. The business model of these large firms is to do

lots of transactions at a low price and earn more revenue from data sales. While we know that

many firms execute a strategy like this, it is different from a capital accumulation economy and

suprising that such a strategy arises from simple economic properties of data as information.

   The primary contribution of the paper is not the particular predictions we explore. Some of

those predictions are more obvious, some more suprising. The larger contribution is a tool to think

clearly about the economics of aggregate data accumulation. Because our tool is a simple one,

                                                  3
many applications and extensions are possible. Section 3 describes applications ranging from the

distribution of firm size, to economic development, to finance.

   The model also offers guidance for measurement. Measuring and valuing data is complicated by

the fact that frequently, data is given away, in exchange for a free digital service. Our model makes

sense of this pricing behavior and assigns a value to goods and data that have a zero transactions

price. In so doing, it moves beyond price-based valuation, which often delivers misleading answers

when valuing digital assets.

   Our result should not be interpreted to mean that data does not contribute to growth. It

absolutely does, just like capital investment does. If ideas continue to improve, then data will help

us find the most efficient uses of these new ideas. The accumulation of data may even reduce the

costs of technological innovation by reducing its uncertainty, or increase the incentives for innovation

by increasing the payoffs. The point is that being non-rival, freely replicable and productive is not

enough for data alone to sustain growth. We still need innovation for that.


Related Literature.       In the growth literature, our model builds on Jones and Tonetti (2018).

They explore how different data ownership models affect the rate of growth of the economy. The

key difference in our model is that data is information, used to forecast a random variable. In Jones

and Tonetti (2018) and related work Cong et al. (2020), data contributes directly to productivity.

It is not information. A fundamental characteristic of information is that it reduces uncertainty

about something. When we model data as information, not technology, Jones and Tonetti (2018)'s

conclusions about the benefits of data privacy may still hold. But instead of long-run growth, there

is long-run stagnation.

   In models of learning-by-doing (Jovanovic and Nyarko (1996), Oberfield and Venkateswaran

(2018)) and organizational capital Atkeson and Kehoe (2005), firms also accumulate a form of

knowledge. But the economics differ. Unlike prediction data, this knowledge need not have long-

run diminishing returns. Also, it is not a tradeable asset. Our short-run increasing return to data

differs from growth models with increasing returns Farmer and Benhabib (1994), because those are

based on positive spillovers between firms. Ours is a feedback loop within a firm.

   Work on information frictions in business cycles (Caplin and Leahy (1994), Veldkamp (2005),

Lorenzoni (2009), Ordonez (2013), Ilut and Schneider (2014) and Fajgelbaum et al. (2017)) have


                                                   4
early versions of a data-feedback loop whereby more data enables more production, which in turn,

produces more data. In each of these models, information was a by-product of economic activity;

firms used this information to reduce uncertainty and guide their decision-making. But the key

difference is that information was a public good, not a private asset. The private asset assumption

in this paper changes firms' incentives to produce data. In these earlier models, firms use data to

forecast business cycles, not optimal firm strategy. We model data that is industry or firm specific,

and is private property of the firm.

       Work exploring the interactions of data and innovation complements ours. For example, Agrawal

et al. (2018) develop a combinatorial-based knowledge production function and embed it in the

classic Jones (1995) growth model to explore how breakthroughs in AI could enhance discovery

rates and economic growth.1 Our work analyzes big data and new prediction algorithms, in the

absence of technological change. Once we understand this foundation, one can layer these insights

about data and innovation on top.

       In the finance literature, Begenau et al. (2018) explore how growth in the processing of financial

data affects firm size. They do not model firms' use of their own data. There is also a literature on

data-driven decision making, which explores how data matters at a microeconomic level. We add

the aggregate effects of such activities.

       Finally, the insight that the stock of knowledge can serve as a state variable comes from the five-

equation toy model sketched in Farboodi et al. (2019). That was a partial-equilibrium numerical

exercise, designed to explore the size of firms with heterogeneous data. This paper builds an

aggregate equilibrium model that we solve analytically, with richer features and explores different

questions. The new features, including a market for data, non-rival data, and adjustment costs are

not mere whistles and bells. These new margins shape the answers to our main questions about

aggregate dynamics and long-run outcomes.
   1
    Other work in the vein includes:Lu (2019) who embeds self-accumulating AI in a Lucas (1988) growth model
and examines growth transition paths and welfare; Aghion et al. (2017) who explore the reallocative effects of AI, as
Baumol (1967)'s cost disease leads to the declining share of traditional industries' GDP.




                                                         5
2        A Data Economy Growth Model

The model looks much like a simple Solow (1956) model. To isolate the effect of data accumulation,

the model holds fixed productivity, aside from that which results from data accumulation. There

are inflows of data from new economic activity and outflows, as data depreciates. The depreciation

comes from the fact that firms are forecasting a moving target. Economic activity many periods

ago was quite informative about the state at the time. However, since the state has random drift,

such old data is less informative about what the state is today.

        The key differences between our data accumulation model and Solow's capital accumulation

model are three-fold: 1) Data is used for forecasting; 2) data is a by-product of economic activity,

and 3) data is, at least partially, non-rival. Multiple firms can use the same data, at the same time.

These subtle changes in model assumptions are consequential. They alter the source of diminishing

returns, create increasing returns and data barter, and produce returns to specialization.


2.1       Model

Real Goods Production                  Time is discrete and infinite. There is a continuum of competitive
                                            units of goods with k units of capital. These goods
firms indexed by i. Each firm can produce ki,t                   i,t

have quality Ai,t . Thus firm i's quality-adjusted output is


                                                               
                                                  yi,t = Ai,t ki,t                                                 (1)


        The quality of a good depends on a firm's choice of a production technique ai,t . Each period

firm i has one optimal technique, with a persistent and a transitory components: t +                 a,i,t .   Neither

component is separately observed. The persistent component t follows an AR(1) process: t =
¯ + (t-1 - 
           ¯) + t . The AR(1) innovation t  N (0,  2 ) is i.i.d. across time.2 The transitory
                                                  

shock      a,i,t   is i.i.d. across time and firms and is unlearnable.

        The optimal technique is important for a firm because the quality of a firm's good, Ai,t , de-

pends on the squared distance between the firm's production technique choice ai,t and the optimal
    2
    One might consider different possible correlations of i,t across firms i.       An independent  processes
(corr(i,t , j,t ) = 0, i = j ) would effectively shut down any trade in data. Since buying and selling data hap-
pens and is worth exploring, we consider an aggregate  process (corr(i,t , j,t ) = 1, i, j ). It is also possible to
achive an imperfect, but non-zero correlation.



                                                         6
technique t +    a,i,t :



                                            ¯ - (ai,t - t -
                                     Ai,t = A                     a,i,t )
                                                                         2
                                                                                                   (2)


Data      The role of data is that it helps firms to choose better production techniques. One in-

terpretation is that data can inform a firm whether blue or green cars or white or brown kitchens

will be more valued by their consumers, and produce or advertise accordingly. In other words, a

technique could represent a resource allocation. Transactions help to reveal customers' marginal

values, but these values are constantly changing. Firms must continually learn to catch up. An-

other interpretation is that the technique is inventory management, or other cost-saving activities.

Observing production and sales processes at work provides useful information for optimizing busi-

ness practices. For now, we model data as welfare-enhancing. We relax that assumption in Section

3.

     Specifically, data is informative about t . The role of the temporary shock a is that it prevents

firms, whose payoffs reveal their productivity Ai,t , from inferring t at the end of each period.

Without it, the accumulation of past data would not be a valuable asset. If a firm knew the value

of t-1 at the start of time t, it would maximize quality by conditioning its action ai,t on period-t

data ni,t and t-1 , but not on any data from before t. All past data is just a noisy signal about

t-1 , which the firm now knows. Thus preventing the revelation of t-1 keeps old data relevant

and valuable.

     The next assumption captures the idea that data is a by-product of economic activity. The
                                                                                               :
number of data points n observed by firm i at the end of period t depends on their production ki,t


                                                         
                                              ni,t = zi ki,t ,                                     (3)


where zi is the parameter that governs how much data a firm can mine from its customers. A data

mining firm is one that harvests lots of data per unit of output.

     Each data point m  [1 : ni,t ] reveals


                                         si,t,m = t+1 +      i,t,m ,                               (4)



                                                     7
where      i,t,m   is i.i.d. across firms, time, and signals. For tractability, we assume that all the shocks

in the model are normally distributed: fundamental uncertainty is t  N (µ, 2 ), signal noise is


 i,t,m    N (0,  2 ), and the unlearnable quality shock is         a,i,t
                                                                                  2 ).
                                                                            N (0, a


Data Trading and Non-Rivalry                   Let i,t be the amount of data traded by firm i a time t. If

i,t < 0, the firm is selling data. If it > 0, the firm purchased data.3 We restrict i,t  -ni,t so

that a firm cannot sell more data than it produces. Let the price of one piece of data be denoted

t .

       Of course, data is non-rival. Some firms use data and also sell that same data to others. If there

were no cost to selling one's data, then every firm in this competitive, price-taking environment

would sell all its data to all other firms. In reality, that does not happen. Instead, we assume that

when a firm sells its data, it loses a fraction  of the amount of data that it sells to each other firm.

Thus if a firm sells an amount of data i,t < 0 to other firms, then the firm has ni,t + i,t data

points left to add to its own stock of knowledge. Recall that for a data seller,  < 0 so that the firm

has less data than the ni,t points it produced. This loss of data could be a stand-in for the loss of

market power that comes from sharing one's own data. It can also represent the extent of privacy

regulations that prevent multiple organizations from using some types of personal data. Another

interpretation of this assumption is that there is a transaction cost of trading data, proportional

to the data value. If the firm buys i,t > 0 units of data, it adds ni,t + i,t units of data to its stock

of knowledge.


Data Adjustment and the Stock of Knowledge                                 The information set of firm i when it
                                              -1                   n
                                                                 t-1
chooses its technique ai,t is4 Ii,t = [{Ai, }t               i,
                                              =0 ; {{si,,m }m=1 } =0 ]. To make the problem recursive

and to define data adjustment costs, we construct a helpful summary statistic for this information,

called the "stock of knowledge."

       Each firm's flow of ni,t new data points allows it to build up a stock of knowledge i,t that it

uses to forecast future economic outcomes. We define the stock of knowledge of firm i at time t

to be i,t . We use the term "stock of knowledge" to mean the precision of firm i's forecast of t ,
   3
    This formulation prohibits firms from both buying and selling data in the same period.
   4
    We could include aggregate output and price in this information set as well. We explain in the model solution
why observing aggregate variables makes no difference in the agents' beliefs. Therefore, for brevity, we do not include
these extraneous variables in the information set.


                                                          8
which is formally:

                                        i,t := Ei [(Ei [t |Ii,t ] - t )2 ]-1 .                              (5)

Note that the conditional expectation on the inside of the expression is a forecast. It is the firm's

best estimate of t . The difference between the forecast and the realized value,          Ei [t |Ii,t ] - t , is
therefore a forecast error. An expected squared forecast error is the variance of the forecast. It's

also called the variance of , conditional on the information set Ii,t , or the posterior variance. The

inverse of a variance is a precision. Thus, this is the precision of firm i's forecast of t .

    Data adjustment costs capture the idea that a firm that does not store or analyze any data

cannot freely transform itself to a big-data machine learning powerhouse. That transformation

requires new computer systems, new workers with different skills, and learning by the management

team. As a practical matter, data adjustment costs are important because they make dynamics

gradual. If data is tradeable and there is no adjustment cost, a firm would immediately purchase

the optimal amount of data, just as in models of capital investment without capital adjustment

costs. Of course, the optimal amount of data might change as the price of data changes. But such

adjustment would mute some of the dynamics we are interested in.

    We assume that, if a firm's data stock was i,t and becomes i,t+1 , the firm's period-t output

is diminished by (i,t+1 ) =  (i,t+1 )2 , where  is a constant parameter and  represents the

percentage change: i,t+1 = (i,t+1 - i,t )/i,t . The percentage change formulation is helpful

because it makes doubling one's stock of knowledge equally costly, no matter what units data is

measured in.


Firm's Problem             A firm chooses a sequence of production, quality and data-use decisions

ki,t , ai,t , i,t to maximize

                                            t
                                       1
                         E0                              
                                                Pt Ai,t ki,t - (i,t+1 ) - t i,t - rki,t                     (6)
                                      1+r
                                t=0


    Firms update beliefs about t using Bayes' law. Each period, firms observe last period's revenues

and data, and then choose capital level k and production technique a. The information set of firm

i when it chooses its technique ai,t and its investment ki,t is Ii,t .

    As in Solow (1956), we take the rental rate of capital as given. This reveals the data-relevant


                                                          9
mechanisms as clearly as possible. It could be that this is an industry or a small open economy,

facing a world rate of interest r.


Equilibrium           Pt denotes the equilibrium price per quality unit of goods. In other words, the price

of a good with quality A is APt . The inverse demand function and the industry quality-adjusted

supply are:


                                                          ¯ Y - ,
                                                     Pt = P                                                      (7)
                                                             t

                                                                
                                              Yt =        Ai,t ki,t di.                                          (8)
                                                      i


Firms take the industry price Pt as given and their quality-adjusted outputs are perfect substitutes.


2.2    Solution

The state variables of the recursive problem are the prior mean and variance of beliefs about t-1 ,

last period's revenues, and the new data points. However, we can simplify this to one sufficient

state variables to solve the model simply. The next steps explain how.


Optimal Technique and Expected Quality                          Taking a first order condition with respect to

the technique choice, we find that the optimal technique is ai,t = Ei [t |Ii,t ]. Thus, expected quality

of firm i's good at time t in (2) can be rewritten as              E[Ai,t ] = A
                                                                              ¯ - E (Ei [t |Ii,t ] - t -   a,i,t )
                                                                                                                     2   .

The second term is an expected squared forecast error, or equivalently, a conditional variance, of

t +   a,i,t .   That conditional variance is denoted - 1   2
                                                     i,t + a . Therefore, the expected quality of firm

i's good at time t in (2) can be rewritten again as            Ei [Ai,t ] = A
                                                                            ¯ - -1 - a
                                                                                i,t
                                                                                     2.


   Notice that the way signals enter in expected utility, only the variance (or precision) matters,

not the prior mean or signal realization. As in Morris and Shin (2002), precision, which in this case

is the stock of knowledge, is a sufficient statistic for expected utility and therefore, for all future

choices. The quadratic loss, which eliminates the need to keep track of signal realizations, simplifies

the problem greatly.


The Stock of Knowledge               Since the stock of knowledge i,t is the sufficient statistic to keep

track of information and its expected utility, we need a way to update or keep track of how much


                                                          10
of this stock there is. Lemma 1 is just an application of Bayes' law, or equivalently, a modified

Kalman filter, that tell us how the stock of knowledge evolves from one period to the next.

Lemma 1 Evolution of the Stock of Knowledge In each period t,


                               -2 -1            -1
              i,t+1 = 2 (i,t + a ) + 2
                                                     + ni,t + i,t (1i,t >0 + 1i,t <0 )  -2        (9)


   The proof of this lemma and of all the lemmas and propositions that follow are in Appendix

A. Lemma 1 says that the stock of knowledge is the depreciated stock from the previous period t,

plus new data inflows.

   The inflows of data are new pieces of data that are generated by economic activity. The number

of new data points ni,t is assumed to be data mining ability times end of period physical output:
     . By Bayes' law for normal variables, the total precision of that information is the sum of the
zi ki,t

precisions of all the data points: ni,t  -2 . The term a
                                                       -2 in (9) is the additional information learned


from seeing one's own realization of quality Ai,t , at the end of period t. That information also gets

added to the stock of knowledge. At the firm level, we need to keep track of whether a firm buys

or sells data. Thus the newly added stock of data ni,t has to be adjustd for data trade. That is the

role of the indicator functions at the end of (9).

   One might wonder why firms do not also learn from seeing aggregate price and the aggregate

output. These obviously reflect something about what other firms know. But what they reflect is

the squared difference between t and other firms' technique ajt . That squared difference reflects

how much others know, but not the content of what others know. Because the mean and variance

of normal variables are independent, knowing others' forecast precision reveals nothing about t .

Seeing one's own outcome Ai,t is informative only because a firm also knows its own production

technique choice ai,t . Other firms' actions are not observable. Therefore, aggregate prices or quan-

tities reveal what other firms predicted well, which conveys no useful information about whether

t is high or low.

   How does data flow out or depreciate? Data depreciates because data generated at time t is

about next period's optimal technique t+1 . That means that data generated s periods ago is about

t-s+1 . Since  is an AR(1) process, it is constantly evolving. Data from many periods ago, about

a  realized many periods ago, is not as relevant as more recent data. So, just like capital, data

                                                     11
depreciates. Mathematically, the depreciated amount of data carried forward from period t is the
                             -2 ))-1 +  2       -1               -2 term represents the stock of knowledge
first term of (9): (2 (i,t + a                       . The i,t + a

at the start of time t plus the information about period t technique revealed to a firm by observing

its own output. This stock of knowledge is multiplied by the persistence of the AR(1) process

squared, 2 . If the process for optimal technique t was perfectly persistent then  = 1 and this

term would not discount old data. If the  process is i.i.d.  = 0, then old data is irrelevant for the

future. Next, the formula says to invert the precision, to get a variance and add the variance of the

AR(1) process innovation 2 . This represents the idea that volatile  innovations make knowledge


about past 's less relevant. Finally, the whole expression is inverted again so that the variance

is transformed back into a precision. This precision represents a (discounted) stock of knowledge.

The depreciation of knowledge is the period-t stock of knowledge, minus the discounted stock.

   At the aggregate level, an economy as a whole cannot buy or sell data. Therefore, for the

aggregate economy,


                                      -2                         -2
                  Inflows:        +
                                  t =
                                                        
                                                    zi ki,t di + a                                   (10)
                                                i
                                                                                    -1
                 Outflows:        -       -2
                                  t = t + a -
                                                                         -2 -1
                                                               (2 (i,t + a )) + 2
                                                                                         di.         (11)
                                                           i


A One-State-Variable Problem                We can now express expected firm value recursively, with

the stock of knowledge as the single state variable in the following lemma.


Lemma 2 The optimal sequence of capital investment choices {ki,t } and data sales {i,t  -ni,t }

solve the following recursive problem:


                                 ¯ - -1 -  2 k  - (i,t+1 ) - t i,t - rki,t
               V (i,t ) = max Pt A   i,t  a   i,t
                          ki,t ,i,t
                                           1
                                      +             V (i,t+1 )                                       (12)
                                          1+r

                  and the law of motion for 
where ni,t = zi ki,t                         i,t is given by (9).



   This result greatly simplifies the problem by collapsing it to a deterministic problem with choice

variables k and  and one state variable, i,t . In expressing the problem this way, we have already

substituted in the optimal choice of production technique. The quality Ai,t that results from the

                                                         12
optimal technique depends on the conditional variance of t . Because the information structure is

similar to that of a Kalman filter, that sequence of conditional variances is deterministic.

        The non-rivalry of data acts like a kinked price of data, or a negative transactions cost in (9).5


Valuing Data            Since i,t can be interpreted as a discounted stock of data, V (i,t ) captures

the value of this data stock. V (i,t ) - V (0) is the present discounted value of the net revenue the

firm receives because of its data. Therefore, the marginal value of one additional piece of data, of

precision 1, is simply Vt / i,t . When we consider markets for buying and selling data, Vt / i,t

represents the firm's demand, its marginal willingness to pay for data.



3        Long-Run and Short-Run Growth of a Data Economy

In this section, we establish key properties of growth in this data economy. The first set of results

involve the long-run growth of the data economy. We start by showing that within the model, there

is no long run growth. We then move to results that describe general conditions under which data

used for forecasting can sustain infinite growth. These results are not model-specific. They do not

prove that data-driven growth is not possible. Rather, if one believes that the accumulation of data

for forecasting can sustain growth forever, there are some logically equivalent statements that one

must also accept. The second set of results demonstrate that data can create firm-level increasing

returns, in the short run.


3.1       Diminishing Returns and Zero Long Run Growth

Just like we typically teach the Solow (1956) model by examining the inflows and outflows of capital,

we can gain insight into our data economy growth model by exploring the inflows and outflows of

data. Figure 1 illustrates the inflows and outflows (eq.s 10 and 11), in a form that looks just

like the traditional Solow model with capital accumulation. What we see on the left is the large

distance between inflows and outflows of data, when data is scarce. This is a period of fast data

accumulation and fast growth in the quality and value of goods. What we see on the right is the
    5
    To see the kinked price interpretation more clearly, redefine the choice variable to be  , the amount of data added
to a firm's stock of knowledge . Then,  = ni,t + i,t for data purchases (i,t > 0) and  = ni,t + i,t for data sales
when i,t < 0. Then, we could re-express this problem as a choice of  and a corresponding price that depends on
whether   ni,t or  < ni,t .



                                                          13
Figure 1: Economy converges to a data steady state: Aggregate inflows and outflows of data.
Line labeled inflows plots the quantity in (10) for the aggregate economy, for different levels of initial data stock.
Line labeled outflows plots the quantity in (11). This is equivalent to the outflow and inflow for a representative firm
i who operates in an economy populated with identical firms with no trade. The representative firm makes optimal
                  
capital decision ki,t , with different levels of initial data stock.


distance between inflows and outflows diminishing, which represents growth slowing. Eventually,

inflows and outflows cross at the steady state. If the stock of knowledge ever reached its steady

state level, it would no longer change, as inflows and outflows just balance each other. Likewise,

quality and GDP would stop growing.

       One difference between data and capital accumulation is the nature and form of depreciation.

In the Solow model of capital accumulation, depreciation is a fixed fraction of the capital stock,

always linear. In the data accumulation model, depreciation is not linear, but is very close to

linear. Lemma 5 in the Appendix shows that depreciation is approximately linear in the stock of

knowledge, with an error bound that depends primarily on the variance of the innovation in .

       Inflows have diminishing returns because returns to data are bounded. With infinite data, all

learnable uncertainty about  can be resolved. With a perfect forecast of , the expected good
           ¯ - a
quality is A   2 , which is finite.           6   Thus, the optimal capital investment is finite. Since a

function that is continuous and not concave will always cross any finite upper bound, productivity,

investment and data inflows must all be concave in the stock of knowledge .
   6
    it is also true that inflow concavity comes from capital having diminishing returns. The exponent in the production
function is  < 1. But that is a second force. Even if capital did not have diminishing marginal returns, inflows
would still exhibit concavity.



                                                          14
Figure 2: Aggregate growth dynamics: Data accumulation grows knowledge and output over time,
                                                                                                    2
with diminishing returns. Parameters:  = 1, r = 0.2,  = 0.97,  = 0.3,  = 0.4,  = 0.1, A = 1, P = 1, a =
      2
0.05,   = 0.5,  2 = 0.1, z = 5,  = 1 . See appendix B for details of parameter selection and numerical solution of the
model.


    What diminishing returns means for a data-accumulation economy is that, over time, the aggre-

gate stock of knowledge and aggregate amount of output would have a time path that resembles the

concave path in Figure 2. Without idea creation, data accumulation alone would generate slower

and slower growth.

    Conceptually, diminishing returns arise because we model data as information, not directly as an

addition to productivity. Information has diminishing returns because its ability to reduce variance

gets smaller and smaller as beliefs become more precise. Of course, mathematically, diminishing
                                                 ¯ as the upper bound on productivity. That
returns is hard-wired into the model by imposing A

raises the question of how general this result is. The next set of results speak to the generality and

justify the mathematical form we adopt.


Long Run Growth Impossibility Results                      One might be concerned that diminishing returns

is a remnant of the quadratic loss assumption, or some other functional form. Here, we consider

an abstract economy, where the assumptions we impose are that data is used to forecast future

outcomes and that productivity is not growing from sources other than improved forecasts. If there

is sustained growth arising from such an economy two things must be true: 1) Perfect foresight

implies infinite real output; and 2) the future is a deterministic function of today's observable data.

Both appear implausible.



                                                         15
   The point is not that data is unproductive. The point is that absent any technological progress,

better forecasts are not a tool that can logically sustain long-run growth.

   Consider an economy, where data is used to forecast random outcomes. Let t represent the

distribution of firms' stock of knowledge i,t at time t. For a continuum of firms, t encapsulates

exactly what measure of firms have how much data, or more specifically, how much forecast preci-

sion, when they forecast t . There is a finite-valued mapping f (t ) that maps the forecast precision

of all firms into output (or, it could be a mapping into quality-adjusted output At Yt ). f (t ) defines

a "data economy." The fixed nature of the f function represents the assumption that productivity

is fixed. Then the following results must hold for data accumulation to sustain a minimal positive

rate of aggregate output growth.


Proposition 1 Perfect Foresight Must Deliver Infinite Output                    A data economy with

output Yt = f (t ) can sustain an aggregate growth rate of output ln(Yt+1 ) - ln(Yt ) that is greater

than any lower bound g > 0, in each period t, only if perfect foresight i,t =  for some firm i

implies infinite output yi,t = .


   From a mathematical perspective, this result is perhaps obvious. But it is economically signif-

icant for two reasons. First, there are many models with perfect foresight. None generate infinite

real economic value. Second, if society as a whole knows tomorrow's state, they can simply produce

today what they would otherwise be able to produce tomorrow.

   Furthermore, the feasibility of perfect foresight is dubious, as the next result shows.


Proposition 2 Data-Driven Growth Implies Deterministic Future                       Suppose aggregate

output is a finite-valued function of each firm's forecast precision: Yt = f (t ), and all data points

si,t,m are t-measurable signals about some future event t+1 .Sustained aggregate growth ln(Yt+1 ) -

ln(Yt )  g > 0 requires that future events t+1 are t-deterministic: t+1 is a deterministic function

of the time-t sigma algebra of past events.


   This result is significant because it illustrates why forecast precisions should not become infinite

(no perfect foresight). Infinite precision implies no un-forecastable noise. In other words, perfect

foresight (i,t = ) is not consistent with the existence of fundamental randomness. If there is no

un-forecastable component of the future state, that means the future state is deterministic. Perfect

                                                  16
forecasting requires that the future event is a deterministic function of observable information today.

If the mapping is not deterministic, then the forecast has randomness, or noise and is not perfect.

   Thus, if one believes some events tomorrow are truly random today, then one must logically

accept a finite upper bound on precision. A finite upper bound implies diminishing marginal

returns: any function without this property would violate the upper bound.

   Taken together, these results suggests two distinct reasons why one might be skeptical of long-

run, data-driven growth. The first reason is that perfect forecasts might not create infinite output.

The second reason is that a perfect forecast implies that future events are deterministic functions

of past events. Proving such determinism is well beyond the scope of economics.


3.2   Increasing Returns in the Short Run

While the previous results focused on diminishing returns, the other force at work is increasing

returns. Increasing returns arise from the data feedback loop: A firm with more data produces

higher-quality goods, which induces them to invest more, produce more, and sell more. This, in

turn, generates more data for them. That feedback causes aggregate knowledge accumulation to

accelerate. The feedback loop competes against diminishing returns. Diminishing returns always

dominate when data is abundant; the previous results about the long run were unambiguous. But

when firms are young, or data is scarce, increasing returns can be strong enough to create an

increasing rate of growth. While that sounds positive, it also creates the possibility of a firm

growth trap, with very slow growth, early on the in the lifecycle of a new firm.

   While we have been talking about symmetric firms that do not trade data, we now relax the

symmetry assumption to allow for data trade. We consider a setting were all firms are in steady

state. Then, we drop in one, atomless, low-data (low i,t ) firm and observe its transition. From

this exercise, we learn about barriers to new firm entrants.

   Before stating the formal result, we need to define net data flow. Recall that aggregate data

inflows +
        t are the total precision of all new data points at t (eq. 10). Aggregate data outflows

-
t are the end-of-period-t stock of knowledge minus the discounted stock (eq. 11). We can define

the data flows as the difference between data inflows and outflows. At the aggregate level, this is
           -
dt = d+
      t - dt . At he individual level, data flows are defined using the individual version of
                                                                   -
equations (10)-(11), which incorporates data trade: di,t = d+
                                                            i,t - di,t . Proposition 3 states when


                                                  17
a single firm entering faces increasing and then decreasing rates of net data flow.


Proposition 3 S-Shaped Accumulation of Knowledge                           When all firms are in steady state,

except for one firm i, then the firm's net data flow di,t

  1) increases with the stock of knowledge i,t when that stock is low, i,t < ^ , when goods
                                                                1
      production has sufficient diminishing marginal return,  < 2 , adjustment cost  is sufficiently

      low, goods and data prices are sufficiently high, and the second derivative of the value function

      is bounded V  [, 0); and

                                                ^
                                                ^.
  2) decreases with i,t when i,t is larger than 


    Entry dynamics and aggregate growth dynamics differ. The difference between one firm entering

when all other firms are in steady state, and all firms growing together, is prices. When all firms are

data-poor, all goods are low quality. Since quality units are scarce, prices are high. The high price

of good induces these firms to produce goods, creating data. When the single firm enters, others

are already data-rich. Quality goods are abundant, so prices are low. This makes it costlier for

the single firm to grow. What works in the opposite direction is that data may also be abundant,

keeping the price of data low.

    For some parameter values, the diminishing returns to data is always stronger than the data

feedback loop. Proposition 6 in the Appendix shows that, when learnable risk is abundant, knowl-

edge accumulation is concave.7 In such cases, each firm's trajectory looks like the concave path in

Figure 2. But for other economies, the increasing returns of the data feedback loop is strong enough

to make data inflows convex, at low levels of knowledge. The inflows, outflows and growth dynamics

of such an economy are illustrated in Figure 3. This figure illustrates one possible economy. Data

production may lie above or below the data outflow line.

    The difference between data inflows (solid line) and data production (dashed line) is data pur-

chases. These purchases push the inflows line above the outflows line and help speed up convergence.

    What does an economy with this S-shaped knowledge accumulation look like? Figure 4 illus-

trates the growth path of a new entrant firm in this environment. On the left side of the time path,
   7
     An additional proposition in the Appendix proves that the time-path of the stock of knowledge is s-shaped,
implying a long low-return incubation period for new entrants. That result is not logically equivalent to proposition
3 because one also needs to show that the stock of knowledge  is always increasing.


                                                         18
Figure 3: New firms grow slowly: inflows and outflows of data of a single firm.
Line labeled inflows plots the individual firm i version of the quantity in equation (10), that makes an optimal capital
                                  
decision ki,t and data decision i,t , with different levels of initial data stock. This firm is in an economy where all
other firms are in steady state. Line labeled outflows plots the individual firm i version of the quantity in (11). Data
                    -2
production is zi ki,t  , which is inflows without the data purchases i,t .


where the firm is young and the stock of data is low, increasing returns dominates. In this region,

increasing returns in knowledge means low returns to production at low levels of knowledge. Early

on, the negative profits and negative book value could jeopardize the firm's financial viability.

    We define the firm book value to be the cumulative, discounted sum of profits, plus the cost of

any purchased data. This corresponds to the accounting practice of including the assets acquired

by the firm, in this case the data the firm has bought, in the book value.




                                      
                  Profitst = Pt Ai,t ki,t - (i,t+1 ) - t i,t - rki,t                                               (13)
                                t
            Book Valuet =            (1 + r)t- P Ai, ki,
                                                      
                                                         - (i, +1 ) -  i, 1i, <0 - rki,                            (14)
                                =0


    The indicator function 1i,t <0 does not subtract any cost of purchased data because, according

to GAAP accounting rules, purchased intangible assets add to the book value of a firm. However,

intangibles created by the company, i.e. the firm's own data, are not counted. The market value of

the firm is the Bellman equation value function V () in (12). The difference between the market

value of a firm and its book is used to measure intangible assets. In our numerical example, the new


                                                          19
Figure 4: S-shaped growth can create initial profit losses. Knowledge stock defined in Lemma 1. Book
                                                                                             2         2
value defined in (14). Parameters:  = 1, r = 0.2,  = 0.97,  = 0.3,  = 0.4, A = 0.5, P = 0.5, a = 0.05,   =
     2
0.5,  = 0.1, z = 0.01,  = 0.002, P = 1,  = 1


entrant has negative book value for 9 periods. Such a long period of negative value suggests that

new entrants with financing constraints might falter. Adding firm entry is one of many directions

for additional research.



4     Applications

Frameworks like this are only as important as the questions they can be used to answer. The benefit

of a simple framework is that it can be extended in many directions to answer other questions. In

this section, we investigate a diverse set of questions through the lens of the model.


4.1    Data Barter

Data barter arises when the goods are exchanged for customer data, at a zero price. While this is a

knife-edge possibility in this model, it is an interesting outcome because it illustrates a phenomenon

we see in reality. In many cases, digital products, like apps, are being developed at great cost to

a company and then given away "for free." Free here means zero monetary price. But obtaining

the app does involve giving one's data in return. That sort of exchange, with no monetary price

attached, is a classic barter trade.


                                                   20
Proposition 4 Bartering Goods for Data                 It is possible that a firm will optimally choose
                      > 0, even if its price per unit is zero: P = 0.
positive production ki,t                                        t



   The possibility of barter is not shocking, given the assumptions. But the result demonstrates

the plausibility of the framework, by showing how it speaks to data-specific phenomena we see.

The framework also allows us to value data, despite its zero monetary price.

   At Pt = 0, the marginal benefit of investment is additional data that can be sold at price t .

If the price of data is sufficiently high, and/or the firm is a sufficiently productive data producer

(high zi ), then the firm should engage in costly production, even at a zero goods price, because it

also produces data, which has a positive price.

   Figure 4 illustrated an example where the firm makes negative profits for the first 1-2 periods

because they sell goods at a loss. Producing goods at a loss eventually pays off for this firm. It

generates data that allows the firm to become profitable. This situation looks like Amazon at its

inception. During its first 17 quarters as a public company, Amazon lost $2.8 billion, before turning

a profit. Today, it is one of the most valuable companies in the world.


4.2   Specialization in Data Sales

This framework can also give us insight into the organization of data markets. When some firms

have better data mining ability (zi ), do they keep the data or sell most of it off? There are two

possible ways a data-efficient firm might profit. First, it could retain the data, to make high-quality

goods, to sell at a high price. Such firms are specialized in the production of high-quality goods.

Alternatively, they could sell off most of their data and produce low-quality goods. Their goods

would earn little or even no revenue. But their data sales would earn profits. We say that such a

firm specializes in data production or data services.

   When data is sufficiently non-rival, a version of comparative advantage emerges that resembles

patterns of international trade: Firms that are better at data collection have a comparative (and

absolute) advantage in data and specialize in data sales. Firms that are poor at data collection

have the comparative advantage in high-quality goods production and specialize in that.

   We consider a competitive market populated by a measure  of low data-productivity firms

(zi = zL , hereafter L-firms), and 1 -  of high data-productivity firms (zi = zH , hereafter H-firms),


                                                  21
in steady state. We are interested in the difference between the accumulated data of the H- and

L-firms in the steady state. Firms who accumulate more data produce higher quality goods. In

order to make this comparison, we define the concept of the knowledge gap.


Definition 1 (Knowledge Gap) Knowledge gap denotes the equilibrium difference between knowl-

edge level of a high and low data productivity firm, t = Ht - Lt .


   When the knowledge gap is high, data-producing firms produce high-quality goods. When

it is negative, data producers behave like data platforms, providing basic low-cost services and

profiting mostly from their data. Regardless of the knowledge gap, high data-productivity firms

would produce many units of goods and data. The question is whether they use data to produce

high-quality goods or not.


Lemma 3 Data-Accumulation by Individual Efficient Data Producer                     Suppose there is

a single, measure-zero H -firm in the market with zi = zH ( = 1). In steady state, the knowledge
                                          dss
gap is positive, ss > 0, and increasing   dzH   > 0,  and zH .


   When a single, high-productivity (H) firm enters a market populated by L-firms ( = 1). The

steady state outcome is what is intuitively expected. A positive knowledge gap means that the data-

productive firm is larger, accumulates more data in the steady state, and specializes in high quality
                             dss
production. Furthermore,     dzH   > 0 means that the data productivity of the H-firm increases, it

accumulates even more knowledge in steady state.

   Next, consider a steady state in which there are many H-firms. Formally, the measure of L-

firms, , is bounded away from one. In this case, when data is sufficiently non-rival, the reverse

happens; the knowledge gap is negative. The next result shows that, when firms can retain most

of the data they sell, high-productivity data miners sell more data; so much more that they are left

with less knowledge.


Proposition 5 More Efficient Data Producers Accumulate Less Knowledge                       Suppose
                                                                                               1
that there is a strictly positive measure of high-data-productivity firms, lambda < 1. If  <   2   and

 is sufficiently small then when data is sufficiently non-rival,  < ¯
                                                                    , the steady state knowledge gap

is negative: ss < 0.


                                                  22
   The non-rivalry of data here is essential. The proof in the Appendix also shows that when data

                          ), the knowledge gap becomes positive ss > 0. Data non-rivalry acts
is sufficiently rival ( > ¯

like a negative bid-ask spread in the data market. It drives a wedge between the value of the data

sold and the opportunity cost, the amount of data lost through the act of selling. While a bid-ask

spread typically involves some loss from exchange of an asset, with non-rivalry, exchanging data

results in more total data being owned. If the buyer pays a price  per unit of data gained, the

seller earns more than  per unit of data forfeited, because they forfeit only a fraction of the data

sold. This negative spread, or tax, on transactions incentivizes data producers to be prolific sellers

of data. The incentive to sell data can be so great that these data producers are left with almost

no data for themselves.

   Since many economists and policy makers are concerned about concentration in data markets,

we also explore what happens to data specialization when the the data market is more concentrated.

The numerical example in Figure 5 illustrates the visible hallmarks of data specialization. Since

data is multi-use (non-rival), the knowledge gap is negative. As a result, efficient data producers

earn more of their profits from data sales. Low-efficiency producers earn negative data profits

because they are data purchasers. We interpret  close to 1, where there is a small measure of

high-efficiency data producers, as being data market concentration. Figure 5 shows that data

market concentration amplifies the specialization of data firms and high-quality goods producers.

   Data specialization also grows as the gap between data-productivity of H- and L-type firms

widens.

Corollary 1 Data Efficiency Divergence Amplifies Knowledge Gap                      Suppose  < 1,

< 1
  2 ,  is sufficiently small, and the economy is in steady state. For each , ¯
                                                                             2 , zH such that


                                 dss
                                 dzH   >0     if    zH > zH ,  > ¯
                                                                 2
                                 dss
                                 dzH   <0     if    zH > zH ,  < ¯
                                                                 2 .


   If  is high, the knowledge gap was originally positive, and it becomes more positive when data

processing efficiency diverges. If  is low, meaning that data is not very rival, negative knowledge

gap becomes more negative. But the cutoff ¯
                                           for positive knowledge gap is not the same as the

cutoff ¯
       2 for growing knowledge gap. That means that for some intermediate levels of data rivalry,


                                                   23
Figure 5: Data market concentration () causes large (H ) firms to derive most profits from data.
Data market concentration is one minus the fraction of high-data-efficiency (H ) firms. Parameters:  = 1, r =
                                               2         2
0.2,  = 0.97,  = 0.3,  = 0.09, A = 1, P = 0.5, a = 0.05,   = 0.5,  2 = 0.1, z1 = 0.01, z2 = 10



the knowledge gap can shrink as the efficiency of the more efficient data producers improve.

   Comparing Propositions 3 and 5 raises the question: How does a positive mass of high-data-

productivity firms cause the result to change sign? The key is that the single, measure-zero H-firm

cannot influence the amount of data held by the continuum or L-firms. The knowledge gap falls

in Proposition 5, not because H-firms lose knowledge but because L-firms gain knowledge. That

gain cannot happen when there is a single, measure-zero H-firm because that one firm is simply

not large enough to sell data to all L-firms. By continuity, the knowledge gap also rises when

data-productive firms in an industry are scarce (  1). Scarce data-efficient firms means that the

data production market is very concentrated in a small number of firms.


Interpretation: Data Platforms and Data Services                      Large firms that sell most of their

data are like data platforms (the second scenario of Corollary 1). That might appear contradictory

because social networks and search engines do use lots of their own data. But they use that data

primarily to sell data services to their business customers, which is a type of data sale. For example,

Facebook revenue comes not from postings, but from advertising, which is a data service. A formal

analysis of the equivalence between data services and data sales is in Admati and Pfleiderer (1990).




                                                     24
4.3      Data for Business Stealing

Data is not always used for a socially productive purpose as in this model. Firms can use data

simply to steal customers away from other firms. Using an idea from Morris and Shin (2002), we

can model such business-stealing activity as an externality that works through productivity:

                                                                       1
                                ¯ - ai,t - t -                2                                   2
                         Ai,t = A                     a,i,t       +          aj,t - t -   a,j,t       dj           (15)
                                                                      j =0


This captures the idea that when one firm uses data to reduce the distance between their chosen

technique ai,t and the optimal technique  + , that firm benefits, but all other firms lose a little

bit. These gains and losses are such that, when added up to compute aggregate productivity, they

cancel out:             ¯. This represents an extreme view that data processing contributes absolutely
                 Ai,t = A

nothing to social welfare. While that is unlikely, examining the two extreme cases is illuminating.

       Reformulating the problem this way makes very little difference for most of our conclusions. The

externality does reduce productivity and welfare. But it does not change firms' choices because it

does not enter in a firm's first order condition.8 Therefore, it does not change data inflows, outflows

or accumulation.

       Whether data is productivity-enhancing or not matters for welfare, but does not change our

conclusions about bounded growth, data poverty traps or the organization of data markets.


4.4      Data-Driven Innovation

If there is technological progress and ideas are accumulating, data could facilitate that accumulation

of ideas, and thereby promote growth.
                                                                                       ¯t in equation
       The simplest way to accommodate data-driven innovation in the model is to allow A
                                                      ¯t (it ).9 More generally, advances in the quality
2 to be a function of firm's stock of data at time t, A
         ¯t might depend on the size of the labor force engaged in research LR , some research capital
frontier A
   8
      To see why this is the case, note that firm i's actions have a negligible effect on the average productivity term
  1                     2
 j =0
       aj,t - t - a,j,t dj . So the derivative of that new externality term with respect to i's choice variables is zero.
If the term is zero in the first order condition, it means it has no effect on choices of the firm.
    9
      Alternatively, A ¯t could be a function of a firm's newly collected data at time t - 1,
 ¯
At ni,t + i,t (1i,t >0 + 1i,t <0 ) . This formulation looks like learning-by-doing models (Jovanovic and Nyarko,
1996).




                                                              25
K R , and research data DR :


                                            ¯t-1 = (LR ) (K R ) (DR )1--
                                       ¯t - A
                                       A             t     t      t



If 1 -  -  > 0, then data not only contributes to growth, it is essential for growth.

   But perhaps transactions records are essential for marketing and product development, but true

innovations make use of some other kind of data, perhaps developed with labor and capital, in a

lab. If that is true, then DR is a function of LR and K R . In this case, we could substitute out DR

and write the idea production function in terms of LR and K R , without mentioning data at all.

That model's role for data would be similar to our baseline model. Either could be integrated into

this framework, perhaps to explore optimal data policy.


4.5   Data Portfolio Choice

A useful extension of the model would be to add a choice about what type of data to purchase or

process. Firms that make different data choices would then naturally occupy different locations in

a product space or operate in different industries.

   The relevant state t becomes an n × 1 vector of variables. The stock of knowledge would then

be the inverse variance-covariance matrix, i,t :=           Ei [(Ei [t |Ii,t ] - t )(Ei [t |Ii,t ] - t ) ]-1 , which is
n × n. The choice variables {ki,t , i,t } are n × 1 vectors of investments in different sectors, projects

or attributes and the corresponding data sales. The multi-dimensional recursive problem becomes


            V (i,t ) = max Pt           1 (A
                                           ¯ -  2 )1 - -1 k  - (i,t+1 ) -  i,t - rk 1
                                               a       i,t i,t            t        i,t
                       ki,t ,i,t
                                         1
                                   +           V (i,t+1 )                                                        (16)
                                        1+r

        means that each element is raised to the power ,
where ki,t                                                               1 is an n × 1 vector of ones, and the
law of motion for i,t is given by (9).

   In such a model, locating in a crowded market space presents a trade-off. Abundant production

of goods in that market will make goods profits low. However, for a firm that is a data purchaser,

the abundance of data in this market will allow them to acquire the data they need to operate

efficiently, at a low price. If many data purchasers locate in this product space and demand data


                                                       26
about a particular risk t (j ), then efficient data producers might also want to produce goods that

load on risk j , in order to produce high-demand data.



4.6   Other Possible Applications and Extensions

Below we mention other extensions, which we do not explore in detail.

    Optimal Data Policy. Figure 3 shows how a lack of data can slow the growth of a firm. Given

this problem, a benevolent government might adopt a data policy to promote the growth of small

and mid-size firms. The policy solution to increasing returns growth traps is typically a form of

big push investment. In the context of data invesment, the government could collect data itself,

from taxes or reporting requirements, and share it with firms. For example, China shares data

with some firms, in a way that seems to facilitate their growth Beraja et al. (2020). Alternatively,

the government might facilitate data sharing or act to prevent data from being exported to foreign

firms. The current policy debates in the European Union, could be partly about countries fighting

for their ability to keep up in the data race, to prevent being stuck in relative data poverty.

    Firm Size Dispersion. One of the biggest questions in macroeconomics and industrial organi-

zation is: What is the source of the changes in the distribution of firm size? One possible source

is the accumulation of data. The S-shaped dynamic of firm growth implies that firm size first

becomes more heterogeneous and then converges. During the convex, increasing returns portion of

the growth trajectory, small initial differences in the initial data stock of firms get amplified.

    Investing in Data-Savviness. The fixed data productivity parameter zi represents the idea that

certain industries will spin off more data than others. Credit card companies learn more than

barber shops. We could allow a firm to do more to collect, structure and analyze the data that

its transactions produce. It could choose its data-savviness zi , at a cost. Endogenizing this choice

might produce changes in the cross-section of firms' data, over time.



5     Conclusions

The economics of transactions data bears some resemblance to technology and some to capital.

It is not identical to either. Yet, when economies accumulate data alone, the aggregate growth

economics are similar to an economy that accumulates capital alone. Diminishing returns set

                                                  27
in and the gains are bounded. Data's production process, with its feedback loop from data to

production and back to data, also makes increasing returns a natural outcome. Thus, while the

accumulation and analysis of data may be the hallmark of the "new economy," this new economy

has many economic forces at work that are old and familiar.

   This simple framework speaks to many data-related phenomena. It can be a foundation for

thinking about many more.




                                              28
References

Admati, Anat and Paul Pfleiderer, "Direct and Indirect Sale of Information," Econometrica,

  1990, 58 (4), 901­928.

Aghion, Philippe, Benjamin F. Jones, and Charles I. Jones, "Artificial Intelligence and

  Economic Growth," 2017. Stanford GSB Working Paper.

Agrawal, Ajay, John McHale, and Alexander Oettl, "Finding Needles in Haystacks: Arti-

  ficial Intelligence and Recombinant Growth," in "The Economics of Artificial Intelligence: An

  Agenda," National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc, 2018.

Atkeson, Andrew and Patrick J Kehoe, "Modeling and Measuring Organization Capital,"

  Journal of political Economy, 2005, 113 (5), 1026­1053.

Baumol, William J., "Macroeconomics of Unbalanced Growth: The Anatomy of Urban Crisis,"

  The American Economic Review, 1967, 57 (3), 415­426.

Begenau, Juliane, Maryam Farboodi, and Laura Veldkamp, "Big Data in Finance and the

  Growth of Large Firms," Working Paper 24550, National Bureau of Economic Research April

  2018.

Beraja, Martin, David Y. Yang, and Noam Yuchtman, "Data-intensive Innovation and the

  State: Evidence from AI Firms in China," 2020. MIT Working Paper.

Caplin, Andrew and John Leahy, "Business as Usual, Market Crashes, and Wisdom After the

  Fact," American Economic Review, 1994, 84 (3), 548­565.

Cong, Lin William, Danxia Xie, and Longtian Zhang, "Knowledge Accumulation, Privacy,

  and Growth in a Data Economy," Privacy, and Growth in a Data Economy (October 8, 2020),

  2020.

Fajgelbaum, Pablo D., Edouard Schaal, and Mathieu Taschereau-Dumouchel, "Uncer-

  tainty Traps," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2017, 132 (4), 1641­1692.

Farboodi, Maryam, Roxana Mihet, Thomas Philippon, and Laura Veldkamp, "Big Data

  and Firm Dynamics," American Economic Association Papers and Proceedings, May 2019.

                                               29
Farmer, RE and J Benhabib, "Indeterminacy and Increasing Returns," Journal of Economic

  Theory, 1994, 63, 19­41.

Ilut, Cosmin and Martin Schneider, "Ambiguous Business Cycles," American Economic Re-

  view, August 2014, 104 (8), 2368­99.

Jones, Chad and Chris Tonetti, "Nonrivalry and the Economics of Data," 2018. Stanford GSB

  Working Paper.

Jones, Charles I., "R&D-Based Models of Economic Growth," Journal of Political Economy,

  1995, 103 (4), 759­784.

Jovanovic, Boyan and Yaw Nyarko, "Learning by Doing and the Choice of Technology,"

  Econometrica, 1996, 64 (6), 1299­1310.

Lorenzoni, Guido, "A Theory of Demand Shocks," American Economic Review, December 2009,

  99 (5), 2050­84.

Lu, Chia-Hui, "The impact of artificial intelligence on economic growth and welfare," 2019.

  National Taipei University Working Paper.

Lucas, Robert, "On the mechanics of economic development," Journal of Monetary Economics,

  1988, 22 (1), 3­42.

Morris, Stephen and Hyun Song Shin, "Social value of public information," The American

  Economic Review, 2002, 92 (5), 1521­1534.

Oberfield, Ezra and Venky Venkateswaran, "Expertise and Firm Dynamics," 2018 Meeting

  Papers 1132, Society for Economic Dynamics 2018.

Ordonez, Guillermo, "The Asymmetric Effects of Financial Frictions," Journal of Political Econ-

  omy, 2013, 121 (5), 844­895.

Solow, Robert M., "A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth," The Quarterly Journal

  of Economics, 02 1956, 70 (1), 65­94.

Veldkamp, Laura, "Slow Boom, Sudden Crash," Journal of Economic Theory, 2005, 124(2),

  230­257.

                                              30
A       Appendix: Derivations and Proofs. Not For Publication.

A.1      Belief updating
The information problem of firm i about its optimal technique i,t can be expressed as a Kalman filtering system,
with a 2-by-1 observation equation, (^
                                     µi,t , i,t ).
    We start by describing the Kalman system, and show that the sequence of conditional variances is deterministic.
Note that all the variables are firm specific, but since the information problem is solved firm-by-firm, for brevity we
suppress the dependence on firm index i.
    At time t, each firm observes two types of signals. First, date t - 1 output reveals -1 good quality Ai,t-1 =
         
yi,t-1 /ki,t                                                                                  a        ¯
             -1 . Good quality Ai,t-1 provides a noisy signal about t-1 . Let that signal be si,t-1 = (A - Ai,t-1 )
                                                                                                                    1/2
                                                                                                                        -
ai,t-1 . Note that, from equation 2, that the signal derived from observed output is equivalent to


                                                     sa
                                                      i,t-1 = t-1 +   a,t-1 ,                                          (17)

                     2
where   a,t    N (0, a ).
    The second type of signal the firm observes is data points. They are a by-product of economic activity. For
                                                                                                           
firms that do not trade data, the number of new data points added to the firm's data set is i,t = ni,t = zki,t . For
firms that do trade data, i,t = ni,t + i,t (1i,t >0 + 1i,t <0 ). The set of signals {st,m }m[1:i,t ] are equivalent to an
aggregate (cross-firm average) signal s
                                      ¯t such that:


                                                        s
                                                        ¯t = t +   s,t ,                                               (18)


where   s,t    N (0,  2 /it ). The state equation is


                                                 t - ¯ = (t-1 - ¯) + t ,


               2
where t  N (0,   ).
    At time, t, the firm takes as given:


                                                µt-1 = E t | st-1 , y t-2

                                                t-1 = V ar t | st-1 , y t-2


where st-1 = {st-1 , st-2 , . . . } and y t-2 = {yt-2 , yi,t-3 , . . . } denote the histories of the observed variables, and
st = {st,m }m[1:i,t ] .




                                                             31
    We update the state variable sequentially, using the two signals. First, combine the priors with sa
                                                                                                      i,t-1 :


                                                              - 1        -2 a
                                                              t-1 µt-1 + a si,t-1
                              E t-1 | It-1 , sa
                                              i,t-1 =
                                                                    - 1   -2
                                                                    t-1 + a

                                                      -1    -2                   -1
                              V t-1 | It-1 , sa
                                              i,t-1 = t-1 + a


                                 E t | It-1 , sa       ¯                     a
                                               i,t-1 =  +  · E t-1 | It-1 , si,t-1 - 
                                                                                     ¯

                                                        -1   -2                    -1
                                V t | It-1 , sa       2
                                              i,t-1 =  t-1 + a                          + 2




Then, use these as priors and update them with s
                                               ¯t :

                                                               -1           -1
                                        2 - 1   -2
                                          t-1 + a                   + 2
                                                                                 · E t | It-1 , sa
                                                                                                 i,t-1 + t 
                                                                                                            -2
                                                                                                               s
                                                                                                               ¯t
                    µt = E  t | I t =                                                     -1                               (19)
                                                                              -1
                                                       2 - 1   -2
                                                         t-1 + a                   + 2
                                                                                               + t  -2
                                                                    -1           -1                  -1
                    t = V ar t | It =       2 - 1   -2
                                              t-1 + a                     + 2
                                                                                      + t  -2                              (20)


Multiply and divide equation (19) by t as defined in equation (20) to get


                    µi,t = (1 - t  -2 t ) ¯(1 - ) +  (1 - Mt )µt-1 + Mt sa
                                                                         i,t-1                            + t  -2 t s
                                                                                                                    ¯t ,   (21)

           -2        -2 -1
where Mt = a  (t-1 + a ) .
    Equations (20) and (21) constitute the Kalman filter describing the firm dynamic information problem. Impor-
tantly, note that t is deterministic.




A.2     Making the Problem Recursive: Proof of Lemma 1
Lemma. The sequence problem of the firm can be solved as a non-stochastic recursive problem with one state variable.
Consider the firm sequential problem:

                                                                      t
                                                               1                  
                                         max E0                           (Pt At kt - rkt )
                                                  t=0
                                                              1+r

We can take a first order condition with respect to at and get that at any date t and for any level of kt , the optimal
choice of technique is


                                                            at = E[t |It ].



Given the choice of at 's, using the law of iterated expectations, we have:

                                                       2                                              2
                                 E[(at - t -   a,t )       |Is ] = E[V ar[t +      a,t |It ]|Is ]   + a ,




                                                                 32
for any date s  t. We will show that this object is not stochastic and therefore is the same for any information set
that does not contain the realization of t .
    We can restate the sequence problem recursively. Let us define the value function as:

                                                                             1
    V ({st,m }m[1:t ] , yt-1 , µ
                               ^t-1 , t-1 ) = max E Pt At kt - rkt +                  V ({st+1,m }m[1:t+1 ] , yt , µ
                                                                                                                   ^t , t )|It-1
                                            kt ,at                          1+r

with i,t being the net amount of data being added to the data stock. Taking a first order condition with respect
to the technique choice conditional on It reveals that the optimal technique is at = E[t |It ]. We can substitute the

optimal choice of at into At and rewrite the value function as


        V ({st,m }m[1:t ] , yt-1 , µ                       ¯ - (E[t |It ] - t -
                                   ^t-1 , t-1 ) = max E Pt A                             a,t )
                                                                                                 2    
                                                                                                     kt - rkt
                                                     kt

                                                                      1
                                                                 +               V ({st+1,m }m[1:t+1 ] , yt , µ
                                                                                                              ^t , t )|It-1 .
                                                                     1+r

Note that   a,t   is orthogonal to all other signals and shocks and has a zero mean. Thus,


        V ({st,m }m[1:t ] , yt-1 , µ                       ¯ - ((E[t |It ] - t )2 + a
                                   ^t-1 , t-1 ) = max E Pt A                        2    
                                                                                      ) kt - rkt
                                                     kt

                                                                      1
                                                                 +               V ({st+1,m }m[1:t+1 ] , yt , µ
                                                                                                              ^t , t )|It-1 .
                                                                     1+r

Notice that E[(E[t |It ] - t )2 |It-1 ] is the time-t conditional (posterior) variance of t , and the posterior variance of
                                                                                ¯ - t - a
beliefs is E[(E[t |It ] - t )2 ] := t . Thus, expected productivity is E[At ] = A       2
                                                                                          , which determines the within
period expected payoff. Additionally, using the Kalman system equation (20), this posterior variance is

                                                                            -1               -1
                                      t = Pt 2 (- 1   2 -1
                                                t-1 + a )  + 2
                                                                                 + t  -2


which depends only on t-1 , nt , and other known parameters. It does not depend on the realization of the data.
Thus, {st,m }m[1:t ] , yt-1 , µ
                              ^t do not appear on the right side of the value function equation; they are only relevant
for determining the optimal action at . Therefore, we can rewrite the value function as:


                                       ¯ - t - a
                                               2                                                         1
                      V (t ) = max Pt (A         )kt + i, t - (i,t+1 ) - rkt +                                  V (t+1 )
                                 kt                                                                     1+r
                                                          -1               -1
              s.t.      t+1 =     2 (-
                                     t
                                       1   2 -1
                                         + a ) + 2
                                                               + i,t  -2


    Data use is incorporated in the stock of knowledge through (9), which still represents one state variable.


A.3     Lemma 2: Equilibrium and Steady State Without Trade in Data
Capital Choice             The first order condition for the optimal capital choice is

                                        -1             t+1                  1                t+1
                               Pt Ai,t kt  -  (·)           -r+                     V (·)        =0
                                                       ki,t                1+r              ki,t




                                                                33
          t+1         -1 -2
where    ki,t
                = zi ki,t  and  (·) = 2 (i,t+1 - i,t ). Substituting in the partial derivatives and for i,t+1 , we
get
                                                                                              1/(1-)
                                                                  1
                              ki,t =       Pt Ai,t + zi  -2 (          V (·) - 2 (·))                                          (22)
                                       r                         1+r

       Differentiating the value function in Lemma 1 reveals that the marginal value of data is

                                                  Ai,t             t+1                  1                t+1
                        V (i,t ) = Pt Ai,t ki,t        -  ( ·)         -1 +                    V ( ·)
                                                   i,t             t                   1+r               t

                                                                            -2
where Ai,t / i,t = - 2
                   i,t and  t+1 / t = 
                                       2
                                         2 + 2        -2
                                               (i,t + a  )                       .
       To solve this, we start with a guess of V and then solve the non-linear equation above for ki,t . Then, update
our guess of V .


Steady State           The steady state is where capital and data are constant. For data to be constant, it means that
i,t+1 = i,t . Using the law of motion for  (eq 9), we can rewrite this as

                                                                                 -1
                                        ss  -2 + 2 (ss + a
                                                         -2 -1
                                                           ) + 2
                                                                                      = ss                                     (23)

                                                                                                               -1
This is equating the inflows of data i,t  -2 with the outflows of data 2 (i,t + a
                                                                                -2 -1
                                                                                  ) + 2
                                                                                                                    - i,t . Given a
number of new data points ss , this pins down the steady state stock of data. The number of data points depends
on the steady state level of capital. The steady state level of capital is given by (22) for Ass depending on ss and a
steady state level of V (ss ). We use the term Vss to refer to the partial derivative V / , evaluated at the steady
state value of . We solve for that steady state marginal value of data next.
       If data is constant, then the level and derivative of the value function are also constant. Equating V (i,t ) =
V (i,t+1 ) allows us to solve for the marginal value of data analytically, in terms of kss , which in turn depends on
ss :
                                                                            -1
                                                         1        t+1
                                        Vss = 1 -                     |ss            
                                                                                 Pt kss -
                                                                                        ss
                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                               (24)
                                                        1+r       t

Note that the data adjustment term  (·) dropped out because in steady state  = 0 and we assumed that
 (0) = 0.
       The equations (22), (23) and (24) form a system of 3 equations in 3 unknowns. The solution to this system
delivers the steady state levels of data, its marginal value and the steady state level of capital.


A.4        Equilibrium With Trade in Data
To simplify our solutions, it is helpful to do a change of variables and optimize not over the amount of data purchased
                                                                                                                  
or sold i,t , but rather the closely related, net change in the data stock i,t . We also substitute in ni,t = zi ki,t and




                                                                 34
substitute in the optimal choice of technique ai,t . The equivalent problem becomes

                                                                                                 
                                         ¯ - - 1   2                                   i,t - zi ki,t
                       V (i,t ) = max Pt A   i,t - a ki,t -                                                 - rki,t
                                     ki,t ,i,t                                   1i,t >ni,t + 1i,t <ni,t
                                                                    1
                                                 -  (i,t+1 ) +             V (i,t+1 )                                             (25)
                                                                   1+r

                                                              -2 -1                      -1
                                       where i,t+1 = 2 (i,t + a ) + 2
                                                                                              + i,t  -2                           (26)


Capital Choice                The first order condition for the optimal capital choice is

                                                                                   -1
                                                              -1            zi ki,t
                                   F OC [ki,t ] :    Pt Ai,t ki,t +                           -r =0                               (27)
                                                                      1i,t >ni,t + 1i,t <ni,t

       Solving for ki,t gives
                                                                                        1
                                                             1                         1-
                                                    ki,t =     (Pt Ai,t + ~ zi )                                                  (28)
                                                             r

where ~  /(1i,t >ni,t + 1i,t <ni,t ). That the adjusted price ~ is higher when a firm sells data. We are dividing
by  < 1, which raises the price. This idea is that a firm that sells  units of data only gives up  units of data. So
it's as if they are getting a higher price per unit of data they actually forfeit.
       Note that a firm's capital decision is optimally static. It does not depend on the future marginal value of data
(i.e., V (i,t+1 )) explicitly.


Data Use Choice                  The first order condition for the optimal i,t is

                                                          i,t+1             1                         i,t+1
                              F OC [i,t ] :      - (·)          -~+                    V (i,t+1 )           =0                    (29)
                                                          i,t              1+r                       i,t

          i,t,t+1
where     i,t
                    =  -2 .


Steady State             The steady state is where capital and data are constant. For data to be constant, it means that
i,t+1 = i,t . Using the law of motion for  (eq 9), we can rewrite this as

                                                                                       -1
                                                 ss  -2 + 2 (ss + a
                                                                  -2 -1
                                                                    ) + 2
                                                                                            = ss                                  (30)

                                                                                                                  -1
This is equating the inflows of data i,t  -2 with the outflows of data 2 (i,t + a
                                                                                -2 -1
                                                                                  ) + 2
                                                                                                                       - i,t . Given a
number of new data points ss , this pins down the steady state stock of data. The number of data points depends
on the steady state level of capital. The steady state level of capital is given by Equation 28 for Ass depending on
ss and a steady state level of Vss . We solve for that steady state marginal value of data next.
       If data is constant, then the level and derivative of the value function are also constant. Equating V (i,t ) =
V (i,t+1 ) allows us to solve for the marginal value of data analytically, in terms of kss , which in turn depends on
ss :
                                                                                  -1
                                                              1        t+1
                                              Vss = 1 -                    |ss              
                                                                                       Pss kss -
                                                                                               ss
                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                  (31)
                                                             1+r       t



                                                                   35
Note that the data adjustment term  (·) dropped out because in steady state  = 0 and we assumed that
 (0) = 0.
    From the first order condition for i,t (eq 29), the steady state marginal value is given by


                                                                   2
                                                      Vss = (1 + r)~                                              (32)


    The equations (28), (29), (30) and (31) form a system of 4 equations in 4 unknowns. The solution to this system
delivers the steady state levels of capital, knowledge, data, and marginal value data.


A.4.1       Characterization of Firm Optimization Problem in Steady State

At this point, from tractability, we switch notation slightly. Instead of optimizing over the net additions to data  ,
we refer to the purchase/sale of data  := i,t - ni,t .


Individual Optimization Problem
                                                                       2
                                                      i,t+1 - i,t                             1
                 V (i,t ) = max Pt Ai,t ki,t -                             - i,t - rki,t +       V (i,t+1 )
                            ki,t ,i,t                     i,t                                1+r
                                    -2 -1              -1
                   i,t+1 = 2 (i,t + a ) + 2                       
                                                            + zi ki,t + 1i,t >0 + 1i,t <0 i,t  -2

                            ¯ - -
                     Ai,t = A     1   2
                                i,t - a



where i denotes the firm data productivity.
    Thus the steady state is characterized by the following 8 equations:

                                        -2 -1                 -1
                             L = 2 (L + a ) + 2                           
                                                                   + zL k L + L  -2                               (33)
                                        -2 -1                  -1
                             H = 2 (H + a ) + 2                             
                                                                     + zH k H + H  -2                             (34)

                                ¯ - -
                             P (A    1   2    -1
                                    L -  a ) kL
                                                       -1
                                                 + zL kL  =r                                                      (35)
                                                                -1
                                ¯ - -1   2    -1            zH kH
                             P (A   H -  a ) kH  +                         =r                                     (36)
                                                                  
                                                                       2
                             P  -2 kL
                                    
                                      =  2
                                         L      1+r-                    -2         2                              (37)
                                                                 2
                                                            2 +    (L + a  )
                                                                        2
                             P  -2 kH
                                    
                                      =  2
                                         H       1+r-                    -2            2                          (38)
                                                                  2
                                                             2 +    (H + a  )
                                       -1
                                ¯ (A
                                   ¯ - L    2               ¯ - -1   2                        -
                             P =P         - a ) kL + (1 - )(A   H -  a ) kH                                       (39)

                             L + (1 - )H = 0                                                                      (40)


A.5     Proof of Proposition 1: Perfect Foresight Must Imply Infinite Output
Suppose not. Then, for every firm i  I , with   i/I
                                                      di = 0, producing infinite data ni,t   implies finite firm output
yi,t < . Thus My  supi {yi,t } + 1 exists and is finite. By definition, yi,t < My , i. If the measure of all firms is



                                                             36
also finite, that is 0 < N <  such that          i
                                                     di < N . As a result, the aggregate output is also finite in any period
t + s, s > 0:
                                           Yt+s =        yi,t di < My        di < My N < .                             (41)
                                                     i                   i

    On the other hand, given that the aggregate growth rate of output ln(Yt+1 ) - ln(Yt ) > g > 0, we have that in
period t + s, s > 0,


                       ln(Yt+s ) - ln(Yt ) =[ln(Yt+s ) - ln(Yt+s-1 )] + · · · + [ln(Yt+1 ) - ln(Yt )] > gs,            (42)


which implies


                                                          Yt+s > Yt egs .                                              (43)

                    ln(M N )-ln(Yt )
Thus for s > s             g
                                       ,

                                                                       ln(My N )-ln(Yt )
                                                                   g
                                 Yt+s > Yt egs > Yt egs > Yt e                g
                                                                                           = My N,                     (44)


which contradicts (41).


A.6       Proof of Proposition 2: Perfect Foresight Implies a Deterministic Future
We break this result into two parts. Part (a) of the result is that in order to have infinite output in the limit, an
economy will need an infinite forecast precisions. Forecasts with errors won't produce the maximum possible, infinite,
output.
    Part (b) of the result says that if signals are derived from the observations of past events, then infinite precision
implies that the one-period-ahead future is deterministic. Allowing precesion to be infinite means there cannot be
any fundamental randomness, any unlearnable risk, because that would cause forecasts to be imperfect. Infinite
precision means zero forecast error with certainty. Such perfect forecasts can only exist if future events are perfectly
forecastable with past data. Perfectly forecastable means that, conditional on past events, the future is not random.
Thus, future events are conditionally deterministic.
    Part a. Claim: Suppose aggregate output is a finite-valued function of each firm's forecast precision: Yt = f (t ).
A data economy can sustain an aggregate growth rate of output ln(Yt+1 ) - ln(Yt ) that is greater than any lower
bound g > 0, in each each period t, only if infinite data ni,t   for some firm i implies infinite precision i,t  .
Proof part a : From proposition 1, we know that sustaining aggregate growth above any lower bound g > 0 arises

only if a data economy achieves infinite output Yt   when some firm has infinite data ni,t  . Since Yt is a
finite-valued function of t , it can only be that Yt   if some moment of t is also becoming infinite t  ±.
Moments of t cannot become negative infinite because t is a distribution over t which is a precision, defined
to be non-negative. Thus for some moment, t  . If some amount of probability mass is being placed on 's
that are approaching infinity, that means there is some measure of firms that are achieving perfect forecast precision:



                                                                  37
i,t  .
    Suppose not. Then, for every firm i  I , with    i/I
                                                           di = 0, producing infinite data ni,t   implies finite precision
i,t < , that is t is finite (except for zero-measure sets). Since Yt = f (t ) is a finite-valued function, we must
have Yt < , as ni,t  . In other words, since Yt is a finite-valued function of t , it can only be that Yt   if
some moment of t is also becoming infinite t  ±. Moments of t cannot become negative infinite because t
is a distribution over t which is a precision, defined to be non-negative. Thus for some moment, t  . If some
amount of probability mass is being placed on 's that are approaching infinity, that means there is some measure
of firms that are achieving perfect forecast precision: i,t  .
    But finite limit output is inconsistent with sustained growth. From proposition 1, we know that sustaining
aggregate growth above any lower bound g > 0 arises only if a data economy achieves infinite output Yt   when
some firm with positive measure has infinite data ni,t  . This is a contradiction.


    Part b. Claim: Suppose all data points si,t,m are t-measurable signals about some future event t+1 . If infinite
data ni,t   for some firm i implies infinite precision i,t  , then future events t+1 are deterministic: t+1 is
a deterministic function of the sigma algebra of past events.
    We prove this statement by proving the contrapositive: If the future, t is not deterministic at t - 1, then the
stock of knowledge must be finite.
    Suppose t+1 is not a deterministic function of the sigma algebra of past events. Then t+1 is random with
respect to the sigma algebra of the t-1 history of events. Let Ft be the sigma algebra derived from the history
               t-1
{ , s,m , sa
           i, } =0 .

    If signals are measurable with respect to all past events, then they are a subset of the sigma algebra of past events.
                                                                                            t-1            n    t-1
Formally, the information set of firm i when it chooses its technique ai,t is Ii,t = [{sa                   i,
                                                                                        i, } =0 ; {{si,,m }m=1 } =0 ]. By

assumption, si,t-1,m and sa
                          i,t-1 are measurable with respect to Ft , that is B  B , { : si,t,m ( )  B }  Ft . So

 (Ii,t )  Ft . This implies that t - 1 measurable signals cannot contain information about the future event t , other
than what is already present in the history of events.
    By construction, t is not measurable with respect to Ft-1 , that is B  B s.t. { : t ( )  B }  Ft . Since
 (Ii,t )  Ft , we have that { : t ( )  B }  Ii,t,m , and thus t is not measurable with respect to Ii,t,m . Therefore
Var(t | Ii,t,m ) > 0. By the definition of  as the inverse of the conditional variance, this implies i,t < .
    This showed that, if t is random with respect to past events, it must be random with respect to all possible
signals si,t,m . If t is random with respect to the signals, there is strictly positive forecast variance. If forecast
variance cannot be zero, then signal precision cannot be infinite.
    Since we proved that the the stock of knowledge must be finite, therefore the contrapositive, that infinite precision
implies a deterministic future, must also be true.




A.7      Proof of Proposition 3: S-shaped Accumulation of Knowledge
We proceed in two parts: convexity and then concavity.


                                                              38
    Part a. Convexity at low levels of t . In this part, we first calculate the derivatives of data infow and outflow
with respect to i,t , combine them to form the derivative of data net flow, and then show that it is positive in given
parameter regions for i,t < ^.

    Since all other firms, besides firm i are in steady state, we take the prices t and Pt as given. Since data is
sufficiently expensive, data purchases are small. We prove this for zero data trade. By continuity, the result holds
for small amounts of traded data.
                                             -2                                           d+             -1 -2      k
    Recall that data inflow is d+
                                i,t = zi,t ki,t  and its first derivative is               i,t
                                                                                           i,t
                                                                                                 = zi,t ki,t   i,t
                                                                                                               i,t
                                                                                                                   . We then need
          ki,t
to find    i,t
               .
    Since we assumed that  is small, consider the case where  = 0. In this case, the data adjustment term in
                                                                                                     1/(1-)
equation 22) drops out and it reduces to ki,t =               r
                                                              
                                                                  Pt Ai,t + zi  -2 1+
                                                                                    1
                                                                                      r
                                                                                        V (i,t+1 )            , which implies


                                            1-                                1
                                           ki,t =         Pt Ai,t + zi  -2       V (i,t+1 ) .
                                                     r                       1+r

Differentiating with respect to i,t on both sides yields

                                            1-     1-
                                           ki,t   ki,t   ki,t          -     ki,t
                                                =      ·      = (1 - )ki,t ·
                                            i,t   ki,t  i,t                   i,t

               Ai,t                     i,t+1
Plugging in     i,t
                      = i,t -2 and       i,t
                                                = 2 [2 + 2        -2 -2
                                                           (i,t + a )] , we have

                      ki,t                                                     1
              =                 =    
                                    ki,t                 Pt i,t -2 + zi  -2       V (i,t+1 )2 [2 + 2        -2 -2
                                                                                                     (i,t + a )]  .
                       i,t                 (1 - )r                            1+r

Therefore,

   d+i,t                 2-1 -2        2                                1
              =    zi,t ki,t                     Pt i,t -2 + zi  -2        V (i,t+1 )2 [2 + 2        -2 -2
                                                                                              (i,t + a )]
    i,t                             (1 - )r                            1+r
                         2-1 -2        2                      2-1 -4 
                                                                       2
                                                                             1
              =    zi,t ki,t                Pt i,t -2 + zi,t
                                                         2
                                                             ki,t                 V (i,t+1 )2 [2 + 2        -2 -2
                                                                                                     (i,t + a )] .
                                    (1 - )r                         1 -  r(1 + r)
                                                                                                                                     (45)

                                                                                                                        -1
    Next, we calculate the derivative of data outflow d-           -2   2       -2 -1
                                                       i,t = i,t + a - ( (i,t + a ))  + 2
                                                                                                                             with respect
to i,t . We have
                                     d-i,t                    1
                                           =1- 2      -2 2 2             -2 -1 2 .                                                   (46)
                                      i,t      (i,t + a ) (  + -2 (i,t + a ) )
    The derivatives of net data flow is then

d+i,t   d-i,t                        2-1 -2 2                     2-1 -4 
                                                                                2
                                                                                     1
      -                =       zi,t ki,t        Pt i,t -2 + zi,t
                                                             2
                                                                 ki,t                     V (i,t+1 )2 [2 + 2        -2 -2
                                                                                                             (i,t + a )]
 i,t     i,t                            (1 - )r                             1 -  r(1 + r)
                                                 1
                               + 2      -2 2  2                  - 2 - 1 2 - 1.                                       (47)
                                 (i,t + a  ) (  + -2 (i,t + a       ) )

                                                                       2-1 -2                    2
For notational convenience, denote the first term in (2) as M1 = zi,t ki,t    
                                                                            (1-  P  -2 > 0, the second term as
                                                                               )r t i,t
      2    2-1 -4          2                       -2 -2
M2 = zi,t ki,t        1
                1- r(1+ r)
                           V (i,t+1 )2 [2 +2
                                             (i,t +a )]  0 and the third term as M3 =                                      -2 2
                                                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                                 2 +-2 (     -2 -1 2   >
                                                                                                                   2 (i,t +a ) (        i,t +a )  )




                                                                       39
                                                                                                 d+
                                                                                                  i,t       d-
                                                                                                             i,t
0. Notice that M3 - 1 < 0 always holds, and thus M2 + M3 - 1 < 0.                                 i,t
                                                                                                        -    i,t
                                                                                                                   > 0 only holds when Pt is
sufficiently large so that M1 dominates.
     Assume that V                                   ¯ ) + M2 ( ). Then
                             [, 0). Let h(i,t )  M1 (P

                                                                   2                                                                    2
                                        3-2                                                        1
       h (i,t )     =      (2 - 1)zi,t ki,t                                ¯ i,t -2 + zi,t  -2
                                                                        -2 P                          2 [2 + 2        -2 -2
                                                                                                               (i,t + a )]
                                                      r(1 - )                                     1+r
                                  2-1       2                            1           2 2
                           +zi,t ki,t                  ¯ -
                                                  -2 -2P   3
                                                         i,t - zi,t 
                                                                     -2
                                                                            2 2            -2 3 .
                                         (1 - )r                        1+r  ( +  2
                                                                                    (i,t + a ))

The first term is positive when  > 1 , and negative when  < 1                                        ¯ < f (i,t ),
                                                              . And the second term is positive when P
                                   2                        2

                  ¯ > f (i,t ). To see this, note that
and negative when P


                          2-1        2                          1           22
                     zit kit               -2 -2P
                                                ¯ - 3
                                                  it - zit 
                                                            -2
                                                                   2                                               3   >0                   (48)
                                  (1 - )r                      1+r   2 +  2      -2
                                                                            it + a

               ¯ < f (i,t ), where
if and only if P

                                                                                             2
                                                                                             
                                          f (i,t )     := -zit  -2 1+
                                                                    1
                                                                      r
                                                                        2 3
                                                                          it               2  + -2      3                                   (49)
                                                                                       (2 + ( it a ))

Notice by inspection that f (i,t ) < 0.
     Let ^ be the first root of

                                                                  h(i,t ) = 1 - M3 ,                                                        (50)

then if  <    1
                ,   when i,t < ^ and Pt > f (),
                                             ^ we have that h(i,t ) is decreasing in i,t and h()  1 - M3 . Since
              2
                                                                   d+
                                                                    i,t       d-
                                                                               i,t                                        1
  V , we then have M1 + M2  1 - M3 , that is                        i,t
                                                                          -      i,t
                                                                                        > 0. By the same token, if  >     2
                                                                                                                              and Pt < f (i,t ),
       d+
        i,t       d-
                   i,t
then    i,t
              -      i,t
                           < 0.


     Part b. Concavity at high levels of t .               In this part, we first calculate limit of the derivatives of net data flow
                                                                                                                                       di,t
with respect to i,t is negative when i,t goes to infinity and then prove that when i,t is large enough,                                 i,t
                                                                                                                                              is
negative.
                 2
     For   1 and    0, data outflows are bounded below by zero. But note that outflows are not bounded
                                                                                                                                       d-
                                                                                                                                        i,t
above. As the stock of knowledge i,t  , outflows are of O(i,t ) and approach infinity. We have that                                     i,t
                                                                                                                                              =
                     1                                                                        d-
                                                                                               i,t
1-           -2 2 2 +-2 (     -2 -1 2 .              It is easy to see that limi,t             i,t
                                                                                                     = 1.
     2 (i,t +a ) (       i,t +a )  )
                                                                        d+              2-1 -2          2
     For the derivative of data inflow (45), note that                   i,t
                                                                          i,t
                                                                                  zi,t ki,t    
                                                                                             (1-  P  -2 because 0 <  < 1 and
                                                                                                )r t i,t
                                  d+
                                   i,t
V    < 0. Thus limi,t              i,t
                                           0.
                           d +                  di,t -
     Therefore,     limi,t   i,t
                             i,t
                                           -     i,t
                                                          -1. Since data outflows and inflows are continuously differentiable,
^                     ^
^ > 0 such that i,t > ,
                      ^                              di,t +       di,t -
                        we have                       i,t
                                                              -    i,t
                                                                            < 0, which is the decreasing returns to data when data is
abundant.




                                                                           40
A.8     Proof of Proposition 4: Firms Sell Goods at Zero Price (Data Barter)
Proof: Proving this possibility requires a proof by example. Suppose the price goods is Pt = 0. We want to show
that an optimal production/ investment level Kt can be optimal in this environment. Consider a price of data t
is such that firm i finds it optimal to sell a fraction  > 0 of its data produced in period t: i,t = -ni,t . In this
                                                                                                               (i,t+1 )
case, differentiating the value function (12) with respect to k yields (t /)zi k-1 = r +                        ki,t
                                                                                                                        .   Can this
optimality condition hold for positive investment level k? If k1- =                       t zi 
                                                                                          (i,t+1 )      > 0, then the firm optimally
                                                                                    r+     ki,t
                                                                                                     

chooses ki,t > 0, at price Pt = 0.


A.9     Proof of Lemma 3: Knowledge Gap When High Data Productivity is
        Scarce
When there is a single zH firm, L = 0 in steady state and (kL , L ) and (P,  ) are determined by the following 4
equations:



                                                    -2 -1               -1           -2
                                         L = 2 (L + a ) + 2
                                                                             + zL k L                                           (51)

                                            ¯ - -
                                         P (A    1   2    -1
                                                L -  a ) kL
                                                                   -1
                                                             + zL kL  =r                                                        (52)

                                                                                2
                                         P  - 2 kL
                                                 
                                                   =  2
                                                      L   1+r-                        -2      2                                 (53)
                                                                             2
                                                                    2   +      (L   + a  )
                                               ¯ - -
                                            ¯ (A    1  2            -
                                         P =P      L - a )kL                                                                    (54)


    While (kH , H , H ) are determined by the following 3 equations, taking the above (kL , L , P,  ) as given:



                                                                  -1
                                           ¯ - -1   2    -1   zH kH
                                        P (A   H -  a ) kH  +        =r                                                         (55)
                                                                
                                                                                2
                                        P  -2 kH
                                               
                                                 =  2
                                                    H     1+r-                        -2      2                                 (56)
                                                                             2
                                                                    2 +        (H   + a  )
                                                   -2 -1             -1
                                        H = 2 (H + a ) + 2                         
                                                                            + zH k H + H  -2                                    (57)


    Manipulate to get


                ¯ - -1  2                zH     1-
             P (A   H - a ) +               = rkH                                                                               (58)
                                         
                   1-
                                                                        2
             kH = kH           1-
                                    =         2
                                              H   1+r-                                                                          (59)
                                        P  -2              2 + 2      -2
                                                                 (H + a  )
                                                                                         2


                1-2       1       ¯ - -1  2
                                                                                                          2
                 1-
                               P (A   H - a ) + zH
                                                           1-
                                                                =         2
                                                                          H         1+r-                                        (60)
                      r   1-                                        P  -2                         2 + 2      -2
                                                                                                        (H + a  )
                                                                                                                     2



    Next we show three steps:

   a. For  < ¯
             , more data productivity makes the "more data productive firm" (zH firm) both larger, and retaining


                                                             41
         more data.

                                                                               dkH      dH
                                                          ¯        
                                                           s.t.  < ¯               > 0,     > 0.
                                                                               dzH      dzH

              and zH , the "more data productive firm" (zH firm) retains more data when  increases.
   b. For  < ¯

                                                                                           dH
                                                                ¯        
                                                                 s.t.  < ¯                    > 0.
                                                                                            d

   c. ¯
       > 1.

This completes the proof.
    Part a. Take the total derivative of equation (60) wrt to zH and simplify. It implies

                                                           2-    1                                          1 -2
                                                     2          1-       ¯- 2 - 1
                                                                       P A a                    +zH        1-
                                                                                            H
                 dH                                                               (1-)
                     =                                                
                 dzH                         4 +2 a 2 2
                                                                                       1                          2
                                                                                                                                    1 -2
                          2 2    H 1+r -                                                   +3
                                                                                                 ¯ - P (a H +1) +zH                1-
                                                                             2 P  -1
                                                                      
                                           (      2 + ) 3
                                           2 + 2 (a              )                               AP     
                                                      H                                                       H
                                               P
                                                                         -                                (1-)2
                                                                                                              H

                              2
                              i A(H )
                      =
                          B (H ) - P A(H )

            ¯ A
Note that i P ¯ - a
                  2
                    -       1               1-
                                 + zi = i rki  . Use that to simplify                           dH
                                                                                                      by letting
                            i                                                                   dzH


                                                          1
                                                      2- 1-                     1 -2                  2-1
                                                                   1-
                                                    2 i     
                                                               i rki           1-                       2-1
                                                                                                2 r 1- ki
                                   A(i) =                                                   =                                                      (61)
                                                            (1 - )2  i                           (1 - )2  i

                                                                               2 (2 +a
                                                                                     2 2
                                                                                        )
                                                   2 2 i 1 + r -               2 ( 2 + ) 3
                                                                           (2 +   a   i )                     dC (i)
                                   B (i) =                                                                =                                        (62)
                                                                          P                                    d i
                                                                                   2
                                                    2 2
                                                      i 1+r-                 2 ( 2 + ) 2                      
                                                                         (2 +   a   i )                   i k i
                                   C (i) =                                                            =                                            (63)
                                                                         P                                 

where i = L, H , L = 1 and H = .
         dH                                                                                                                            dH
    In   dzH
               the numerator is positive. Thus "more data productive firms retains more data", or                                      dzH
                                                                                                                                             > 0 iff the
denominator is positive, which is the case if



                                                          2 (2 +a
                                                                2 2
                                                                   )
                          2 2 H      1+r-                2 ( 2 + ) 3
                                                                                                 2-1
                                                                                                2-1
                                                     (2 +   a   H )                     2 r 1- ki
                                                                                  - i P             >0
                                                    P                                    (1 - )2  i

                                                                   2 (2 + a2 2
                                                                             )                                        2-1
                                                                                                                             2-1
                          2 2 (1 - )3
                                    H               1+r-                                          > i P 2  2 r         1-   ki
                                                                (2 +  2  2 +  ))3
                                                                        (a    H


    which leads to ¯
                   :

                                                                                            2 (2 +a
                                                                                                  2 2
                                                                                                     )
                                               2 2 (1 - )3
                                                         H                1+r-             2 ( 2 + ) 3
                                                                                       (2 +   a   H )
                                     ¯
                                     =                                         2-1
                                                                                      2-1
                                                                     2 P 2 r    1-   ki



                                                                             42
    Furthermore, consider equation (38). Keeping the prices constant, the left hand side is increasing in kH . Alter-
natively, the derivative of the right hand side with respect to H is given by

                                                                   2 -2
                                                          2 ( 2 +   a )
                                      2H        1+r-              -2       3    .
                                                           2
                                                       2 +   (H + a  )

       2 -2
   (2 + a )
    2 ( + -2 )    < 1, thus equation (38) implies that the term in the parenthesis is positive, thus the derivative is
(2 +   H a    )
positive. Thus H and kH move in the same direction.
    Since the high data productivity firm is atomistic, so L and kL are unchanged. Thus the proposition also implies
that surprisingly, both H-L size ratio and H-L knowledge gap of the two firms is increasing in data productivity of
the more productive firm if  < ¯
                               :

                                             d(kH - kL )      d(H - L )
                                                         > 0,           >0
                                                dzH             dzH

    Equation (59) implies that fixing , kH moves in the same direction as H .
                                                                          dH
    Part b. The proof is the same as the previous step The derivative      d
                                                                                    is more complicated but it simplifies
to the exact same expression. Furthermore, let ^
                                                denote the smallest  for which an equilibrium exists. We have
   ) > L . Since L is independent of , this implies that whenever an equilibrium exist, zH ,
H (^


                                                 H - L > 0       <¯
                                                                  


                                                 > 1, i.e. the proposition holds for    1. Note that  > 1 would
    Part c. It is straight forward to show that ¯
mean that selling data would result in more data for the seller, which is not economonically meaningful economic.
We have thus restricted   1 from the start. As such, the result holds for every .




A.10      Proof of Proposition 5: Negative Knowledge Gap with Non-rival Data
          When High Data Productivity is Abundant
                                                                                    ¯ . Then, by continuity, the
The proof proceeds in a few steps. We will do the proof for  = 0, which implies P = P
same result holds for  sufficiently small.
    Part a. zH firms are data sellers while zL firms are data buyers (H < 0 and L > 0). The marginal benefit of
selling data is the same for both firms, data price  . The marginal cost of producing data is lower for the zH firms
at the same level of capital. Thus the zH firm produces more data in equilibrium. Furthermore, recall that each firm
can only buy or sell data.
    Now assume that in equilibrium L < 0. This means that the H firm prefers to buy the last unit of data rather
than to produce it, while the L firm prefers to produce it and sell it. This would imply that the marginal benefit
of selling data is larger than marginal cost of producing it for a small firm, but smaller than marginal cost of its
production for a large firm, a contradiction.




                                                          43
              d
    Part b.   zH
                   < 0. Step 1 shows that the H firm is always the data seller. Thus higher zH corresponds to an
upward shift of supply curve, which in turn implies a lower dat aprice.
    Part c. Negative knowledge gap: ¯
                                    |¯                                                ¯ to write H
                                        ss < 0. Merge equations (35)-(38) and use P = P
and L :

                                                  2                            1           ¯ - -
                                                                                        ¯ (A
                                                                                                                        
                   2       1+r-                                        =                P       1  2
                                                                                               L - a ) + zL
                                                                                                                       1-
                                                                                                                                      (64)
              ¯  -2 L
              P                    2 +        2
                                                (L    +   -2 2
                                                          a )              r
                                                                                
                                                                               1-

                                                                               1-2
                                                  2                             1-
                                                                                               ¯ - -
                                                                                            ¯ (A
                                                                                                                              
                   2       1+r-                                        =                    P       1  2
                                                                                                   H - a ) + zH
                                                                                                                             1-
                                                                                                                                  .   (65)
              ¯  -2 H
              P                     2 +       2
                                                (H    +   -2 2
                                                          a )              r
                                                                                
                                                                               1-



                                        1
Consider equation (65). Since  <        2
                                          ,     0 implies that the first term on the right hand since goes to zero. Every
other term in the left and right hand side of the equation is finite and bounded away from zero, except 2
                                                                                                        H , so

H  0. By continuity, as  gets small, keeping everything else constant H has to decline while there is no effect
in equation (64) on L . Thus ¯              ss < 0.
                              such that   ¯



                                                                                                         dss
A.11      Proof of Corollary 1: Change in Knowledge Gap                                                  dzH

                                                                               ¯ . Then, by continuity, the same
Similar to proof of Proposition 5, we do the proof for  = 0, which implies P = P
result holds for  sufficiently small.
    Equations (35) and (37) can be solved to get (kL , L ) in terms of data price  :



                  1-      ¯ ¯
                 kL  =     P (A -  -1  2
                                   L - a ) + zL
                         r
                                              2                                         1                    ¯  -2
                                                                                                             P                
                                                                                                                             1-
                 2
                 L      1+r-               -2             2                                              =
                               2 +  2
                                      (L + a  )                   ¯ - -1 - a
                                                               ¯ (A
                                                               P           2 ) + z
                                                                                  L
                                                                                                    1-               r
                                                                      L


The second equation implies
                                                                                                        
                                              2                  P  ¯ - -1 - a
                                                                 ¯ (A        2
                                                                               ) + zL                  1-                     

                  2
                  L     1+r-                                   =        L                                    ¯  -2 
                                                                                                             P
                                                                                                                             1-
                                                                                                                                      (66)
                                          -2              2
                               2 + 2
                                     (L + a  )                                                                     r

The same argument as in proposition 3 shows that using equation (37), the derivative of the left hand side with
respect to L is positive. Next, using implicit function theorem on both sides of equation (66) implies that if   1
                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                   ,
                                          dL                                       1
the equation is only consistent with       d
                                                  < 0. Note that                   2
                                                                                       is a sufficient (not necessary) condition. As such,
  L . Using this in the first equation implies kL increases as well, kL .
    Next, merge equations ((35), (37)) and ((36), (38)) to get:

                   1       ¯ - -1  2
                                                                                                          2
                        P (A   L - a ) + zL
                                                          1-
                                                               =         2
                                                                         L              1+r-                                          (67)
              r   1-                                               P  -2                         2 + 2      -2
                                                                                                       (L + a  )
                                                                                                                         2

                  1-2
                   1-
                           ¯ - -1  2
                                                                                                              2
                        P (A   H - a ) + zH
                                                              1-
                                                                   =         2
                                                                             H              1+r-                                  .   (68)
              r   1-                                                   P  -2                       2 + 2      -2
                                                                                                         (H + a  )
                                                                                                                             2




                                                                   44
                        ¯ , thus taking the derivatives we have
Again,  = 0 implies P = P
                                                                   
                                                   2
                          2 2
                            L 1+r -
                                                                                                                           1 -2
                                        (          2 + ) 2
                                            2 + 2 (a           )              zL 2  P ¯- 2 - 1
                                                                                    ¯ A                        +zL        1-
                                                      L                                 a 
             dL      -                       ¯
                                             P
                                                                      +                             (1-)
                                                                                                           L
                                                                                                                                   d
                 =                                                 
             dzH                             2 (2 +a 2 2 )
                                                       
                                                                                                                                  dzH
                     2 2 L 1+r -                                                                                           1 -2
                                        (          2 + ) 3
                                            2 + 2 (a           )                   ¯ A
                                                                              ¯ 2  P
                                                                              P      ¯- 2 - 1          +zL                1-
                                                       L                               a 
                                            ¯
                                            P
                                                                          -                      (1-)2
                                                                                                       L
                                                                                                      L
                                                         2-    1                                      1 -2
                                                 2            1-      ¯- 2 - 1
                                                                    ¯ A
                                                                    P   a                       +zH  1-
                                                                                        H
            dH                                                                 (1-)
                =                                                  
            dzH                                       2 2 )
                                                2 (2 +a
                                                        
                     2 2 H 1+r -                                                           1                                        1 -2
                                                                              ¯ 2 3- 1-  P
                                                                   
                                            2 ( 2 + ) 3                                    ¯- 2 - 1
                                                                                         ¯ A                                       1-
                                        (2 +   a   H )                        P              a                            +zH
                                            ¯
                                            P
                                                                          -                            (1-)2
                                                                                                                      H
                                                                                                           H
                                                                          
                                                          2
                              2 2
                                H 1+r -
                                                                                           2-    1                                       1 -2
                                                    2 ( 2 + ) 2                    zH 2         1-       ¯- 2 - 1
                                                                                                       ¯ A                              1-
                                                (2 +   a   H )                                         P   a                   +zH
                         -                           ¯
                                                     P
                                                                              +                                    (1-)
                                                                                                                           H
                                                                                                                                                 d
                     +                                                    
                                                      2 (2 +a 2 2 )
                                                                
                                                                                                                                                dzH
                          2 2 H 1+r -                                                           1                                        1 -2
                                                                                   ¯ 2 3- 1-  P
                                                                          
                                                 (          2 + ) 3
                                                     2 + 2 (a         )            P            ¯- 2 - 1
                                                                                              ¯ A                              +zH      1-
                                                                H                                 a 
                                                     ¯
                                                     P
                                                                               -                               (1-)2
                                                                                                                           H
                                                                                                                   H



Using definition (61)-(63) the above expressions simplify to:

                                      dL zL 2 L A(L) - C (L) d
                                          =         ¯ A(L) dzH
                                      dzH   B (L) - P
                                     dH        2  H A(H )     zH 2H A(H ) - C (H ) d
                                         =           ¯      +            ¯ A(H ) dzH
                                     dzH   B (H ) - P A(H )    B ( H ) - P

Thus the derivative of the knowledge gap is given by

            d     d(H - L )        2  H A(H )                                   zH  2
                                                                                    H A(H ) - C (H )   zL 2L A(L) - C (L)                        d
                =           =            ¯ A(H ) +                                         ¯         -           ¯ A(L)
            dzH     dzH       B ( H ) - P                                        B (H ) - P A(H )        B (L) - P                              dzH

                                   d
We have already shown that        dzH
                                        < 0. Using that, we first show that fixing the parameters, ^
                                                                                                    such that if and only
if  > ^
      , the knowledge gap is increasing in zH .

                                                                                        d
                                                               ^        
                                                                s.t.  > ^                   > 0.
                                                                                        dzH

Note that

            d(H - L )       2  H A(H )                             zH  2
                                                                       H A(H ) - C (H )   zL  2
                                                                                              L A(L) - C (L)                              d
                      =           ¯ A(H ) +                                   ¯         -           ¯ A(L)                                      =
              dzH       B (H ) - P                                  B (H ) - P A(H )        B (L) - P                                    dzH
            d(H - L )     2               2
                          H A(H ) + zH H A(H ) - C (H )
                                                                                                      d
                                                                                                     dzH           zL 2L A(L) - C (L) d
                      >0                    ¯ A(H )                                                            >             ¯ A(L) dzH
              dzH                 B ( H ) - P                                                                        B (L) - P

Multiply both sides by the denominator on the left hand side, which is positive as  < 1. Divide both sides by the
right hand side expression which is also positive. Since both expressions are positive, the inequality sign does not




                                                                                   45
change

                            2            2
                            H A(H ) + zH H A(H ) - C (H )
                                                                            d
                                                                           dzH               ¯ A(H )
                                                                                 > B ( H ) - P
                                           zL 2
                                              L
                                                A(L)-C (L)    d
                                                  ¯ A(L)
                                            B (L)-P          dzH
                                                                                                            
                               1              2               2
                                              H A(H ) + zH H A(H ) - C (H )
                                                                                                       d
                                                                                                      dzH
                          > ¯       B (H ) -                                                                
                            P A(H )                   zL 2
                                                         L
                                                           A(L)-C (L) d
                                                                                ¯ A(L)
                                                                          B (L)-P        dzH




                                          1                                             1 -2
                                 1    2- 1-                                            1-
                               1- i                 ¯ A
                                                  i P ¯ - a
                                                          2
                                                            -         1
                                                                            + zi                       2-1
                                                                                                            2-1
                                                                      i                             2 r 1- ki
                     A(i) =                                                                    =
                                                      (1 - )2
                                                            i                                        (1 - )2  i



                                                                                    
                                      1                               C (H )
                        >            2-1
                                                  B (H ) +
                                                               zL 2  A(L)-C (L)
                                                                                    
                                       2-1                         L
                              ¯  r 1- ki2
                                2
                              P                                  B (L)-P¯ A(L)
                                  (1-)i
                                                                                                    
                                               (1 - )2
                                                     i                               C (H )          1 - 
                         >¯
                          1 H =               1        1 -2
                                                                   B (H ) +
                                                                                 zL 2
                                          ¯  1-
                                          P      (z ) 1-
                                                   i
                                                                                     L
                                                                                       A(L)-C (L)    2 - 3
                                                                                   B (L)-P¯ A(L)



Since  < 1
         2
           , and i and ki , i = L, H are finite, sufficiently large zH insures ¯
                                                                               1H < 1.


A.12           Proposition 6: Accumulation Can be Purely Concave
It turns out that data accumulation is not always S-shaped. The S-shaped results in the previous proposition hold
only for some parameter values. For others, it can be that data accumulation is purely concave. In other words, even
when i,t is small enough, there is no convex region. Instead, the net data flow (the slope) decreases with i,t , right
from the start.


Proposition 6 Concavity of Data Inflow                  > 0 such that i,t  B (0), the net data flow decreases with i,t
     2       2
if       >   a .


     We proceed in two steps. In Step 1, we prove that data outflows are approximately linear when i,t is small.
And then in Step 2, we first calculate the derivative of net data flow with respect to i,t and then characterize the
parameter region where it is negative.


     Step 1: Data outflows are approximately linear when i,t is small.
This is proven separately in Lemma 4.


     Step 2: Characterize the parameter region where the derivative of net data flow with respect to i,t is negative.
A negative least upper bound is sufficient for it be negative.

     Recall that the derivative of data inflows with respect to the current stock of knowledge t is




                                                                    46
d+                           -2             -2
 i,t
 i,t
           = 2 2 +  2
                      (i,t + a  )                > 0 (see the Proof of Proposition 3 for details). Thus


                          d+i,t   d-i,t                  -2                      -2                  2 -2 -2
                                -        2 2 +  2
                                                  (i,t + a  )                         - 1 + 2 (1 + 2  a ) .                                          (69)
                           i,t     i,t

Since this derivative increases in 2 and decreases in i,t = 0, so its least upper bound                               2
                                                                                                                      2  -2     - 1 is achieved when
                                                                                                                    1+  a
 2                                                                                    2        2                           2     2
 = 1 and i,t = 0. A non-negative least upper bound requires                           a          .    That means, if           > a , the supreme of
d+
 i,t          d-
               i,t
 i,t
          -    i,t
                      is negative, so it will always be negative i,t  B (0).


A.13          Proposition 7: S-shaped Stock of Knowledge Over Time
This proposition shows the S-shape of i,t in the time domain. The result differs from Proposition 3 because instead
of establishing that data flows are increasing or decreasing in , this result establishes that flows increase and then
decrease in time.

                                 2
                                 
Proposition 7 Let                2.
                                 a
                                          If  is sufficiently small,  sufficiently small, zi sufficiently large, or a sufficiently
large, then
            2 i,t
     1)     t2
                    > 0 when i,t is small enough, there is sufficient diminishing return to scale  < 1
                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                       , price is sufficiently
                         ^ and the value function is not too concave V
           large Pt > f ()                                                                 [, 0), where ^ is the first root of (50), and f

           is defined by (49);
                 2 i,t
     2) and      t2
                         < 0 when i,t is large enough.


Proof: We have established how net data flows change with i,t . To map it to concavity and convexity of i,t
                                                                            -            -2          -2
with respect to t, we need to find the regions where net data flow, d+
                                                                     i,t - di,t = zi,t ki,t  - i,t - a  +
                                                                                                      -
           -2 -1                 -1                               -                            d+
                                                                                                i,t -di,t                            2 i,t
 (2 (i,t + a )) + 2
                                      is positive.     If d+
                                                           i,t - di,t > 0, then                       i,t
                                                                                                               > 0 maps to           t2
                                                                                                                                              > 0 and
       -
d+
 i,t -di,t                        2 i,t
      i,t
                < 0 maps to       t2
                                           < 0. The rest of the proof proceeds in two steps.


     Step 1: Prove that net data flows are positive when i,t  (0, ¯ f ) and negative when i,t  (¯ l , ).
                                                                                                             2 d-
                                                                                                                i,t                 2  4 2
     We can sign the second derivative of outflows with respect to i,t easily:                                2
                                                                                                                       =         2  -2 +2  2           >
                                                                                                              i,t           (1+2   a       i,t
                                                                                                                                               )3
                                                                               d-
                                                                                i,t                                  1
0. The first derivative of outflows with respect to i,t is                      i,t
                                                                                        = 1-                 -2 2 2 +-2 (     -2 -1 2 .             Since
                                                                                                     2 (i,t +a ) (       i,t +a )  )
 d -
 2
     i,t                              d-
                                       i,t
 2
            > 0, we have that          i,t
                                               is monotonically increasing and its minimum value is obtained when i,t = 0:
   i,t
d-                                                                                                                                           d-
   i,t
 i,t
          |i,t =0 = 1 -      -4
                                      1
                                 2 +-2  2 )-1 )2    , which is always positive given a ,  > 0 and 2  1. Therefore                             i,t
                                                                                                                                              i,t
                                                                                                                                                    > 0.
                          2  a  (      a
                                                                                        d+
                                                                                         i,t                                       d+
                                                                                                                                    i,t
On the other hand, we know from the proof of Proposition 8 that                          i,t
                                                                                               |i,t =0 > 0 and limi,t                i,t
                                                                                                                                           |i,t =0  0.
                                                                                                   -2                  
     When i,t = 0, the data infow and outflow are                      d+
                                                                        i,t |i,t =0   =   zi ( k 0 )  ,     where     k0   is the optimal invesment
                                                             2
when i,t = 0, and          d-
                            i,t |i,t =0    =   -2
                                               a  (1   -   1+2 
                                                                ),   respectively. If   d+
                                                                                         i,t |i,t =0        d-
                                                                                                             i,t |i,t =0 ,     then the data outflow
and inflow curves must have intersection(s) in the region (0, ). Let's denote the first intersection by ¯ f and the last

by ¯ l . When there is a unique intersection, ¯ f and ¯ l coincide. Then net data flows are positive when i,t  (0, ¯f)

and negative when i,t  (¯ l , ).



                                                                          47
    Step 2: Find out the parameter regions where Step 1 holds.

    Since d-                           2
           i,t |i,t =0 is monotonic in  and 
                                             2
                                                [0, 1], we have d-                 -2  -2    +
                                                                 i,t |i,t =0  [ 1+ a , a ]. di,t |i,t =0 
                                                                                     2
d-                               +
 i,t |i,t =0 is guaranteed when di,t |i,t =0 
                                                           
                                                             -2 ,
                                                          1+ a
                                                                             
                                                                    that is k0            
                                                                                       2 1+ .
                                                                                    zi a
                                                                                                The last inequality is only true when
 is sufficiently small,  sufficiently small, zi sufficiently large, or a sufficiently large.
    We can then apply Proposition 8 and map concavity and convexity of i,t to the time domain.


A.14          Lemma 4, 5, 6: Linearity of Data Depreciation
One property of the model that comes up in a few different places is that the depreciation of knowledge (outflows)
is approximately a linear function of the stock of knowledge i,t . There are a few different ways to establish this
approximation formally. The three results that follow show that the approximation error from a linear function is
small i) when the stock of knowledge is small; ii) when the state is not very volatile; and iii) when the stock of
knowledge is large.


Lemma 4 Linear Data Outflow with Low Knowledge                                > 0 such that i,t  B (0), data outflow is approx-
                                                                                         4  2              2
imately linear and the approximation error is bounded from above by                       2  -2 1+2  2 ( + -2 )   . The approximation
                                                                                      1+2   a             a

error is small when  or  is small, or when i,t is very close to 0.


Proof:
                                                                                         -1                                                -1
Recall that data outflows are d-          -2   2       -2 -1
                               i,t = i,t +a - ( (i,t + a ))  + 2                                                        -2 -1
                                                                                              . Let g (i,t )  (2 (i,t + a )) + 2


be the nonlinear part of data outflows. Its first-order Taylor expansion around 0 is g (i,t ) = g (0) + g (0)i,t + o(i,t ),
                      2                   d-
                                           i,t
with g (0) =          2  -2 )2   . Thus    i,t
                                                  = 1 - g (i,t )  1 - g (0) for i,t in a small open ball B (0),              > 0, around
                 (1+2   a
                                                                         42 2
                                                                           i,t
0. And the approximation error is |o(i,t )| =                   2  -2 )[1+2  2 (      -2      , which increases with i,t and thus is
                                                           (1+2   a              i,t +a )]
                                                                          4  2           2
bounded from above by error term evaluated at , that is                     2  -2 1+2  2 ( + -2 )     .
                                                                     1+2       a            a




Lemma 5 Linear Data Outflow with Small State Innovations                                    > 0 such that   B  (0), data outflows
                                                                                                               -2 2
                                                                                                  4 ¯2 (i,t +a   )
are approximately linear and the approximation error is bounded from above by                                   -2 .   The approximation
                                                                                                 1+2 2   (i,t +a )

error is small when  is small, or when  is close to 0.


Proof:
                                                                                                 -1
Recall that data outflows are d-           -2
                               i,t = i,t + a
                                                          -2 -1
                                              - (2 (i,t + a )) + 2
                                                                                                      . The non-linear term g (i,t ) =
           -2 -1  2 -1
[(2 (i,t + a )) +  ] is linear when  = 0. Therefore,                            > 0 such that   B  (0), g (i,t ) is approximately
                                                      2         -2
linear. The approximation error |g (i,t ) -  (i,t +             a  )|    is increasing with        and reaches its maximum value at
                                   -2 2
                          4 2
                             (i,t +a )
 =       ,   with value                -2     .
                          1+2 ¯2 (i,t +a  )




                                                                                                      -2
Lemma 6 Linear Data Outflow with Abundant Knowledge                                 When i,t             , discounted data stock is very
small relative to i,t , so that data outflows are approximately linear. The approximation error is small when  is
small or when  is sufficiently large.


                                                                    48
Proof:
                                                                           -1                                              -1
Recall that data outflows are d-          -2   2       -2 -1
                               i,t = i,t +a - ( (i,t + a ))  + 2                                          -2 -1
                                                                                . Let g (i,t )  (2 (i,t + a )) + 2

                                                        -2 -1                       -2
be the nonlinear part of data outflows. Since (2 (i,t + a ))   0, we have g (i,t )     . Since i,t  0,
                                                               -2
we have g (i,t )  (-2 a
                      2
                        + 2 -1
                           ) . That is g (i,t )  [(-2 a
                                                      2
                                                        + 2 -1
                                                           ) ,    ]. For high levels of i,t , i,t
-2
   generally holds.     And for low levels of i,t , it holds when  is very large.         The approximation error is
 -2           2    -2 -1        2 -1
|     - ( (i,t +   a ))     +          | and decreases with i,t , reaching its minimum at i,t = 0 with a value of
         2
     
(1+2 2  -2 )2 .
       a




B        Numerical Examples
The section contains computational details, additional comparative statics and steady state numerical analyses that
illustrate how our data economy responds to changes in parameter values for one or more firms.


Parameter Selection             The results below are not calibrated.10 However, the share of aggregate income paid
to capital is commonly thought to be about 0.4. Since this is governed by the exponent , we set  = 0.4. For
the rental rate on capital, we use a riskless rate of 3% , which is an average 3-month treasury rate over the last
                                                                                                     ¯ from
40 years. The inverse demand curve parameters determine the price elasticity of demand. We take  and P
the literature. Finally, we model the adjustment cost for data  in the same was as others have the adjust cost of
capital.This approach makes sense because adusting one's process to use more data typically involves the purchase
of new capital, like new computing and recording equipment and involves disruptive changes in firm practice, similar
to the disruption of working with new physical machinery.
    Finally, we normalize the noise in each data point  = 1. We can do this without loss of generality because
it is effectively a re-normalization of all the data-savviness parameter for all firms {zi }. This is because for normal
variables, having twice as many signals, each with twice the variance, makes no difference to the mean or variance of
the agent's forecast. As long as we ignore any integer problems with the number of signals, the amount of information
conveyed per signal is irrelevant. What matters is the total amount of information conveyed.


B.1          Computational Procedure
Figure 2 solves for the dynamic transition path when firms do not trade data.
    Value Function Iteration: To solve for the value function, make a grid a values for  (state variable) and k (choice
variable). Guess functions V0 () and P0 () on this grid. Guess a vector of ones for each. In an outer loop, iterate
until the pricing function approximation converges. In an inner loop, given a candidate pricing function, iterate until
the value function approximation converges.
  10
     To calibrate the model, one could match the following moments of the data. The capital-output ratio tells us
something about the average productivity, which would be governed by a parameter like A  ¯, among others. The
variance of GDP and the capital stock, each relative to its mean, var(Kt )/mean(Kt ) and var(Yt )/mean(Yt ), are
                                                                    2      2
each informative about variance of the shocks to the model, such as   and a  .




                                                          49
    Forward Iteration: Solving for the value function as described above also gives a policy function for k() and
price function P (). Linearly interpolate the approximations to these functions. Specify some initial condition 0 .
For each t until T : Determine the choice of kt and price at this state t . Calculate t+1 from t and kt .
    Trade Value Function Approximation: Figure 4 solves for dynamic transition path when firms are allowed to
buy/sell data for fixed final goods and data prices. We take the same steps as written above, but now optimize over
 rather then k.
    Heterogeneous Firm Steady State Calculation: Figure 5 solves for the steady state equilibrium with two types of
firms, in which both P and  are endogenous.




                                                        50
