                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          DATA-DRIVEN INCENTIVE ALIGNMENT IN CAPITATION SCHEMES

                                        Mark Braverman
                                        Sylvain Chassang

                                      Working Paper 28429
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28429


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2021




Braverman acknowledges support from NSF Award CCF-1215990, NSF CAREER award
CCF-1149888, a Turing Centenary Fellowship, and a Packard Fellowship in Science and
Engineering. Chassang acknowledges support from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation. We are
grateful to Ben Brooks, Janet Currie, Mark Duggan, Kate Ho, Amanda Kowalski, Roger
Myerson, Phil Reny, Dan Zeltzer as well as seminar participants at Boston University, Princeton,
and the Becker-Friedman institute at the University of Chicago, for helpful comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Mark Braverman and Sylvain Chassang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Data-Driven Incentive Alignment in Capitation Schemes
Mark Braverman and Sylvain Chassang
NBER Working Paper No. 28429
February 2021
JEL No. C55,D82,H51,I11,I13

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper explores whether Big Data, taking the form of extensive high dimensional records, can
reduce the cost of adverse selection by private service providers in government-run capitation
schemes, such as Medicare Advantage. We argue that using data to improve the ex ante precision
of capitation regressions is unlikely to be helpful. Even if types become essentially observable,
the high dimensionality of covariates makes it infeasible to precisely estimate the cost of serving
a given type: Big Data makes types observable, but not necessarily interpretable. This gives an
informed private operator scope to select types that are relatively cheap to serve. Instead, we
argue that data can be used to align incentives by forming unbiased and non-manipulable ex post
estimates of a private operator's gains from selection.


Mark Braverman
Princeton University
mbraverm@cs.princeton.edu

Sylvain Chassang
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
chassang@princeton.edu
Data-Driven Incentive Alignment in Capitation Schemes

                        Mark Braverman                Sylvain Chassang
                                     Princeton University

                                        October 19, 2020



                                              Abstract

           This paper explores whether Big Data, taking the form of extensive high dimen-
       sional records, can reduce the cost of adverse selection by private service providers in
       government-run capitation schemes, such as Medicare Advantage. We argue that using
       data to improve the ex ante precision of capitation regressions is unlikely to be help-
       ful. Even if types become essentially observable, the high dimensionality of covariates
       makes it infeasible to precisely estimate the cost of serving a given type: Big Data
       makes types observable, but not necessarily interpretable. This gives an informed pri-
       vate operator scope to select types that are relatively cheap to serve. Instead, we argue
       that data can be used to align incentives by forming unbiased and non-manipulable ex
       post estimates of a private operator's gains from selection.

           Keywords: adverse selection, big data, capitation, health-care regulation, detail-
       free mechanism design, delegated model selection.



1      Introduction
This paper explores the value of Big Data in reducing the cost of adverse selection by
private service providers in government-run capitation or voucher schemes. We emphasize
    
    Braverman acknowledges support from NSF Award CCF-1215990, NSF CAREER award CCF-1149888, a
Turing Centenary Fellowship, and a Packard Fellowship in Science and Engineering. Chassang acknowledges
support from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation.
   
    We are grateful to Ben Brooks, Janet Currie, Mark Duggan, Kate Ho, Amanda Kowalski, Roger Myerson,
Phil Reny, Dan Zeltzer as well as seminar participants at Boston University, Princeton, and the Becker-
Friedman institute at the University of Chicago, for helpful comments.

                                                  1
an application to healthcare insurance. School voucher programs are an other example.
       In the context of public health-insurance, a capitation scheme pays private insurance
plans an estimate of the cost of insurance for individuals they enroll. An example is Medicare
Advantage, a program which lets US Medicare recipients switch to private health insurance
plans. Capitation payments can be conditioned on agreed upon user characteristics (then,
they are said to be risk-adjusted). While capitation programs are a popular way to outsource
government mandated services to the private sector, they are often plagued by adverse
selection. Private plans have strong incentives to select types that are cheaper to serve
than their capitation payment, which increases the cost of serving the overall population.
In the context of Medicare Advantage, Batata (2004) and Brown et al. (2014) report yearly
overpayments in the thousands dollars for patients selected by private plans.
       A natural strategy to reduce adverse selection is to increase the precision of risk-adjusted
capitation schemes by reimbursing private plans for the expected cost of taking care of the
specific patients they select. This suggests that Big Data -- i.e., the availability of high-
dimensional patient records -- could be used to condition capitation payments on precise
individual characteristics, and eliminate the scope for adverse selection. We take a different
view and argue that in realistic Big Data environments, this na¨
                                                               ive use of high-dimensional
co-variates is likely to be of limited value. Instead, we suggest that data may be more
successfully used to form unbiased ex post estimates of strategic selection by private plans.
Correcting capitation formulas with these ex post estimates aligns the public and private
plans' incentives.
       Our model considers a single public plan p0 seeking to outsource the provision of health-
care services to a single private plan p1 .1 The private plan may have a genuine comparative
advantage in insuring certain types of patients so that some selection into plans may be
welfare enhancing. For instance, plan p1 may have expertise in tobacco cessation, inducing
a comparative advantage insuring current smokers. However, the private plan also has in-
   1
   In the case of Medicare Advantage, the private plan would correspond to a preferred provider organization
(PPO) or a health management organization (HMO).


                                                     2
centives to select patients whose cost of care is overestimated; for instance, patients that are
more healthy or less likely to use costly services than their official risk-rating suggests. This
leads us to distinguish legitimate selection characteristics, which predict comparative ad-
vantage, from illegitimate selection characteristics, which predict costs but not comparative
advantage. Efficient selection strategies need only depend on legitimate selection characteris-
tics. We assume that comparative advantage can be captured using a small set of legitimate
characteristics, while the underlying set of types predicting cost of care is large. In addition,
we assume that public plan p0 has access to a hold-out sample of cost realizations that is
not observed by private plan p1 , such as cost realizations for the patients it serves.
       Our modeling choices reflect both the opportunities and limitations presented by Big
Data. We assume that high-dimensional records isomorphic to patients' types -- i.e. suffi-
cient statistics for patients' cost of care -- are observable. However, we also recognize that
the number of such possible types need not be small relative to the sample size of available
cost data, thereby limiting their use for prediction.2 This leads us to study mechanism de-
sign for environments where both the sample size and the number of relevant covariates are
large. In such Big Data environments, sufficient statistics of types are observable but not
interpretable : even conditional on type and cost data, it is not possible to form a precise
estimate of a patient's cost of care. This creates a trade-off when setting capitation rates:
"sparse" cost estimates, conditioned on a few patient characteristics, have low standard er-
rors but high bias; in contrast "rich" cost estimates, conditioned on an exhaustive set of
patient characteristics, have low bias, but large standard errors.
       Concerns over estimation error are reflected in the capitation scheme employed by Medi-
care Advantage, as well as in the risk-adjustment formula used to calculate transfers be-
tween plans under the Affordable Care Act (ACA). The Medicare Advantage risk adjust-
ment model, rolled out in 2004 by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS),
uses Hierarchical Condition Categories (HCCs) (Pope et al., 2004). The HCCs are groups
   2
    The statistics literature concerned with Big Data makes similar assumptions. See Belloni et al. (2013,
2014) for recent examples in econometrics.


                                                    3
of conditions that can be inferred from the patient diagnosis data. The number of HCCs in
the model varies between editions, but generally is under 100. HCCs are used in conjunction
with condition severity modifiers and demographic factors to estimate individual patients'
expected expenditures in the subsequent year. Thus the model falls under the "sparse capita-
tion" category discussed above: there are relatively few categories, and a reasonably precise
estimator can be formed for each category (Evans et al., 2011). The desire for "adequate
sample sizes to permit accurate and stable estimates of expenditures" has been a design
principle for the risk adjustment scheme, and a factor in keeping the number of patient
types in the model relatively low (Pope et al., 2004).
   The model used for risk-adjustment transfers under the ACA uses a somewhat expanded
set of HCCs (114 in 2014), reflecting the fact that the ACA transfer model is a general-
population model, while the Medicare Advantage model is primarily for patients above the
age of 65 (Kautter et al., 2014). As in the case of the Medicare Advantage model, the need
for statistical power to get good ex ante estimates is one of the design principles limiting
the number of categories used (Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, 2016). We
discuss implications of our analysis to the ACA setting, where no public option is available,
in Section 5.
   Our first set of results considers traditional capitation schemes, which, as emphasized
by Brown et al. (2014), seek to reimburse private plans for the expected cost of treating
patients given ex ante observables. Sparse capitation schemes condition cost estimates on
a small set of patient characteristics, while rich capitation schemes condition cost estimates
on the full set of characteristics made available by Big Data. We show that such schemes
induce efficient selection when the private plan is constrained to select only on the basis
of legitimate characteristics (determinants of comparative advantage). However, if private
plans can engage in illegitimate selection, then patient assignment is bounded away from ef-
ficiency in Big Data environments. Indeed, even though types are observable, cost-estimates
conditional on types remain noisy even for large samples. As a result it is possible for the



                                              4
private plan to maintain an informational advantage which induces inefficient selection and
increases the average cost of care.
       In spite of these limitations, if legitimate selection characteristics are common knowledge,
we can construct a prior-free mechanism that achieves efficient patient assignment at no
excess cost for the public plan. Big Data is not used to obtain a more precise ex ante
capitation formula. Instead, we augment the baseline capitation formula (based on legitimate
characteristics) with a single additional term measuring ex post selection by the private
plan. This additional term takes the form of an appropriately weighted covariance between
the distribution of types selected by the private plan, and the residuals from the sparse
capitation regression evaluated on out-of-sample costs. More concretely, it uses Big Data to
form an unbiased estimate of the cost savings obtained by the private plan from selecting a
non-representative sample of patients. This "strategic capitation scheme" induces efficient
selection, and, importantly, does not give the public plan any incentive to bias its report of
out-of-sample costs. This last property allows us to extend our approach to health exchanges
for which out-of-sample cost realizations would be reported by competing healthcare plans
(see Section 5).
       Strategic capitation can be extended to environments where legitimate selection char-
acteristics are not common knowledge. It is still possible to achieve a meaningful share of
first-best efficiency by using generalized strategic capitation schemes that let private plans
specify the characteristics they wish to select on. This flexibility comes at a cost related
to the complexity of the class of models the private plan can use to select patients. We
show that the performance guarantees of this indirect prior-free mechanism are essentially
unimprovable by studying the unrestricted direct mechanism design problem in a specific
environment.
       The paper contributes to the theoretical literature on adverse selection in insurance mar-
kets.3 Our work is particularly related to Glazer and McGuire (2000), who study optimal
   3
    See for instance Rothschild and Stiglitz (1976), Bisin and Gottardi (1999, 2006), Dubey and Geanakoplos
(2002).


                                                    5
risk-adjustment in a Bayesian setting. They show that when selection is possible, optimal
ex ante reimbursement schemes should deviate from simply reimbursing private plans the
expected cost of taking care of patients. In particular, capitation schemes should adjust
reimbursement rates to dull the effect of "cream-skimming" by private plans. We show how
to induce efficient selection by using information about patient types and ex post cost data.
      Our mechanism is closely related to that of Mezzetti (2004), which also uses noisy ex post
information to provide accurate ex ante incentives. Also related is the work of Riordan and
Sappington (1988) who show how to exploit noisy ex post signals to screen agents at no cost
to the principal. As we clarify in greater detail in Section 6, our work differs for two main
reasons. First, we are interested in prior-free mechanisms and do not make the identification
assumptions required in Riordan and Sappington (1988). Second, ex post signals (here the
public plan's hold-out cost data) need not be publicly observed and we must ensure that the
relevant party has correct incentives for reporting. Third, unlike Mezzetti (2004), we require
exact budget-balance.
      Our work is motivated by a growing empirical literature which documents cream-skimming
in health insurance markets, and studies the efficiency of various risk-adjustment schemes
(Frank et al., 2000, Mello et al., 2003, Batata, 2004, Newhouse et al., 2012, Brown et al.,
2014). Our analysis is inspired by Brown et al. (2014) which shows that increasing the
number of covariates used in Medicare Advantage's capitation formulas has in fact led to
an increase in the cost of adverse selection to the state.4 We complement their result by
showing that na¨
               ive uses of data are unlikely to resolve adverse selection, but progress can be
made by using data to detect selection ex post.
      The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes our framework, and in particular
our approach to Big Data. Section 3 uses a simple example in which legitimate selection
characteristics are common knowledge to delineate the mechanics of adverse selection under
various capitation schemes. Section 4 generalizes the analysis to settings in which the private
  4
      Newhouse et al. (2012) argues that the cost of adverse selection may be overstated.




                                                      6
plan's comparative advantage is not common knowledge. Section 5 uses a stylized model
to show how strategic capitation can help reduce adverse selection in healthcare exchanges.
Section 6 and Appendix A present several extensions addressing potential risk inflation,
dynamic selection, and reduced quality provision by private plans. Proofs are collected in
Appendix B unless mentioned otherwise.



2     Framework
Our model seeks to capture three features of healthcare capitation. The first is selection by
private healthcare plans, such as HMOs or PPOs, which we model as a reduced form cost for
attracting different populations. Selection may be achieved through targeted advertisement
and marketing (consistent with Starc (2014)), heterogenity in the quality of customer service
during enrollment procedures, as well as targeted service bundles.
    Second, public and private plans may have heterogeneous comparative advantages in
treating patients. While there is controversy about the real value added of private plans over
Medicare, there is evidence that insurance plans are more than mere financial intermediaries.
Plans play an important role in selecting, monitoring and generally resolving agency problems
vis `
    a vis doctors and hospitals, as well as encouraging preventive care and healthy habit
formation. Data from Bundorf et al. (2012) provides evidence for such comparative advantage
across different plans. In their sample, HMOs have a comparative advantage over PPOs in
insuring high risk patients. In our model, the possibility of comparative advantage creates
a reason for both public and private plans to be active, and raises the question of efficient
patient allocation.
    Third, we seek to correctly capture the forces that make Big Data attractive but chal-
lenging: we assume that high dimensional records make patients' types observable, but that
as a result, even with a large sample of patients, it is not possible to form precise estimates of
expected cost of treatment conditional on individual types (the concern for power is explicit
in discussions of CMS formulas by Pope et al. (2004), Evans et al. (2011), Kautter et al.

                                                7
(2014)). In short, types are observable but not interpretable.
   The lead example for our work is Medicare Advantage, a program that lets US Medicare
recipients switch to private insurance plans such as HMOs and PPOs. Medicare Advantage is
a large and growing program. It covers approximately 15 million patients, out of the roughly
50 million enrolled in Medicare, and its size was multiplied by three from 2005 to 2015.
Selection by private plans is an ongoing concern threatening the financial sustainability of
the program (Batata, 2004, Brown et al., 2014).


2.1    Players, Actions, Payoffs

We study the relationship between a public health care plan p0 , responsible for the health
expenses of a set I = {1, · · · , N } of patients, and an independent private plan p1 .


Treatment costs. Each patient i  I has a type i  T  Rn where the set of types
T is potentially very large, but finite. Type  is a sufficient statistic for a patient's cost
of care, and is observable to both plans. For any sample J of patients, we denote by
                                                                                      |J  |
µJ  (T ) the empirical distribution of types  in sample J , defined by µJ ( )          |J |
                                                                                            ,   where
J   {j  J |j =  }, and |J | denotes the cardinal of J .
   The realized cost of care for a patient i of type  insured by plan p is positive, bounded
above, and denoted by ci (p)  [0, cmax ]. The distribution of potential costs (ci (p0 ), ci (p1 ))
conditional on type  is distributed according to a c.d.f. F ( ). Treatment costs across
patients i are exchangeable conditional on patient type  , cost distribution F , and plan p.
We allow for aggregate uncertainty so that c.d.f. F is itself uncertain.


Selection. The key difficulty is that private plan p1 may strategically seek to attract a
targeted subset of patients. Specifically, private plan p1 can choose an expected selection
policy  : T  [0, 1] at a cost K ()  0. A patient i enrolls with private plan p1 with
probability (i ). Consistent with observations in Starc (2014), this reduced-form cost of



                                                8
selection may be thought of as a cost of advertisement.5 Realized selection   I is a mean
preserving spread of intended selection  defined by


                                            1i = (i ) + i .


Error terms (i )iI have expectation equal to zero, and may be correlated across different
types   T , but are otherwise independent of cost realization ci (p). For instance, a recruit-
ment ad may unexpectedly attract a population different from the targeted one. Patients
i  I \  that do not enroll with private plan p1 are insured by public plan p0 .


Realized payoffs and preferences. Transfers   R from public plan p0 to private plan
p1 are feasible. Given a selection decision  by private plan p1 , a realized selection , and a
transfer , the realized surpluses U0 and U1 accruing to the public and private plans are


                    U0 = - +           ci (p0 ) and U1 =  -              ci (p1 ) - K ().
                                   i                                 i


       Conditional on selection rule  and a distribution of costs F , surplus takes the form


                         S () = -K () + EF                (i ) (ci (p0 ) - ci (p1 )) .
                                                     iI


Public plan p0 has lexicographic preferences: its main objective is to maximize surplus S
in expectation; however, taking as given selection behavior  and surplus S , its secondary
objective is to maximize cost savings U0 in expectation. Private plan p1 seeks to maximize
its profits U1 in expectation.
       Note that although we let the public plan care about surplus, we will seek mechanisms
such that the expectation of cost savings U0 is approximately non-negative in equilibrium.
   5
     Cost K implicitly includes any information acquisition costs needed to implement . Under a more
standard model of selection along the lines of Rothschild and Stiglitz (1976), the private plan would screen
patients through a menu of discounts and benefits specifically appealing to desirable types. In a dynamic
setting, plans may be able to select patients by offering better customer service to types they wish to retain.


                                                      9
This can be thought of as a financing constraint.


2.2       Data

We model explicitly the role that data plays in the contracting problem. We assume that in
Big Data environments, the richness of covariates makes patients' types essentially observ-
able, but prevents the public plan from forming a precise estimate of expected treatment
costs conditional on types. A consequence illustrated in Section 3 is that even imprecise
additional signals of costs may allow the private plan to profit from selecting patients.


Samples. Both plans p0 and p1 observe a public dataset of types and cost realizations
D0 = {(i, i , ci (p0 ))|i  D0 } for plan p0 , where i  D0 denotes a patient i whose record is
                                            
included in D0 . In addition, we denote by D0 = {(i, i , ci (p0 ))|i = , i  D0 } the cost data
                                                                        
relating to patients of type  . We assume that for every   T , the set D0 is non-empty,
which implies |T |  |D0 |: the sample size of dataset D0 is at least as large as the type space.
       Plan p1 privately observes a dataset D1 = {(i, xi , ci (p1 ))|i  D1 } reporting both her own
costs, and side-signals xi for a sample of patients i  D1 . Side signal xi (which can include
type i ) captures other signals beyond cost realizations that the plan may be able to use in
order to select patients.
       Finally, we assume that plan p0 has access to a hold-out sample H = {(i, i , ci (p0 ))|i  H }
of its own costs, independent of data D1 conditional on the realization of cost distribution
F . Hold-out sample H may consist of ex post cost realizations for the current set of patients
enrolled by the public plan. Alternatively, H may correspond to past cost data, securely
encrypted, and verifiably released only after patient selection has occurred.6 Contractual
transfers  will be allowed to depend on hold-out sample H , but we will take seriously
the public plan's incentive to reveal correct information. Specifically, we will address the
public plan's incentives to bias its records in order to reduce payments to the private plan.
   6
    For instance, an encrypted version of the data can be released before selection occurs, with a decryption
key publicized after patient enrollment has occurred.


                                                     10
For instance the public plan could down-code interventions happening to its own patients.
Access to a hold-out sample is essential. It allows the public plan to obtain estimates of its
own costs whose errors are uncorrelated to the private plan's information. We motivate the
asymmetric treatment of data-sets D0 (publicly observed) and H (privately observed by the
public plan) when we discuss the timing of actions.

                                   |I  |
Big Data. Recall that µI ( )        |I |
                                           denotes the sample distribution of types  in patient
population I . Our model of Big Data consists of two assumptions:

 (i) types   T are publicly observed;

(ii) even if sample data D0 is large, type space T is of comparable size; i.e. there
     exists a fixed constant a > 0 such that

                                                 1
                                      EµI         
                                                        > a.
                                                |D0 |

Points (i) and (ii) summarize what we think are the opportunities and limitations of Big
Data. Point (i) captures the idea that high dimensional records make types observable.
                                                                                           
Point (ii) implies that even if sample D0 is very large, the size |D0 | of many subgroups D0
remains bounded above. As a result the public plan's estimates of type-specific costs on the
basis of data D0 remains noisy.
   Note that all our results are non-asymptotic: we provide efficiency bounds that depend
explicitly on EµI  1   |
                           . Point (ii) clarifies the terms we consider negligible and non-
                     |D0

negligible when we provide performance bounds. Our large type-space model of Big Data
contrasts with small type-space environments in which the sample size maybe considered
large compared to the set of types.


2.3    Beliefs, Contracts, and Equilibrium

Beliefs. The plans' environment is described by: healthcare-cost distribution F ; data-sets
D0 , D1 and H ; cost of selection K . All these objects are in principle random variables.


                                                 11
For simplicity, we assume that plans p0 and p1 share a common prior  over the tuple
(F, D0 , D1 , H, K ).
       Note that the capitation mechanisms we study do not rely on the common prior assump-
tion. Our performance bounds remain valid in a non-common prior setting if expectations
are taken under the private plan's prior.7


Reporting of hold-out data. We allow mechanisms to depend on reports of hold out
sample H made by public plan p0 . We denote by  : H  HR the public plan's strategy,
mapping hold-out data H to (potentially biased) reported hold-out data HR . We note that 
does not depend on realized selection . This can be thought of as a restriction on timing (the
hold-out sample must be encrypted and shared before selection occurs), or a restriction on
strategies (the public plan cannot tailor misreporting to simultaneous selection by the private
plan). We denote by   (H )  H the truthful reporting strategy, and break indifferences in
favor of truth-telling, reflecting small costs in misreporting.


Contracts. For any set of patients J  I , let J  (i )iJ and cJ (p)  (ci (p))iJ de-
note profiles of types and costs. We denote by HR = {(i, i , cR
                                                              i (p0 )), i  H } the hold-out

data reported ex post by public plan p0 . We emphasize that these are reports of privately
observed costs, and that the public plan must be given appropriate incentives in order to
report truthfully. A capitation contract between the public and private plan is a mapping
(, HR )  R, specifying the aggregate transfer to private plan p1 as a function of realized
selection , and reported hold-out sample data HR . Note that contract  implicitly depends
on data D0 , but we suppress this dependency in the notation since D0 is common-knowledge
between plans.
   7
    For recent work emphasizing prior-free approaches to mechanism design, see Segal (2003), Bergemann
and Schlag (2008), Hartline and Roughgarden (2008), Chassang (2013), Carroll (2015), Madar´asz and Prat
(2014), Brooks (2014), Antic (2014).




                                                  12
Timing and equilibrium. Given public data D0 and a common knowledge contract ,
the timing of the interaction between public and private plans is as follows:

  1. the public and private plans simultaneously pick a cost reporting strategy  , and a
     selection strategy ;

  2. potentially biased hold-out data HR is reported, and actual selection   I by the
     private plan is realized, resulting in a contractual transfer (, HR ).

We assume away potential incentive issues related to the revelation of data D0 by public plan
p0 for simplicity. It is sufficient for our analysis that the contract  be common knowledge
in stage 1. We only care about data D0 to the extent that it lets us specify contract .
   Note that since the public plan's primary objective is to maximize surplus, there would be
little incentive to misreport D0 : biased costs would distort the selection of patients  taking
place at a later stage, and reduce surplus S . In contrast, sending a biased report HR of hold-
out data H cannot influence the selection of patients , which takes place simultaneously.
As a result, biasing hold-out data H does not affect surplus S ; it only affects the allocation
of surplus across the public plan's cost savings U0 , and the private plan's profits U1 . This
is why we take seriously strategic issues related to the reporting of hold-out data H , but
simplify away strategic considerations pertaining to the release of initial data D0 .
   Given a capitation contract , a selection strategy , and a reporting strategy  , the
public and private plans' expected payoffs under common prior  are


                          E U0 = E - +             ci (p0 ) ,  ,
                                              i


                          E U1 = E  -           ci (p1 ) ,  - K ().
                                            i


Given a contract , abstractly denoting by I0 and I1 the information available to plans p0




                                              13
and p1 , a strategy profile (, ) is an equilibrium if and only if  and  respectively solve


            max E [- I0 , , ] and          max E  -            ci (p1 ) I1 , ,  - K ().
                                             
                                                           i


In words, taking selection  as given, the public plan's reporting strategy  must minimize
expected transfers to the private plan. Taking reporting  as given, the private plan picks
the selection strategy that maximizes its expected profit.


Design objectives. We seek contracts  such that for all priors  , data D0 , D1 , and all
equilibria (,  ), surplus S and public and private plan payoffs U0 , U1 satisfy:


                              E [S |] = E max E [S |, D0 , D1 ] - o(|I |);                     (1)
                                                

                     E U0 , , D0  -o(|I |);                                                    (2)

                     E U1 , , D1  0,                                                           (3)


where o(|I |) is the usual little-o notation for "negligible relative to |I |."
    In words, we seek ex post budget-balanced prior-free mechanisms that: (i) maximize
efficiency given available information up to a term negligible compared to the size |I | of the
patient population; (ii) satisfy approximate interim individual rationality for the public plan
(reflecting some willingness to subsidize the market); (iii) satisfy exact interim individual
rationality for the private plan.



3     Strategic Capitation
In this section we clarify why existing ex ante capitation schemes may work under idealized
conditions, but likely fail in a realistic Big Data setting. Still, we are able to exhibit a prior-
free mechanism that achieves first-best allocation by using an ex post measure of selection to
correct capitation payments. Since this indirect prior-free mechanism achieves the first-best,


                                                 14
there are no performance benefits from using a prior-dependent Bayesian mechanism.
   To make the key forces more transparent we make a few simplifying assumptions that
we relax in Section 4.


Legitimate and illegitimate selection. We assume for now that there exists a common
knowledge partition E of type space T , with typical element   E , such that treatment
costs can be decomposed as
                                    ci (p) = (i , p) + ei,i                                       (4)

where error terms ei,i do not depend on provider p, and have mean zero conditional on i
in the patient population:
                                    E,µI [ei,i |i , D0 ] = 0.                                     (5)

In the example of a private plan with expertise running smoking cessation programs, E would
partition patients into smokers, and non-smokers;  would be a patient's smoking status.
   Cost decomposition (4) implies that the comparative advantages of plans p0 and p1 ,
described by (, ·), depend only on characteristics   E . We think of E as a small set
compared to type space T , so that it is possible for each plan to form accurate estimates of
its costs conditional on   E . For simplicity, we assume that the costs of the public plan
(·, p0 ) are known by both plans, and that private plan p1 knows its own costs (·, p1 ). Error
term ei, captures residual errors in cost estimates.
   We assume (for this section) that the private plan can engage in arbitrary costless selec-
tion:   [0, 1]T , K () = 0. Let M(E ) denote the set of selection rules measurable with
respect to E .

Remark 1. First-best surplus, Smax  max E              i ci (p0 )   - ci (p1 ) is attained by a selec-
tion policy  ( ) = 1(,p0 )>(,p1 ) that is measurable with respect to partition E .

   Accordingly, a selection rule is said to be legitimate if and only if it is measurable with
respect to E (i.e.   M(E )). Selection rules that are not measurable with respect to


                                               15
type-space partition E depend on features of types  that do not matter for efficiency. They
are referred to as illegitimate.


A stylized example. The following very stylized example makes for simple computations
in the proofs that follow. We denote by 0 the corresponding prior. We assume that |I | =
|T | = |D0 | = |D1 |. Types   T take the form  = (, n,  ), with  in some finite set E ,
n  {1, · · · , n} an integer, and   {-1, 1}. Sample I includes one patient per type   T .
Data D0 (resp. D1 ) consists of a cost realization ci (p0 ) (resp. ci (p1 )). Thus |I | = 2 × n × |E |.
   Comparative advantage is determined by (, p) = 0 +  ×  1p=p1 , where   [0, 0 /4]
parameterizes the magnitude of comparative advantages, and   U {-1, 1} (uniformly
distributed over {-1, 1}) indicates which plan has a comparative advantage. Error term
ei, is distributed ei,  U {0, ,n 0 }, with ,n  U {-1, 1}. Every n is associated with
two types (corresponding to  equal to 1 or -1), one whose idiosyncratic cost shocks has a
positive average, and one with a negative average. Random variables  and ,n are drawn
independently. Shocks ei, are drawn independently across individuals i conditional on ,n .
   It is immediate that E,i µI [ei,i |D0 ,  ] = 0. Cost data for types (, n, 1) and (, n, -1) is
either fully revealing of ,n or not at all, leading to straightforward conditional expectations.


3.1     Why Ex Ante Capitation Schemes Fail

Existing capitation mechanisms attempt to align incentives through capitation rates that
are fixed ex ante. This removes concerns that the public plan may misreport its hold-out
cost data H to reduce payments. We clarify when such schemes are potentially effective:
when the private plan p1 is unable to engage in illegitimate selection, or when type-specific
cost estimates are arbitrarily precise. We then show that in Big Data environments, if plan
p1 is able to engage in illegitimate selection, such schemes are either bounded away from
efficiency, or generate large losses for the public plan.
   We consider sparse and rich capitation contracts that differ in the sophistication of the



                                                  16
information used to predict treatment costs. For simplicity, and since we mostly establish
negative results, we allow these ex ante capitation schemes to depend on the common prior
 .8 Transfers take one of the following forms:


                 sparse () =         E,µI [ci (p0 )|i , D0 ] =       (i , p0 )                         (6)
                                i                                i

                   rich () =         E [ci (p0 )|i , D0 ] =       (i , p0 ) + E [ei,i |i , D0 ].       (7)
                                i                             i


In both schemes the private plan is paid the public plan's expected cost of treating selected
patients, conditional on some set of ex ante observables. We denote by S sparse and S rich the
associated surpluses in equilibrium.
       Sparse capitation, like the existing CMS formulas, estimates patients' costs conditional
on legitimate characteristics  alone. Rich capitation estimates patients' costs conditional
on the full set of observables  -- i.e. it exploits Big Data to form targeted estimates.
       Under sparse capitation, private plan p1 's expected payoffs for engaging in selection 
can be decomposed as the sum of social surplus, and a rent equal to the covariance between
selection profile  and the bias in cost estimates conditional on type  :


                         (i ) [(i , p0 ) - (i , p1 )] +          (i )E [ei,i |D0 , D1 , i ] .9         (8)
                    iI                                     iI

                               social surplus                    rents from type selection




Proposition 1 (sparse capitation). Consider capitation scheme sparse .

        (i) If the private plan is constrained to use legitimate selection (  M(E )), then
         efficient selection and truthful reporting ( ,   ) is the unique equilibrium.

        (ii) Under prior 0 , if the private plan is not constrained to use legitimate selec-
   8
    In contrast, we establish positive results for mechanisms that do not depend on the prior  .
   9
    We include D0 in the information set of the private plan since this information is essentially conveyed
by the capitation rate set by the public plan.


                                                      17
      tion rules, then E0 [Smax - S sparse ] = 3
                                               8
                                                 |I |.

      If  = 0 so that there is no comparative advantage, the public plan makes expected
                          3
      losses E0 [U0 ] = - 16 0 |I |.

   Since E,µI [ei,i |D0 , D1 , i ] = 0, rents from type selection in (8) are equal to zero whenever
selection strategy  is measurable with respect to legitimate selection characteristics   E .
Hence, under the constraint that   M(E ), sparse capitation leads to efficient selection.
   When the private plan can select on the basis of illegitimate characteristics  , bias
E [ei,i |D0 , D1 , i ] in cost estimates can be exploited. The private plan will seek to avoid
under-reimbursed patients and recruit over-reimbursed patients, thereby deviating from ef-
ficient selection. In addition, rents from such selection come at the expense of the public
provider, potentially resulting in large losses to p0 if the gains from trade are small. The
inefficiency loss due to selection does not vanish even for large samples D0 .
   In order to correct bias E [ei,i |D0 , D1 , i ] in cost estimates, rich capitation rich conditions
capitation rates on the full set of observables  . Unfortunately, this does not solve the
problem in Big Data settings since conditional cost estimates remain noisy, allowing the
private plan to exploit estimation error, instead of estimation bias.

Proposition 2 (rich capitation).          (i) Under any prior  , efficiency loss Smax -
      S rich satisfies E Smax - S rich  2cmax |I |EµI  1       |
                                                             |D0

                                                   3
    (ii) Under prior 0 , E Smax - S rich =        32
                                                     |I |.
                                                                 3
      If  = 0, the public plan makes expected losses E [U0 ] = - 64 0 |I |.

   While sparse capitation schemes do not achieve efficiency, regardless of data D0 , rich
capitation schemes may achieve near efficiency provided that EµI  1           |
                                                                                   is small, i.e. for
                                                                            |D0
                                
almost every type  , subsample D0 is large. This is ruled out in Big Data environments.
Cost estimates E [e,i |D0 , i ] remain imprecise for a non-vanishing mass of types  (under
the sample distribution of types µI ). As a result, the private plan's additional data D1 has a
non-vanishing impact on cost estimate E [e,i |D0 , D1 , i ]. This result would arise even if the

                                                18
private plan did not observe data D0 but only observed the capitation rates E [ci (p0 )|i , D0 ]
offered by the public plan for enrolling patients with type i .


3.2       Aligning Plan Incentives via Strategic Capitation

We now describe a capitation scheme that eliminates incentives for strategic selection by p1
and strategic reporting by p0 . Payments take the form


                                     strat (, HR )             (i ) +  (i , HR , ),                              (9)
                                                        i


where  ( )  (, p0 ) is the baseline capitation rate conditional on legitimate characteristics
used in sparse capitation. Term  (, HR , ) is a correction dependent on reported hold-out
data HR and selected sample . It correlates a measure of the private plan's deviation from
legitimate selection with hold-out estimates of cost-prediction bias. It is equal to zero in
expectation when the plan does not engage in illegitimate selection. Formally, it takes the
form:
                                                                           1
                      (i , HR , )  covI (si , ri |i =  ) =                        s  r ,    where
                                                                         |I  | iI  i i

                µ (i |i )
       · s i    µI (i |i )
                             - 1 measures selected sample 's deviation from legitimate selection;10

       · ri       1
                   
                |HRi |
                                
                             j HRi   cR
                                      j (p0 ) - (, p0 )      is the average residual of costs for type i in the
                                  i
        reported hold-out sample HR  {(j, j , cR
                                               j )|j  HR , j = i }.


Strategic capitation satisfies the following key properties


 ,        E [ (, HR , )|D0 , D1 ,   , ] = E                        (µ ( | ) - µI ( | ))E [e,i |D1 , D0 ,  ] , (10)
                                                               

                                 M(E ), ,   E,                     E [| | (, HR , )|D0 , D1 , , ] = 0. (11)

  10                                                |J  |
     Recall that for any sample J , µJ ( | )        |J  |   denotes the distribution of types  conditional on charac-
teristic   T in sample J .



                                                              19
Condition (10) implies that under truthful reporting   , the strategic capitation adjustment
is an unbiased estimate of the excess profits plan p1 may have obtained through illegit-
imate selection (the adjustment is negative if private plan p1 overselects types that are
comparatively cheaper to treat). This noisy ex post estimate provides an accurate ex ante
correction and dissuades inefficient selection. Condition (11) ensures that regardless of the
public plan's reporting strategy  , the private plan can guarantee itself expected capitation
payments  ( ) = (, p0 ), provided it uses a legitimate selection strategy   M(E ).11
Strategic capitation essentially turns illegitimate selection into a zero-sum game in which
both the public and private plans can guarantee themselves a value of zero.

Proposition 3. Strategic capitation contract strat induces a unique equilibrium ( ,   ).
Private plan p1 selects patients efficiently, and public plan p0 truthfully reports hold-out
sample H . Both plans get positive expected payoffs:


                     E [U0 |D0 , D1 ,  ,   ]  0      and    E [U1 |D0 , D1 ,  ,   ]  0.


      Section 6 discusses possible alternative mechanisms and clarifies the importance of dif-
ferent moving parts needed to make strategic capitation work. In a nutshell, Big Data
(i.e. observable types  ) is needed to measure the private plan's deviation from legitimate
selection, and ensure that in equilibrium, public plan p0 does not benefit from misreport-
ing hold-out sample costs. The hold-out sample is needed to ensure that residuals ri are
uncorrelated to plan p1 's information.



4       General Analysis
The strategic capitation scheme presented in Section 3 relies on cost decomposition (4): the
surplus maximizing policy depends on a small number of commonly known characteristics
  E . This is not realistic. A private plan's dimensions of comparative advantage are likely
 11
      This point plays a key role when studying incentives for truthful revelation in exchanges.


                                                      20
to be its private information. For instance, a private plan may be able to innovate and develop
comparative advantages along new dimensions. In addition, it need not be the case that the
optimal selection policy be measurable with respect to a small set of characteristics. Finally,
in practice, the public plan's expected cost of treatment conditional on a characteristic  will
have to be estimated from data. This creates additional room for selection by the private
plan. This section extends strategic capitation to such environments.
   We denote by ei the idiosyncratic cost shocks of a patient enrolled in public plan p0 ,
conditional on cost distribution F : ei  ci (p0 ) - EF [ci (p0 )|i ]. By construction, it must be
that ei  [-cmax , cmax ]. Finally, let


                S (|D0 , D1 )  E,            ci (p0 ) - ci (p1 ) D0 , D1 - K (),   and
                                         i

                    SE |D0 ,D1  max S (|D0 , D1 )
                                M(E )



respectively denote the surplus achieved by selection rule  given data D0 , D1 , and the
maximum surplus achievable using selection rules measurable with respect to a partition E
of types.


4.1    Generalized Strategic Capitation

For any given collection E of partitions E  E ­ i.e. for any family of possible definitions
of legitimate and non-legitimate characteristics ­ our goal is to approach the maximum
achievable efficiency SE |D0 ,D1 with respect to partitions E  E . We take on two difficulties:
first, the relevant partition E is no longer common knowledge, but must be elicited from the
private plan; second the public plan's expected costs conditional on characteristics   E
must estimated from data. We define the generalized strategic capitation scheme Gstrat
                                                                                 E     as
follows:

   1. data D0 is shared with plan p1 ;


                                                   21
  2. plan p1 picks a partition E  E according to which it will be allowed to select patients;
      we continue to refer to characteristics   E as legitimate selection characteristics;

  3. plan p1 is rewarded using the strategic capitation scheme strat defined by


                              strat (, HR )                 (i ) +  (i , HR , )
                                                   i


                                                    1
      where  ( ) = (, p0 )               µI ( | ) |D |        
                                                            iD0   ci (p0 ) is the empirical estimate (, p0 )
                                                       0

      (in sample data D0 ) of the public plan's expected treatment costs conditional on char-
      acteristic   E . As in Section 3,  (, HR , ) takes the form:

                                                                             1
                          (, HR , )  covI (si , ri |i =  ) =                        s r ,
                                                                           |I  | iI  i i

      with
                         µ (i |i )                1
                  s i               - 1 and ri     i                       cR
                                                                            j (p0 ) - (, p0 ) .
                         µI (i |i )             |HR  |                  
                                                                   j HRi


An equilibrium of mechanism Gstrat
                             E     is a triplet (E, ,  ) where E  E is private plan p1 's
choice of the characteristics it can use for selection.
   Mechanism Gstrat
              E     expands on strategic capitation by letting the private plan specify the
set of characteristics it wishes to use for selection. As we show below, this additional degree
of freedom results in unavoidable losses related to the complexity of the class of models E
the private plan is allowed to pick from. These losses are related to penalties encountered
in the model selection literature (Vapnik, 1998, Massart and Picard, 2007), and indeed one
can think of our problem as one of delegated model selection.

Definition 1. For any class of partitions E and idiosyncratic errors e = (ei )iD0 , let (E , e)
denote the random variable
                                                                                 + 
                                                                       1
                   (E , e)  max               |I  |        µI ( | )     
                                                                               ei   .                  (12)
                               E E
                                          E             
                                                                      |D0 | iD
                                                                             0



                                                   22
      Variable (E , e) is an upper-bound to the gains a perfectly informed private plan could
obtain from selecting the partition E that lets it optimally target over-reimbursed types.
The scope for selection comes from the fact that generalized capitation uses slightly noisy
sample averages (, p0 ) to estimate the public plan's cost of service EF [ci (p0 )| ] conditional
on legitimate characteristics   E . In Section 3 we simply assumed that the public plan
knew its own cost (, p0 ) conditional on  .
      Generalized capitation extends the performance bounds described in Proposition 3 up to
a penalty of order E [(E , e)].

Proposition 4 (efficiency bounds). Consider a collection E of partitions E  E . In any
equilibrium (E, ,  ) of mechanism Gstrat
                                   E     we have that


                                             S ()  E max SE |D0 ,D1 - 2E [(E , e)] ;                        (13)
                                                               E E


                    E - +             ci (p0 ) D0  -E [(E , e)] ;                                           (14)
                                  i


                  E  -           ci (p1 ) D0 , D1  0.                                                       (15)
                             i


      Note that Proposition 4 takes as given the class of models E . Corollary 2 will show how
to endogenize the class of models E , provided E can be chosen before data D0 is shared with
the private provider.
      To operationalize the performance bounds of Proposition 4 we need to evaluate term
E [(E , e)], which depends depends on prior  through error term e. Lemma 1 provides prior-
                                                     |I  | |D0 |
free bounds for E [(E , e)]. Let   EµI              |D0  | |I |     1 denote the average representativeness
of data D0 for patients in I .12 Let M                E E      2|E | - 1 .

Lemma 1 (bounds on penalties).                    (i) Let (ei )iI denote i.i.d. random variables
        uniformly distributed over {-cmax , cmax }. For any class E and any centered error
 12
      The fact that   1 follows from the observation that  = EµI [µI ( )/µD0 ( )]  1/EµI [µD0 ( )/µI ( )] = 1.



                                                         23
         terms (ei )iI arbitrarily distributed over [-cmax , cmax ], we have that


                                     E [(E , e)]  E [(E , e )]  E .                                (16)


        (ii) Regardless of the distribution of error terms (ei )iI ,


                                                            2
                              E [(E , e)]  |I |cmax              1+     log M .                    (17)
                                                           |D0 |

       Bound (16) is a tight bound that can be computed through numerical simulation. We
denote by E the corresponding upper-bound, which does not depend on prior  . Bound
(17) is a more explicit but coarser bound. While it may seem overly conservative, we now
show that it delivers non-trivial results in a setting of interest: the class of sparse linear
classifiers.


Example: sparse linear classifiers. We now evaluate bound (17) for a natural class of
partitions E : those generated by sparse linear classifiers. This is consistent with the use of
LASSO and other penalized regression techniques for prediction in Big Data settings. We
assume that type space T is a subset of Rf (we will use the inequality f  |T |  |D0 |). For
d  {1, · · · , f }, a d-sparse vector v = (vk )k{1,··· ,f }  Rf is a vector with at most d non-zero
coordinates. The family of partitions E induced by d-sparse classifiers is defined as


                     + -
             E {Ev  {v , v }|v  Rf , v is d-sparse}
                        +                         -
                  where v = {  T s.t. , v  0} and v = {  T s.t. , v < 0}.


                                                                                       -
For any d-sparse vector v  Rf , Ev is the partition of Rf in the two half-spaces v
                                                                                 +
                                                                                   and v
defined by direction v .13
       The private plan is allowed to use any d-sparse linear classifier to decide whether or not
  13
       Note that affine hyperplanes can be generated by including a constant in the type vector.



                                                      24
to select a particular set of types or not.

Corollary 1. When the class of possible partitions E consists of partitions induced by d-
sparse classifiers, penalty E [(E , e)] satisfies


                                                                    d log |D0 |
                                    E [(E , e)]  4cmax |I |                     .                                (18)
                                                                      |D0 |

       Corollary 1 follows from a direct application of Lemma 1(ii) and the fact that |T |  |D0 |.
Indeed, the number of possible partitions of |T | points generated by d-sparse linear classifiers
                           f       |T |                        m
is bounded by 2d ×         d
                               ×    d
                                          <1
                                           4
                                             |T |3d , where    n
                                                                   =     m!
                                                                       (m-n)!n!
                                                                                .14   Since each E  E contains
two elements, we obtain that M  K 2d . Applying bound (17) implies (18).
       Note that for all practical purposes, term             log |D0 | may be treated as a constant between
4 and 5. For |D0 | = 48 × 106 , approximately the size of the US Medicare population,
   log |D0 |    4.2. For |D0 | = 7 × 109 , roughly the current world population,                    log |D0 |     4.8.


Endogenizing E . While Proposition 4 takes as given the class E of type partitions, it is
possible to endogenize E . Consider the following extension of generalized strategic capitation:

   1. private plan p1 picks a class of partitions E , and pays a price pE = E (where E is
      defined within bound (16));

   2. the private and public plan play mechanism Gstrat
                                                  E     .

Note that the private plan must choose E before information D0 is shared. The proof of
Proposition 4 implies the following corollary.

  14
      To obtain this bound, observe that there are f           d ways to choose the d non-zero coordinates in the d-
sparse classifier. For each such choice, the classifier can be written in the form a1 x1 + . . . + ad xd < 1, where
x1 , . . . , xd are the relevant coordinates, and a1 , . . . , ad  R are appropriately chosen coefficients. The set of
appropriate d-tuples (a1 , . . . , ad ) forms a polytope A in Rd , with each of the |T | points representing a linear
constraint on the possible values of (a1 , . . . , ad ). A node of such a polytope is an intersection of d constraints,
and thus A can be identified using d points from T along with the signs of the d constraints. This gives at
most 2d × |T      d
                    |
                      choices.




                                                          25
Corollary 2. Let P (T ) denote the set of partitions of type space T . In any equilibrium
(E , E, ,  ) of the extended generalized strategic capitation mechanism,


                    E [S (|D0 , D1 )]  max E max SE |D0 ,D1 - 2E .                          (19)
                                         E P (T )    E E



   By charging the private plan a price taking the form of a complexity penalty, it is possible
to let the private plan choose the class of models it can use to select patients. Note that if
the upfront price pE is transferred to the public provider, then the public provider makes no
losses in expectation.


4.2    Unimprovability of Strategic Capitation

In the spirit of Hartline and Roughgarden (2008), we now provide a lower-bound for the min-
imal efficiency losses that any mechanism can guarantee, even if the mechanism is allowed to
depend on prior  . The proof will construct a specific prior  over the tuple (F, D0 , D1 , H, K )
for which we establish minimal efficiency losses under any direct mechanism, along the lines
of Myerson and Satterthwaite (1983). Sample size |D0 |, as well as the distributions of types
µI  (T ) in the patient population I , and µD0  (T ) in public data D0 , are known.
   We consider the problem of Bayes-Nash implementation using budget-balanced direct
mechanisms g of the following form:

   · data D0 is publicly observable;

   · plan p1 sends a message m1 = (D1
                                    m
                                      , K m ), reporting its data and selection costs;

   · the mechanism suggests a selection g (D0 , m1 )  [0, 1]T by private plan p1 ;

   · plan p1 makes a selection decision   [0, 1]T , with realized selection   I ;

   · plan p0 sends a message m0 = HR corresponding to a reported hold-out sample;

   · transfers (D0 , m1 , m0 , ) from p0 to p1 are implemented.

   We denote by G the set of incentive compatible direct revelation mechanisms under prior


                                                26
 . For any mechanism g , we denote by g the equilibrium selection by private plan p1 that
maximizes social surplus.

Proposition 5. For any class of partitions E , there exists a prior  such that

                                                                           1
              max E S (g )  E max SE |D0 ,D1 - |I |cmax max EµI             
                                                                                  .         (20)
              g G                  E E                        E E         |D0 |

where    is a fixed constant independent of E and sample size |D0 |.

    In particular, the efficiency loss achieved by strategic capitation for linear classifiers
(Corollary 1) is tight up to an order    log |D0 |, which, for all plausible values of |D0 |, can
be treated as a constant less than 5.



5       Extension: Adverse Selection in Exchanges
So far, we have studied adverse selection in a setting with a single private plan and a single
public plan. Adverse selection is also a significant concern in insurance markets consisting
of multiple private plans, such as the ones organized by the American Healthcare Act.
If regulation constrains prices to depend only on a subset of observables (as is the case
with community rating), plans have incentives to select patients that are cheaper to serve
given characteristics excluded from legal pricing formulas. This increases the cost of serving
patients and can result in limited entry. A simple example suggests that strategic capitation
may help improve market outcomes in such environments.


A stylized model. As in Section 2, a set I of patients with types   T has inelastic
unit demand for insurance, where insurance corresponds to a single standardized insurance
contract. Plan p0 is now an incumbent private plan, while p1 is a potential entrant. For
simplicity, we assume that each plan's cost technology is the same: i  I , ci (p0 )  ci (p1 ).
Here the objective is not to improve the allocation of patients to plans, but rather to increase


                                              27
competition so that insurance is priced at marginal cost. By law, each plan p is constrained
to offer insurance at prices p ( ) that depend only on a coarse set of patient characteristics
  E , where E is a partition of type-space T . Prices are bounded above by  .15
       We assume that the private plans both know their common expected cost of treatment
( )  E[ci |i =  ] conditional on type  . Let ( )  EµI [( )| ] denote the expected cost
of treatment conditional on legitimate characteristics. Each plan p has access to a hold-out
sample of its own costs Hp . We assume that both plans have lexicographic preferences over
maximizing their own revenue and minimizing that of their competitor.16 The timing of
decisions is as follows:

   1. potential entrant p1 decides to enter the market or not;

   2. each plan p active in the market submits a price formula p :   p ( );

   3. each plan p active in the market chooses a selection p  [-1/2, 1/2]T of patients;

   4. if p0 ( ) = p1 ( ), patients of type  purchase insurance from the cheapest plan;
      if p0 ( ) = p1 ( ), plan p serves a patient of type    with probability

                                                  1
                                      µI ( ) ×      + p ( ) - ¬p ( ) ,
                                                  2

         where ¬p denotes the other plan.
         We assume that the cost of selection K (p ) is positive, strictly convex, continuously
         differentiable, and equal to 0 when p is constant and equal to 0: K (0) = 0. In addition,
         K () is sufficiently steep around  = 0 that 1/2 + p - ¬p  0 for all individually
         rational selection policies.

       The cross-price elasticity of patient demand is infinite, so that patients always go to the
cheapest plan. As a result an entrant will make at most zero profits when entering. We
assume that whenever the entrant can guarantee itself zero profits it enters.17 We denote
the realized selected sample of patients purchasing from plan p by p .
  15
     Parameter  may be viewed as the patients' (common) value for insurance.
  16
     This could be because reducing a competitor's profits reduces its ability to expand and compete in the
future.
  17
     This could be due to small subsidies for entry, or high but finite cross-price elasticities.

                                                    28
   The following result holds.

Proposition 6. The market entry game described above has a unique subgame perfect equi-
librium. The potential entrant does not enter, and the incumbent charges price p0 ( ) =  .
   In the off-equilibrium subgame following entry, both the entrant and the incumbent make
equilibrium losses -K ( ) < 0 where  solves max[0,1]T E                i   (i ) - (i ) - K ().

   Indeed, because cross-price elasticities are infinite, in equilibrium, both plans price at
marginal cost conditional on  : p ( ) = ( ). Furthermore, since the marginal cost of
selection at p = 0 is zero, both players find it profitable to engage in non-zero selection. In
aggregate however, selection efforts by the two plans cancel one another and merely destroy
surplus.


Strategic capitation. Consider now the following extension of the strategic capitation
scheme introduced in Section 3. The market entry game is modified in two ways:

   · at stage 2 each active plan p submits a pricing formulas p , and a report HR,p of its
     hold-out sample;

   · after selection has occurred, for each type  it serves, plan p receives price p ( ) and
     capitation adjustment  (, HR,¬p , p ) taking the form:
                                                                       1
                   (i , HR,¬p , p )  covI (si ,p , ri ,p |i =  ) =            s ,p r ,p ,
                                                                     |I  | iI  i i
     with
                      µp (i |i )                  1                        ¬p
             si ,p               - 1 and ri ,p    i                    cR,
                                                                        j     (p0 ) - p ( ) .
                      µI (i |i )                |HR,¬p |        i
                                                            j HR, ¬p



Proposition 7. The market game with strategic capitation described above has an efficient
truthful equilibrium in which: the potential entrant enters; both plans submit prices p ( ) =
( ); both plans select a representative population in expectation (p = 0); both plans submit
their hold-out sample costs truthfully (HR,p = Hp ); and expected ex post adjustments are
equal to 0 (Ep = 0).

                                              29
    The intuition for Proposition 7 result is identical to that of Proposition 3. Given ex ante
representative selection, a plan's expected capitation adjustment is equal to zero regardless of
messages sent by the other plan. Given truthful revelation of costs, representative selection
is a best-response. This reduces the costs of adverse selection and encourages entry.



6     Discussion
This paper explores the value of Big Data in reducing the extent of adverse selection in
government-run capitation schemes. We argue that in realistic Big Data environments,
including a large number of covariates in an ex ante capitation formula is unlikely to succeed.
Instead, we suggest that Big Data may be used to align incentives by using ex post capitation
adjustments that interact an unbiased estimate of counterfactual costs to the public plan,
with the private plan's deviation from legitimate selection.
    This section discusses alternative mechanisms, as well as extensions dealing with dynamic
selection, risk-inflation, and heterogeneity in the quality of care.


6.1    Alternative Mechanisms

Generalized strategic capitation deals with three different difficulties: common values, ex-
act budget balance, and prior-free implementation. As Proposition 5 shows, using prior-
dependent mechanisms does not imply large performance improvements. Still, in order to
clarify the economic forces at work in our analysis it is useful to delineate the mechanics of
other relevant mechanisms.


Mechanisms from the literature. Other work has emphasized the value of ex post noisy
signals in environments with quasi-linear preferences. Riordan and Sappington (1988) show
that it is possible to efficiently regulate a monopoly with unknown costs by exploiting public
signals correlated to the monopoly's type. Using a construction related to that of Cremer
and McLean (1988), they show how to extract all the surplus by offering the monopoly

                                               30
appropriately chosen screening contracts. Strategic capitation also exploits the fact that
noisy ex post signals (here, hold-out cost realizations) can be used to construct accurate ex
ante incentives, but our environment differs in key ways. First, signals are not public, and we
need to take care of the public plan's incentives to reveal its hold-out cost data H . Second,
the identification condition at the heart of Riordan and Sappington (1988) is not satisfied:
neither the distribution of the public plan's cost, nor the private plan's beliefs thereover, are
sufficient statistics of the private plans' costs.
   Mezzetti (2004) shows that it is possible to obtain efficiency in common value environ-
ments using ex post reports of the players' realized payoffs. In our application the mechanism
proposed by Mezzetti (2004) would proceed by making the private plan a negative ex post
transfer equal to the public plan's realized cost, and a positive ex ante transfer to cover
expected costs. This mechanism does not satisfy budget balance (the public plan does not
receive the private plan's transfer ­ if it did truthful reporting of hold-out data H by the
public plan would not be incentive compatible) and relies on priors to set ex ante transfers.18
   The differences between our environment and that of Mezzetti (2004) help clarify the role
played by the Big Data assumption, i.e. the assumption that types are observable but not
interpretable. We align incentives under budget balance by forming a measure of the private
plan's deviation from legitimate selection, and interacting this measure with an unbiased
estimate of the public plan's counterfactual costs. This ensures that in equilibrium, neither
the private nor the public plan can affect their expected payoffs by deviating from legitimate
selection and truthful reporting. The observability of types is used to compute the private
plan's deviation from legitimate selection, as well as correctly reweight the distribution of
types in the hold-out sample H to obtain estimates of counterfactual costs in the sample 
of patients selected by the private plan.
  18
     Budget balanced expected externality mechanisms along the lines of d'Aspremont and G´
                                                                                         erard-Varet
(1979) or Athey and Segal (2013) require private values. They are also prior-dependent.




                                                31
Intuitive alternative mechanisms. A key step in strategic capitation is to use hold-out
data to form estimates of counterfactual costs for the public plan. The assumption that
types are observable is needed to reweight the distribution of types in the hold-out sample to
match that of the selected sample. There may be other ways to form an unbiased estimate
of counterfactual costs to public plan p0 . For instance, if it were possible to assign patients
selected by the private plan back to the public plan with a fixed uniform probability, one
could form an estimate of counterfactual costs without observing types. Beyond feasibility
issues (patients would likely object), a difficulty with this approach is that it does not take
care of the public plan's incentives to bias its own cost reports.
   Strategic capitation dissuades illegitimate selection by forming unbiased estimates of the
private plan's excess profits. An alternative way to dissuade illegitimate selection is to impose
                                                    µ (i |i )
sufficiently large penalties, say proportional to   µI (i |i )
                                                                 - 1 , when the sample selected by
the private plan deviates from legitimate selection. This scheme requires the observability
of types but does not require the availability of a hold-out sample. If the private plan
can perfectly select patients at no cost (K () = 0 for all ), this schemes induces efficient
legitimate selection. However this scheme induces an efficiency loss if it is costly for private
provider p1 to ensure that realized selection  is perfectly representative of population I .
Strategic capitation avoids the issue by using hold-out data to form an unbiased estimate of
the profits from selection.


6.2    Extensions and Implementation Concerns

We now briefly discuss various realistic challenges with capitation programs like Medicare
Advantage, and how they can be addressed within our framework. Details are provided in
Appendix A.


Dynamic selection and risk-inflation. The process of selection is dynamic. In the
context of Medicare Advantage, patients have the opportunity to switch back and forth



                                               32
between public and private plans once a year. This implies that costs of care need to be
evaluated over time. Plans with low short-term cost of care may end up generating greater
longer term costs if they skimp on quality, and encourage patients to disenroll once they get
sick enough (Ellis, 1998). Appendix A shows how to adjust strategic capitation to address
this issue. It becomes important to keep track of the counterfactual distribution of types
over time, had the patient remained with the public plan.
   A key insight from Appendix A is that correct dynamic capitation fees remove incentives
for risk-inflation by private plans. Indeed, if a patient with legitimate characteristic t enrolls
in the private plan at time t, then baseline repayments t+s to the private plan at all times
t + s where the patient remains with the private plan take the form


                             t+s =  (t + s, t )  E[ci,t+s (p0 )|t ].


In other words, target repayments depend only on the type t of the patient when she enrolls
with the private plan, and on elapsed time t + s. Target repayments do not depend on the
patient's type t+s after enrollment time t. As a result, the private plan has no incentives
to exaggerate the medical condition of patients it enrolls (for instance by running a battery
of tests detecting mild conditions). Plans may have incentives to exaggerate the medical
condition of patients it enrolls when repayments t+s depend on types t+s at time t + s.


Quality. Throughout the paper we assume that the quality of actual healthcare delivery is
homogeneous across plans. In practice, insurance plans may differ in the quality of care they
deliver to their enrollees. It may be important to take into account this quality dimension
when designing capitation schemes. Otherwise, costs could be kept low at the expense
of quality. Appendix A describes an extension of strategic capitation that correctly reflects
differences in the quality of care. An important limitation is that it requires health outcomes
(including death) to be observable and assigned monetary values.




                                               33
Surplus Extraction. The paper focuses on the efficient allocation of patients across public
and private plans. However, if there is a deadweight loss of public funds, it may be welfare
improving for the public plan to extract some of the surplus. Since the private plan has
private information over its costs conditional on patient types, this is a difficult multidimen-
sional screening problem. Two observations are helpful to make progress on this issue. First,
given that we consider prior-free mechanisms, the argument of Carroll (2017) suggests there
may not be much value in complex multidimensional screening. It may be near-optimal to
focus on separable one-dimensional screening mechanisms that associate a discounted base-
line capitation rate ( )(, p0 ) to each patient with characteristics  , with ( )  [0, 1] a
discount factor. A second useful observation is that strategic capitation adjustments used to
prevent selection of mispriced types can be applied to any baseline repayment scheme. This
suggests using capitation schemes of the form


                           (, HR )             ( )(, p0 ) +  (i , HR )
                                           i


                           1
where  (i , HR , ) =     |I  |   iI    si ri , with

                   µ (i |i )                1
            s i               - 1 and ri     i (i )                cR
                                                                    j (p0 ) - (, p0 ) .
                   µI (i |i )             |HR |               
                                                           j HRi



This separates the problems of extracting revenue and preventing illegitimate selection.


Ethical concerns. Regulators frequently ban indexing ex ante capitation rates on certain
observables, such as ethnicity or income. One rationale for such bans is that the law has
expressive content that affects social norms, and it is desirable to reinforce the norm that all
citizens deserve equal treatment. We believe that these ethical concerns admit an important
refinement: differential treatment on the equilibrium path weakens the norm of equality;
differential treatment off of the equilibrium path does not. The latter is the case for strategic
capitation: it punishes plans off of the equilibrium path for non-representative selection of


                                                      34
types.


Volatility of revenues and profits. One concern with strategic capitation is that capi-
tation payments to the private plan are uncertain at the interim stage. If correlated noise i
in selection causes the private plan to enroll types that are relatively cheap (resp. expensive)
to treat for the public plan, it receives lower (resp. higher) payments than anticipated. This
increases the volatility of revenues, but may in fact reduce the volatility of profits. Indeed,
types that are relatively cheap (resp. expensive) to treat to the public plan are also likely to
be cheap (resp. expensive) to treat for the private plan. If noise in selection causes a plan to
overselect types that are relatively cheap to treat for the public plan, it receives a negative
capitation adjustment. However, it is likely that the cost of treating these types is also rel-
atively cheap for the private plan, keeping net profits stable. A similar reasoning applies if
the plan overselects types that are relatively expensive to treat for the public plan. Positive
capitation adjustments may well compensate a corresponding increase in the private plan's
cost of care. In other words, strategic capitation can serve as insurance against selection
shocks.



Appendix

A        Extensions

A.1       Dynamic Selection and Risk-Inflation

In dynamic settings, capitation schemes need to control for differential transitions in health
status across plans. For simplicity, as in Section 3, we assume that comparative advantage
depends on a commonly known set E of legitimate selection characteristics   E , and that
expected costs conditional on legitimate characteristics are known. We denote by i,t the
type of patient i at date t  N, by i,t her legitimate selection characteristics at date t, and


                                              35
by ci (t, p) her realized cost of care if treated by plan p at time t. Types (t )t{0,··· ,T } and
characteristics (t )t{0,··· ,T } follow Markov chains, whose process p depends on the plan p
in which the patient is enrolled. Future costs are discounted using discount factor   (0, 1],
and T denotes an upper bound to the duration of patients' lives in the system.
   For a patient i of type i enrolled with the public plan from time t to time T , we define

                            T
             Ci (t, p0 )           s-t ci (s, p0 ) and C (t, , p0 )  E Ci (t, p0 ) t =  .
                            s=t


   In dynamic environments, strategic capitation must accommodate the possible reenroll-
ment of patients with the public plan. As a result, transfers must occur at the reentry of
patients into the public system. Let us denote by t the selection of patients enrolled with
the private plan at time t, and by re
                                   t the selection of patients disenrolling from the private

plan and re-enrolling with the public plan at time t. The following scheme extends strategic
capitation. At initial time of enrollment t = 0, the public plan commits to the following
baseline payments conditional on legitimate characteristics   E :

   · A capitation payment  (t, 0 ) = E [ci (t, p0 )|i,0 = 0 ] whenever patient i with initial
      type 0 is enrolled with the private plan at time t;

      Note that because transfers depend only on type 0 , there is no incentive for risk-
      inflation by the plan, i.e. an incentive to requalify the patient as a different type;

   · A signed transfer i
                       re
                          (with positive transfers being made from the public plan to the pri-
                                                                       re
      vate plan) at every time T patient i returns to the public plan: i  = E [Ci (T, p0 )|i,0 ] -
      C (T, i,T , p0 ).

Provided that the private plan does not engage in illegitimate selection, this scheme induces
efficient dynamic behavior by the private plan. To dissuade illegitimate selection, dynamic
strategic capitation makes payment adjustments  (t, 0 ) and  re (T, 0 ) using reported
dynamic hold-out data HR as follows:


                                                    36
   ·  (t, 0 ) =        1
                    |I 0 |     iI 0   si,t ri,t , with

                    µt (i,0 |i,0 = 0 )                                   1
            si,t                       - 1,               and ri,t                            cR
                                                                                               j (t, p0 ) -  (t, 0 ).
                    µI (i,0 |i,0 = 0 )                                 |HRi,0 |         
                                                                                    j HRi,0



   ·  re (t, t ) =      1
                      |I t |    iI t   sre   re
                                        i,t ri,t , with


               µre  (i,t |i,t = t )                                 1
       sre
        i,t 
                 t
                                    - 1,               re
                                                  and ri,t          
                                                                                                           R
                                                                                       C (T, i,T , p0 ) - Cj (t, p0 ) .
                µI (i,t |i,t = t )                                |HRi,t |       
                                                                             j HRi,t



A.2     Quality

If the private and public plan differ in the quality of health outcomes they deliver to patients,
the value associated with different health outcomes needs to be reflected in capitation trans-
fers. We assume that health outcomes (including death) for each patient i  I treated by
plan p are observable and associated with realized monetary values vi (p). As in the case of
costs, we assume that the private plan's comparative advantage is measurable with respect
to a relatively small set of characteristics i . Given selection rule  and transfers , the
surpluses accruing to the public and private plans take the form


                         E U0 = E - +                      ci (p0 ) + vi (p1 ) - vi (p0 )  ,
                                                     i


                         E U1 = E  -                     ci (p1 )  - K ().
                                                  i


Differences in quality of care are isomorphic to a change in the public plan's cost of care.
Since we assume that health outcomes are observable, data D0 should now include values
vi (p0 ) of patients in D0 . Health outcomes vi (p1 ) of patients in  (selected by private plan
p1 ) should be visible to the public plan. Strategic capitation can be extended by setting




                                                            37
transfers:


                              (, HR )             vi (p1 ) +  (i ) +  (i , HR )
                                            i


where                                                                                
                                                         1
                               ( )        µI ( | )        
                                                                 ci (p0 ) - vi (p0 )
                                       
                                                        |D0 | iD
                                                                  0


and  (, HR ) takes the form:

                                                                1
                                       (i , HR , )                     s r ,
                                                              |I  | iI  i i

             µ (i |i )
with si      µI (i |i )
                          - 1 and

                                                                        
                                        1 
                               ri        i             cR
                                                        j (p0 ) - vj (p0 ) -  ( ).
                                                                          
                                      |HR  |      
                                               j HRi




                                                         38
Online Appendix, Not for Publication

B      Proofs

B.1     Proofs for Section 3

Proof of Proposition 1: We begin with point (i). Reports from plan p0 do not affect
reimbursements so that truth-telling strategy   is dominant. In turn, for any selection 
measurable with respect to characteristics   E , the private plan's expected payoffs from
selection take the form


       E         1i ((i , p0 ) - (i , p1 ) + ei,i ) = E        1i ((i , p0 ) - (i , p1 ))
            iI                                            iI


where we use the fact that E,µI [ei,i |i ] = 0. It follows that the optimal selection rule is
indeed ( ) =  ( ) = 1(,p0 )>(,p1 ) .
    Let us turn to point (ii). Under environment 0 , the public plan sets a fixed capitation
payment 0 for every patient. For  = (, n,  ), the private plan's conditional expectation
about error shock ei,i is E [ei, |D1 ,  ] = 0 if both types (, n, 1) and (, n, -1) have real-
ized costs (, p1 ) in data D1 ­ this happens with probability 1/4. In the complementary
event, the private plan is informed, and E [ei, |D1 ,  ] = ,n 0 /2. Since the magnitude
 of comparative advantage is less than 0 /4, the optimal selection scheme for the private
plan consists of: selecting only the relatively cheap type with characteristics (, n) when the
private plan is informed about ,n (proba 3/4); and selecting type  on the basis of com-
parative advantage when the private plan is uninformed about n (proba 1/4). This implies
that in expectation, the efficiency loss is equal to

                                                        3
                                 E0 [Smax - S sparse ] = |I |.
                                                        8




                                               39
   When  = 0, the private plan only profits from selecting the relatively cheap type with
                                                                                           3
characteristics (, n). This yields an aggregate expected profit equal to                      |I |.
                                                                                           16 0
                                                                                                       Since there
is no comparative advantage, this profit comes entirely at the expense of public plan p0 .


Proof of Proposition 2: We first establish point (i). Given selected set , and data D0 ,
D1 , private plan p1 gets payoff


       E[U1 |, D0 , D1 ] =        (p0 , i ) - (p1 , i ) + E [ei ,i |i , D0 ] - E [ei ,i |i , D0 , D1 ].
                              i


Using the fact that a - |b|  a + b  a + |b|, we have that


        - +         (p0 , i ) - (p1 , i )  E[U1 |, D0 , D1 ]   +                   (p0 , i ) - (p1 , i )
                i                                                            i


with
                             = E             |E [ei ,i |D0 , D1 ] - E [ei ,i |D0 ]| .
                                        iI

   The private plan's optimal selection  must yield a higher payoff than the surplus-
maximizing selection  = 1(,p0 )>(,p1 ) . Hence it follows that


                         (p0 , i ) - (p1 , i )  -2 +                (p0 , i ) - (p1 , i ).
                     i                                        i


   Since |ei, | < cmax , it follows that


                                                                                           1/2
  E |E [ei ,i |D0 , D1 ] - E [ei ,i |D0 ]|  E (E [ei ,i |D0 , D1 ] - E [ei ,i |D0 ])2            
                                                                                                 1/2
                                                                             1/2        c2                 cmax
                                              E (ei ,i - E [ei ,i |D0 ])2                max
                                                                                           i           =     i
                                                                                                                   .
                                                                                        |D0  |             |D0 |


   Hence   cmax |I |EµI  1          |
                                        . This establishes point (i).
                                  |D0




                                                       40
   Point (ii) follows directly from Proposition 1(ii) and the observation that: with proba-
bility 3/4 the public plan is fully informed of ,n , in which case the capitation rate is set
precisely, and the private plan selects types efficiently; with probability 1/4, the public plan
is uninformed about ,n and sets capitation rate (, p0 ). In this last event, the analysis of
Proposition 1(ii) applies as is.


Proof of Proposition 3: We begin by establishing (10) and (11). We begin with (10). We
have that

                                              1         µ (i | )
    E [ (, HR , )|D0 , D1 ,   , ] = E                             - 1 E [ei ,i |D0 , D1 ,  ]
                                            |I  | iI    µI (i | )

                                                            µ ( | )
                                     = E         µI ( | )            - 1 E [e,i |D0 , D1 ,  ]
                                             
                                                            µI ( | )

                                     = E         (µ ( | ) - µI ( | )) E [e,i |D0 , D1 ,  ] .
                                             


We turn to (11). Using the fact that  is measurable with respect to E (allowing us to define
( ) = ( )), and the fact that selection error i is orthogonal to ri have that


                                                             |I  | 
      E [| | (, HR , )|D0 , D1 ,  , ] = E               | | -  | | r
                                                     
                                                             |I |

                                                                     |I  |
                                           = E          ( )|I  | -         ( )|I  | r = 0.
                                                     
                                                                     |I  |


   We now return to the proof of Proposition 3. In equilibrium, the public plan will get a
payoff at most equal to 0. By condition (10), it follows that the public plan can guarantee it-
self a payoff of 0 by reporting costs truthfully:  =   . Hence, it must be that in equilibrium
the public plan gets a payoff of 0. Since we break indifferences towards truthtelling, it must
be that the public plan reports truthfully in equilibrium. This implies that the private plan
gets a payoff equal to E       i   (p0 , i ) - (p1 , i ) , which is maximized by using optimal


                                               41
selection policy  =  .




B.2     Proofs for Section 4

Proof of Proposition 4: Given a cost distribution F , let (, p)  EµI ,F [ci (p)|i =  ]
denote the expected cost of service for plan p conditional on legitimate selection characteristic
 in patient population I . We also denote by (, p)  EF [ci (p)|i =  ] the expected cost of
treatment by plan p conditional on type  .
   Given a partition E and a selection rule , plan p1 's expected returns are


       E [U1 |D0 , D1 ] =E        (i ) [(i , p0 ) +  (i , HR , ) - (i , p1 )] D0 , D1 - K ()
                             iI


                     =E           (i ) [(i , p0 ) - (i , p1 )] D0 , D1 - K ()
                             iI


                     +E           (i ) [(i , p0 ) +  (i , HR , ) - (i , p0 )] D0 , D1
                             iI


                     +E           (i ) [(i , p0 ) - (i , p0 )] D0 , D1
                             iI
                       A    B    C
                     =U1 + U1 + U1 .


       A    B      C
where U1 , U1 and U1 are defined as the three respective terms in the expression above.
           A
Note that U1 = S (|D0 , D1 ). The key steps of the proof are the following,

                                   B
 (i) in any equilibrium (E, ,  ), U1  0;

                                                                               B
(ii) for any reporting strategy  , if  is measurable with respect to E , then U1 = 0;

(iii) for any E and ,
                                          C
                                      E [U1 |D0 ]  E [(E , e)].


Let us first show that points (i), (ii) and (iii) imply properties (13), (14) and (15). We have


                                                   42
that under equilibrium strategies (E, ,  ),


                                                 B                       C
            E [U1 |D0 , D1 ] S (|D0 , D1 ) + E [U1 |D0 , D1 , ,  ] + E [U1 |D0 , D1 , ,  ]
                                               C
                           S (|D0 , D1 ) + E [U1 |D0 , D1 , ,  ].


In addition, from the fact that the private plan is weakly better off using (E, ) over any
strategy (E ,  ) where  is measurable with respect to E , it follows that


                            E [U1 ] E max SE |D0 ,D1 - E [(E , e)].
                                          E E



Altogether, this implies that S (|D0 , D1 )  E maxE E SE |D0 ,D1 - 2E [(E , e)]. Condition
(14) follows from the fact that truthful reporting   (c,  ) guarantees that


-E         (i ) [(i , p0 ) +  (i , HR , ) - (i , p0 )]  -E            (i ) [(i , p0 ) +  (i , HR , ) - (i , p0 )]
      iI                                                         iI
                                                                                        =0


                                                          - E         (i ) [(i , p0 ) - (i , p0 )] .
                                                                 iI

                                                                          -E [(E ,e)]


Finally, condition (15) follows from the fact that plan p1 can choose a selection strategy
measurable with respect to E , which guaranteed p1 positive expected payoffs.
    Let us return to the proofs of points (i), (ii) and (iii) above. Point (i) follows from the
fact that in equilibrium the expected transfers of p0 to plan p1 under equilibrium reporting
strategy  must be weakly lower than under truthful reporting strategy   , i.e. E [| ] 
E [|  ]. This implies that


            E         (i ) [(i , p0 ) +  (i , HR , )]  E             (i ) [(i , p0 ) +  (i , HR , )]   , so that
                 iI                                             iI


E         (i ) [(i , p0 ) +  (i , HR , ) - (i , p0 )]  E             (i ) [(i , p0 ) +  (i , HR , ) - (i , p0 )]   .
     iI                                                         iI




                                                 43
Using


    E [ (i , HR , )|i  ,   ] = E                 (µ ( |i ) - µI ( |i )) ((, p0 ) - (i , p0 )) i  ,  
                                             i


                                     = E         (µ ( |i ) - µI ( |i )) ((, p0 ) - (i , p0 )) i  ,  
                                             i


                                     = E         µ ( |i )((, p0 ) - (i , p0 )) i  ,  
                                             i


and
                                                                                                               

E         (i , p0 ) - (i , p0 ) +  (i , HR , ) = E              | |  (, HR ) +        µ ( | )[(, p0 ) - (, p0 )] 
      i                                                     E                      


we obtain that indeed,


                      E        (i ) [(i , p0 ) +  (i , HR , ) - (i , p0 )]   = 0,
                          iI


                                          B
and hence, for any reporting strategy  , U1  0, which yields point (i).
    Point (ii) follows from the fact that whenever  is measurable with respect to E , then
for all reporting strategies 


                                 E         (i )((i , p0 ) - (i , p0 )) = 0
                                      iI


and
                      E [ (, HR , )] = E                [µ ( | ) - µI ( | )]r = 0,
                                                     

                1
where r =     |H  |   iH    cR
                             i (p0 ) - (, p0 ) denotes the mean residual of the baseline capitation

formula computed in the reported hold-out sample.




                                                      44
   Finally,


                      C
                     U1        max        E          (i )((i , p0 ) - (i , p0 ))
                            [0,1]T ,E E
                                                iI


                               max        E           (i )((i , p0 ) - (i , p0 ))
                            M(E ),E E
                                                iI
                                                                               +

                          max E                      (i , p0 ) - (i , p0 )         ,
                            E E
                                        E     iI 


which yields point (iii).


Proof of Lemma 1: We begin with point (i) and show that E [(E , e)]  E[(E , e )] using
a coupling argument, i.e. by carefully jointly sampling original errors e and Rademacher
errors e .
   Consider the following process for generating errors e and e . Errors e are generated
according to the original distribution of ei (where the different ei 's are independent of one
another). In turn, each error term ei is generated from ei as follows: conditional on ei ,
ei  {-cmax , cmax } is chosen so that E [ei |ei ] = ei . This is possible since ei  [-cmax , cmax ],
and there is a unique such distribution. Since error terms (ei )iD0 are independent, so are
error terms (ei )iI . In addition,


                                E [ei ] = Eei E [ei |ei ] = Eei ei = 0,


which implies ei  U {-cmax , cmax }.
   We now show that E [(E , e)]  E [(E , e )]. Note that (E , e) can be viewed as the
maximum value for S  E  E of
                                                                            
                                                                 1
                            S          |I  |         µI ( | )     
                                                                         ei  .19               (21)
                                   S             
                                                                |D0 | iD
                                                                        0




                                                     45
Fix e, and assume that (E , e) is realized by S for some set S of  's. We have by linearity
of expectation that
                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                           
                                       |I |                                                           |I |
        (E , e) =        |I  |             
                                                          ei  = E               |I  |              
                                                                                                                         ei  e
                     S             
                                    |I  ||D0 | iD                           S              
                                                                                            |I  ||D0 | iD
                                                 0                                                       0


                  E [(E , e )|e] .


Using the law of iterated expectations, this completes the proof of point (i).
      We now turn to point (ii). Let E  E be any partition, and let S  E be a selection of
elements in partition E . We first show that for all t,

                                                                           t2 |D0 |
                                   prob (S > t)  exp -                                                                                (22)
                                                                        2c2     2
                                                                          max  |I |
                                                                                    2



where S is defined by (21). Using Hoeffding's inequality (see Hoeffding (1963) or Cesa-
Bianchi and Lugosi (2006), Lemma 2.2) we have
                                                                                
                                                               2
                                                          2t
        prob (S > t) = exp -                                        |I  |2
                                                                                
                                                               2
                                          S,                 4cmax
                                                          iD0           |2
                                                                   |D0
                                                                                                                                   
                                                  2                                                           2
                                                  t                                                        t
                          exp -                          |I  |2
                                                                     = exp -
                                                                                          |I |2                |I  | |D0 | |I  |
                                                                                                                                   
                                      2c2
                                        max            T |D0|                      2c2
                                                                                     max |D0 |              T |D0  | |I | |I |


                                            t2
                          exp -              |I | 2       .
                                      2c2
                                        max |D0 | 



Since there are at most M =             E E      2|E | - 1 possible non-empty sets S , this implies


                                                                                    t2
                              prob ((E , e) > t)  M exp -                          |I |    2      .
                                                                            2c2
                                                                              max |D0 | 


                                                                                      +
To complete the proof, we use the fact that E [(E , e)] =                            0
                                                                                               prob((E , e) > t)dt. Pick t0
 19                                                                                                 1
      Indeed, the corresponding set S will only select  s such that                      µI ( | ) |D |              
                                                                                                                  iD0   ei > 0.
                                                                                                       0




                                                                   46
                        t2                                                2 log M
such that M exp -     2
                         0
                          |I |2
                                       = 1, i.e. t0 = |I |cmax             |D0 |
                                                                                  .   We have
                    2cmax |D | 
                             0



                            t0                                        +
        E [(E , e)]              prob((E , e) > t)dt +                    prob((E , e) > t)dt
                        0                                         t0
                                   +
                                                             t2
                     t0 +               M exp -        |I |       2
                                  t0            2c2
                                                  max |D0 | 
                                                 
                                       2 log M     2                                            t2
                     |I |cmax                  +      |I |cmax                      M exp -        |I |2
                                        |D0 |     2                           |D0 |         2c2
                                                                                              max |D0 | 

                                        2
                     |I |cmax                      log M + 1 .
                                       |D0 |




Proof of Corollary 2: Let E  be defined as


                                 E   arg max E [max SE |D0 ,D1 ] - 2E .
                                         EP (T )        E E



It follows from the proof of Proposition 4 that, net of payments pE , the payoff U1 to the
private plan in equilibrium (E , E, ,  ) must satisfy:


                                               E [U1 ]  E S (|D0 , D1 ),              and

                     E  P (T ),                E [U1 ]  E max SE |D0 ,D1 - 2E .
                                                                  E E



This implies that


                     E S (|D0 , D1 )  max E max SE |D0 ,D1 - 2E .
                                                 E P (T )         E E




                                                            47
Proof of Proposition 5: Let E be the partition maximizing               E 1+
                                                                               1
                                                                                       µI ( ). We start
                                                                               |D0 |
with the following simple claim:

Claim 1 (hard to distinguish distributions). For each integer d  0, there exists a pair
of distributions l , h taking finitely many values c  [0, cmax ] and such that El c = d l,
                                                                   
Eh c = d           d   d                       d   d
          h , with h , l  [cmax /4, 3cmax /4], h - l  k cmax /(1 +   d), and dl is hard to

distinguish from d
                 h , in the sense that their statistical distance is less than 1/4:



                                    sup        d        d
                                               l (S ) - h (S )  1/4,                              (23)
                                S [0,cmax ]d



for some universal constant k > 0, where d     d
                                         l and h denote the d-product measures.


    We defer the proof of Claim 1 until after the proof of the proposition. The following class
of environments  lets us establish our results.

    · Selection cost K is identically equal to 0.

    · Cost distributions F for the public and private plans are determined as follows. Let
      (b )E be independent Bernoulli draws over {0, 1} such that prob(b = 1) = 1/2.
      For patients i with characteristic   E costs ci (p0 ) are independent and identically
                                                |D |
      distributed according to the distribution b 0 described in Claim 1. Its expected value
                             |D |   |D |
       is denoted by  0  l
                               0
                                 , h 0 . Note that illegitimate selection characteristics  are
       independent of costs, and play no role in this construction.

    · For patients with characteristic   E , costs ci (p1 ) are deterministic and equal to
                             
                   |D0 |   |D0 |
       1      0
              
                +  l     + h     3.

    · Holdout set H contains sufficient information to identify (b )E . Hence, we can let
      messages m0 be reports of (b )E .

    · Private plan p1 knows (b )E . Hence, we can also let messages m1 be reports of
      (b )E .

    Since only legitimate characteristics  are correlated to costs, making illegitimate types 
irrelevant, we can restrict attention to suggested selection strategies (D0 , m1 ) taking values
in [0, 1]E .

                                                   48
Step 1: exploiting incentive compatibility to obtain monotonicity constraints.
                                                                         
Fix a characteristic  (there are µI ( )|I | such patients), and let d  |D0 |. We establish
minimum performance losses that any direct mechanism must accumulate with respect to
patients with characteristic  . Our first step is to exploit incentive compatibility constraints
to derive a monotonicity condition.
   Let m       
        0 and m1 denote the truthful reporting strategies by plans p0 and p1 . Let m0 ,

m1 (resp. m0 , m1 ) denote the reporting strategies in which the two plans correctly report
(b ) = but always report b = 1 (resp. report b = 0).
   Fix a realization of D0 . In principle, D0 is an argument of transfer function , and of
suggested selection . We suppress this dependency for now since D0 is held constant. We
denote by m1 ( ) the selection intensity of patients with characteristic  given message m1 .
   We define plans p0 and p1 's conditional expected values U0 and U1 given messages and a
value of b as


         U0 (m0 , b |D0 )  E -(m0 , m1 , m1
                                            )+           |I  | × 0 × m1
                                                                        ( ) D0 , b
                                                     E


         U1 (m1 , b |D0 )  E (m0 , m1 , m1 ) -          |I  | × 1 × m1 ( ) D0 , b .
                                                    E


   By incentive compatibility of plan p1 's messages if b = 1, we must have


                           U1 (m1 , b = 1|D0 )  U1 (m1 , b = 1|D0 ).                       (24)


Incentive compatibility of plan p0 's message when b = 0 implies that


                           U0 (m0 , b = 0|D0 )  U0 (m0 , b = 0|D0 ).




                                              49
Since the true value of b does not affect expected transfers, this inequality simplifies to


                     E (m0 , m1 , m1 ) D0  E (m0 , m1 , m1 ) D0 .                         (25)


Combining (24) and (25) implies


        E (m0 , m1 , m1 ) - (m0 , m1 , m1 ) D0                                            (26)

                             E          |I  | × 1 × m1 ( ) - m1 ( ) D0 , b = 1 .
                                    E


A symmetric argument implies


        E (m0 , m1 , m1 ) - (m0 , m1 , m1 ) D0                                            (27)

                             E          |I  | × 1 × m1 ( ) - m1 ( ) D0 , b = 0 .
                                    E



By construction, b affects the value                   
                                     1 but not that of 1 for  =  . Hence, (26) and (27)

imply
                        2d   d
                         l + h  2d + d
              E |I  |          - h   l
                                                × m1 ( ) - m1 ( ) D0  0.
                           3       3

This yields the following monotonicity condition:


                             E m1 ( ) D0  E m1 ( ) D0 .                                   (28)


Step 2: establishing a lower bound on performance losses. Under first-best pa-
tient selection, the unconditional expected cost of treatment for a patient with legitimate
characteristic  is

                                               1     1   1 d 2 d           2d   d
                                                                            l + h
           E [c(p0 ) +  ( )(c(p1 ) - c(p0 ))] = dl +       + h         =          .       (29)
                                               2     2   3 l 3                3




                                              50
Monotonicity condition (28) implies that under any selection  induced by a direct mecha-
nism, the expected cost of treatment for a patient with characteristic  satisfies:


    E c(p0 ) + ( )(c(p1 ) - c(p0 )) = E E c(p0 ) + ( )(c(p1 ) - c(p0 ))|D0
                                            2d    d
                                              l + h
           =E prob(b = 0|D0 ) × E m1 ( ) ×          + (1 - m1 ( )) × dl D0
                                                3
                                               2d + d
                + prob(b = 1|D0 ) × E m1 ( ) × h     l
                                                       + (1 - m1 ( )) × dh D0
                                                  3
            2d + d    d - d
           = l    h
                    + h    l
                             × E prob(b = 0|D0 )E [m1 ( )|D0 ]
               3        3
                                            + prob(b = 1|D0 )E [1 - m1 ( )|D0 ]
              2d   d
               l + h  d - d
                     + h   l
                             × E prob(b = 0|D0 )E [m1 ( )|D0 ]
                 3       3
                                            + prob(b = 1|D0 )E [1 - m1 ( )|D0 ]
              2d   d
               l + h  d - d
                     + h   l
                             × E [min {prob(b = 0|D0 ), prob(b = 1|D0 )}]
                 3       3

Step 3: quantify the lower bound using Claim 1. Since prob(b |D0 ) only depends
                                                                  
on D0 , it suffices to bound E [min {prob(b = 0|D0 ), prob(b = 1|D0 )}].
                        
   Recalling that d = |D0 |, Bayes rule and Claim 1 imply that


                                       
  E [min {prob(b = 0|D0 ), prob(b = 1|D0 )}] =
                                                                 
                                       d l (D0 )          d h (D0 )
                            E min                  ,                       =
                                    (d      d           d
                                     l + h )(D0 ) (l + h )(D0 )
                                                               d

                                 1 |d   (D ) - d        
                                                   h (D0 )|      1         |d         d   
                                                                            l (D0 ) - h (D0 )|   1
                             E     - l d0        d             = -                             >
                                 2     2(l + h )(D0 )            2                  4            4
                                                                   D0


                                                                       1                       
where we used the fact that the statistical distance satisfies         2
                                                                            
                                                                           D0   |d         d
                                                                                 l (D0 ) - h (D0 )| =

supS [0,cmax ]d d        d
                l (S ) - h (S ).

   Altogether, it follows that for patients with characteristic  , the per-patient efficiency




                                                 51
loss is least
                                     1 d   d
                                       h - l  k     cmax
                                                ×        
                                                            .
                                     4   3    12 1 + |D0  |
Setting k = k /12 completes the proof.


   We now prove Claim 1.
Proof of Claim 1: Given d  1, let l  cmax B1/2- , and h  cmax B1/2+ , where Bq
denotes Bernoulli variables taking values in {0, 1}, and equal to 1 with probability q . Set
  so that 0 <          < 1/4 (with the relationship between   and d to be specified below). The
Kullback-Leibler divergence D(d   d           d     d
                              l ||h ) between l and h satisfies (see Cover and Thomas

(2012) for a reference)


                     D(d d                                                  2
                       l h ) = d × D (l h ) = d × D (B1/2- B1/2+ ) = d × O ( ),



By Pinsker's Inequality (e.g. Csiszar and K¨
                                           orner (2011), Section 3) the statistical distance
between d     d
        l and h satisfies


                                                                                          
 2×      sup         d        d        d   d
                     l (S ) - h (S ) = l - h   1      2 × D(d d
                                                            l h ) =   d × O( 2 ) < k1 ×   d, (30)
      S [0,cmax ]d


where k1  2 is a constant.
                                                               
  Choose = 1/(2k1 d)  1/4. Claim 1 holds with d   d
                                              h - l = 2 = 1/(k1 d). Setting

k  1/k1 completes the proof.




B.3       Proofs for Section 6

Proof of Proposition 6: Consider the subgame following entry. For any continuation
pricing equilibrium (p0 , p1 ), the usual Bertrand competition argument implies that price




                                                      52
formulas must satisfy
                                      , 0 ( ) = 1 ( ) = ( ).

Given these prices, profits are determined by the plans' selection behavior (p0 , p1 ). Given
the selection rule ¬p of its competitor, plan p chooses

                                                          1
             p  arg max            (( ) - ( ))µI ( )        + ( ) - ¬p ( ) - K ()
                     [0,1]T    T
                                                          2

                     = arg max        µI ( )( )(( ) - ( )) - K ().
                        [0,1]T    T


Since K is strictly convex, minimized at 0, and smooth, it follows that its gradient K|0 at
0 is equal to 0. As a result both plans engage in the same non-zero amount of selection  ,
and in aggregate selection has no effect on each plan's treated sample. Strict convexity of K
implies that K ( ) > 0. The entrant gets strictly negative expected profits following entry.
   It follows that the unique equilibrium involves no entry, allowing the incumbent to charge
prices equal to  .


Proof of Proposition 7: Consider the subgame following entry. For any continuation
pricing equilibrium (p0 , p1 ), the usual Bertrand competition argument implies that price
formulas must satisfy
                                      , 0 ( ) = 1 ( ) = ( ).

   Assuming truthful reporting by plan ¬p, strategic capitation ensures that plan p does
not benefit from selecting a non representative sample of types. Hence plan p's payoff is
equal to
                                                       1
                              (( ) - ( ))µI ( )          - ¬p ( ) - K (p ).
                          T
                                                       2

It is therefore optimal for plan p to set p = 0 and minimize selection cost. Given this choice,
it is indeed optimal for plan ¬p to report its hold-out sample truthfully.



                                                  53
References
Antic, N. (2014): "Contracting with Unknown Technologies," unpublished paper, Princeton
  University.

Athey, S. and I. Segal (2013): "An efficient dynamic mechanism," Econometrica, 81,
  2463­2485.

Batata, A. (2004): "The effect of HMOs on fee-for-service health care expenditures: evi-
  dence from Medicare revisited," Journal of health economics, 23, 951­963.

                                     ´ ndez-Val, and C. Hansen (2013): "Pro-
Belloni, A., V. Chernozhukov, I. Ferna
  gram evaluation with high-dimensional data," arXiv preprint arXiv:1311.2645.

Belloni, A., V. Chernozhukov, and C. Hansen (2014): "Inference on Treatment Ef-
  fects after Selection among High-Dimensional Controls," The Review of Economic Studies,
  81, 608­650.

Bergemann, D. and K. H. Schlag (2008): "Pricing without priors," Journal of the
  European Economic Association, 6, 560­569.

Bisin, A. and P. Gottardi (1999): "Competitive equilibria with asymmetric informa-
  tion," Journal of Economic Theory, 87, 1­48.

------ (2006): "Efficient competitive equilibria with adverse selection," Journal of political
  Economy, 114, 485­516.

Brooks, B. (2014): "Surveying and selling: Belief and surplus extraction in auctions," .

Brown, J., M. Duggan, I. Kuziemko, and W. Woolston (2014): "How Does Risk
  Selection Respond to Risk Adjustment? New Evidence from the Medicare Advantage
  Program," American Economic Review, 104, 3335­3364.




                                             54
Bundorf, M. K., J. Levin, and N. Mahoney (2012): "Pricing and Welfare in Health
  Plan Choice," American Economic Review, 102, 3214­48.

Carroll, G. (2015): "Robustness and linear contracts," American Economic Review, 105,
  536­63.

------ (2017): "Robustness and separation in multidimensional screening," Econometrica,
  85, 453­488.

Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (2016): "HHS-operated risk adjust-
  ment methodology meeting: discussion paper," Tech. rep.

Cesa-Bianchi, N. and G. Lugosi (2006): Prediction, Learning, and Games, Cambridge
  University Press.

Chassang, S. (2013): "Calibrated incentive contracts," Econometrica, 81, 1935­1971.

Cover, T. M. and J. A. Thomas (2012): Elements of information theory, John Wiley
  & Sons.

Cremer, J. and R. P. McLean (1988): "Full extraction of the surplus in Bayesian and
  dominant strategy auctions," Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, 1247­
  1257.

                    ¨ rner (2011): Information theory: coding theorems for discrete
Csiszar, I. and J. Ko
  memoryless systems, Cambridge University Press.

                           ´rard-Varet (1979): "Incentives and incomplete infor-
d'Aspremont, C. and L.-A. Ge
  mation," Journal of Public economics, 11, 25­45.

Dubey, P. and J. Geanakoplos (2002): "Competitive pooling: Rothschild-stiglitz re-
  considered," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1529­1570.




                                           55
Ellis, R. P. (1998): "Creaming, skimping and dumping: provider competition on the
  intensive and extensive margins," Journal of health economics, 17, 537­555.

Evans, M. A., G. C. Pope, J. Kautter, M. J. Ingber, S. Freeman, R. Sekar,
  and C. Newhart (2011): "Evaluation of the CMS-HCC Risk Adjustment Model," CfMM
  Services, Editor.

Frank, R. G., J. Glazer, and T. G. McGuire (2000): "Measuring adverse selection
  in managed health care," Journal of Health Economics, 19, 829­854.

Glazer, J. and T. G. McGuire (2000): "Optimal risk adjustment in markets with
  adverse selection: an application to managed care," American Economic Review, 1055­
  1071.

Hartline, J. D. and T. Roughgarden (2008): "Optimal Mechanism Design and Money
  Burning," in Symposium on Theory Of Computing (STOC), 75­84.

Hoeffding, W. (1963): "Probability Inequalities for Sums of Bounded Random Variables,"
  Journal of the American Statistical Association, 58, 13­30.

Kautter, J., G. C. Pope, M. Ingber, S. Freeman, L. Patterson, M. Cohen,
  and P. Keenan (2014): "The HHS-HCC risk adjustment model for individual and small
  group markets under the Affordable Care Act," Medicare & Medicaid research review, 4.

     ´ sz, K. and A. Prat (2014): "Screening with an Approximate Type Space,"
Madara
  Working Paper, London School of Economics.

Massart, P. and J. Picard (2007): Concentration inequalities and model selection, vol.
  1896, Springer.

Mello, M. M., S. C. Stearns, E. C. Norton, and T. C. Ricketts (2003): "Under-
  standing biased selection in Medicare HMOs," Health services research, 38, 961­992.



                                            56
Mezzetti, C. (2004): "Mechanism design with interdependent valuations: Efficiency,"
  Econometrica, 72, 1617­1626.

Myerson, R. B. and M. A. Satterthwaite (1983): "Efficient mechanisms for bilateral
  trading," Journal of economic theory, 29, 265­281.

Newhouse, J. P., M. Price, J. Huang, J. M. McWilliams, and J. Hsu (2012):
  "Steps to reduce favorable risk selection in Medicare advantage largely succeeded, boding
  well for health insurance exchanges," Health Affairs, 31, 2618­2628.

Pope, G. C., J. Kautter, R. P. Ellis, A. S. Ash, J. Z. Ayanian, M. J. Ingber,
  J. M. Levy, and J. Robst (2004): "Risk Adjustment of Medicare Capitation Payments
  Using the CMS-HCC Model," Healthcare Financing Review, 25, 119.

Riordan, M. H. and D. E. Sappington (1988): "Optimal contracts with public ex post
  information," Journal of Economic Theory, 45, 189­199.

Rothschild, M. and J. Stiglitz (1976): "Equilibrium in Competitive Insurance Mar-
  kets: An Essay on the Economics of Imperfect Information," The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 90, 629­649.

Segal, I. (2003): "Optimal pricing mechanisms with unknown demand," The American
  economic review, 93, 509­529.

Starc, A. (2014): "Insurer pricing and consumer welfare: Evidence from medigap," The
  RAND Journal of Economics, 45, 198­220.

Vapnik, V. (1998): Statistical learning theory, Wiley New York.




                                            57
