                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    A RECONSIDERATION OF THE FAILURE OF UNCOVERED INTEREST PARITY
                         FOR THE U.S. DOLLAR

                                         Charles Engel
                                       Ekaterina Kazakova
                                         Mengqi Wang
                                           Nan Xiang

                                       Working Paper 28420
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28420


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2021




Engel acknowledges support from the National Science Foundation, grant award no. 1918430.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Charles Engel, Ekaterina Kazakova, Mengqi Wang, and Nan Xiang. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
A Reconsideration of the Failure of Uncovered Interest Parity for the U.S. Dollar
Charles Engel, Ekaterina Kazakova, Mengqi Wang, and Nan Xiang
NBER Working Paper No. 28420
January 2021
JEL No. F3,F41

                                          ABSTRACT

We re-examine the time-series evidence for failures of uncovered interest rate parity on short-
term deposits for the U.S. dollar versus major currencies of developed countries at short-,
medium- and long-horizons. The evidence that interest rate differentials predict foreign exchange
risk premiums is fragile. The relationship between interest rates and excess returns is not stable
over time and disappears altogether when nominal interest rates are near the zero-lower bound.
However, we do find evidence that year-on-year inflation rate differentials consistently predict
excess returns ­ when the U.S. dollar y.o.y. inflation rate has been relatively high, subsequent
returns on U.S. deposits tend to be high. We interpret this evidence as being consistent with
hypotheses that posit that markets do not fully react initially to predictable changes in future
monetary policy. Interestingly, the predictive power of relative y.o.y. inflation only begins in the
mid-1980s when central banks began to target inflation more consistently and continues in the
post-ZLB period when interest rates lose their primacy as a policy instrument. However, we
caution not to rule out the possibility that excess returns are not predictable at all.

Charles Engel                                    Mengqi Wang
Department of Economics                          Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin                          University of Wisconsin
1180 Observatory Drive                           1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706-1393                           Madison, WI 53706
and CEPR                                         United States
and also NBER                                    mwang452@wisc.edu
cengel@ssc.wisc.edu
                                                 Nan Xiang
Ekaterina Kazakova                               Department of Economics
Department of Economics                          University of Wisconsin
University of Wisconsin                          1180 Observatory Drive
1180 Observatory Drive                           Madison, WI 53706
Madison, WI 53706                                United States
United States                                    nxiang3@wisc.edu
kazakova@wisc.edu
           Uncovered interest parity under rational expectations is the hypothesis that there is no
foreign exchange risk premium, or that the expected excess returns on foreign bonds is equal to
zero. Algebraically we have:


(1)         Et st +1 - st = it - it*


where st is the log of the exchange rate expressed as the home currency price of foreign currency,

it is the interest rate on a riskless one-period deposit or security in the home country, and it* is the

analogous interest rate in the foreign country.
           The uncovered interest parity puzzle arises from an econometric test in Fama (1984) that
estimates the slope (and intercept) parameters in the regression:1


(2)         st +1 - st =  +  ( it - it* ) + ut ,



where  and  are parameters to be estimated and ut is an error term. One implication of the

null hypothesis of uncovered interest parity (hereinafter referred to as UIP) is  = 0 and  = 1 .
           By a simple algebraic transformation, this regression is equivalent to one that regresses the
ex post excess return on foreign bonds on the home minus foreign interest rate differential:


(3)         st +1 - st + it* - it =  +  ( it - it* ) + ut



If equations (2) and (3) are estimated by ordinary least squares, the estimates of the intercepts are
identical, and the slope coefficient estimates are related as  =  -1 . In this formulation, the null
of UIP requires  = 0 and  = 0 .
           A very large literature has tested UIP with such regressions, especially for the U.S. dollar.
The "UIP puzzle" or the "Fama puzzle" refers to the finding that the slope coefficient in equation




1
    Bilson (1981) is an earlier published paper that performs this test of uncovered interest parity.

                                                                                                        2
(3) is usually found to be negative and often less than -1, This means when the home interest rate
is high, the excess return on the foreign deposit tends to be low.2
           We reconsider these econometric tests. It has been previously noted that when equation (3)
is estimated in subsamples, the slope coefficient estimate is not stable over time. For example,
Bekaert and Hodrick (2018) present rolling regressions on monthly data, using five-year estimation
windows, for the U.S. dollar relative to the euro, the British pound and the Japanese yen. That
study finds considerable instability in the slope parameter estimates.
           We also undertake such an exercise for the U.S. dollar against the major world currencies,
with an extended sample. In addition, in assessing the statistical significance of the slope
coefficient estimate, we take into account, and correct for, the potential small sample bias first
noted by Stambaugh (1999). When we do so, we find that the evidence for a UIP puzzle is weak.
The slope coefficients from (3) vary widely over subsamples. They tend to be negative in the
period before the global financial crisis, but generally are not significantly different from zero
using the bias-corrected tests. After 2007, the point estimates of the slope coefficient are positive,
but the standard errors are quite large so the null of  = 0 cannot be rejected.
           We also consider the correlation of the interest rate differential on the excess return from
rolling over short term bonds. At the "medium" horizon, we estimate:



                              - st + j + it*+ j - it + j =  M +  M ( it - it* ) + utM
            12
(4)        sj =1
                   t + j +1




In this case, we find more evidence of statistical significance, but not stability of the slope
coefficient. The estimates of  M are found to be negative prior to 2007 and positive afterward.

           Then we consider the expected return from rolling over short term bonds over a long
horizon by estimating:


                                                      
(5)         Et   st + j +1 - st + j + it*+ j - it + j  =  L +  L ( it - it* ) + utL .
                j =1                                  




2
    See Engel (1996, 2014) for surveys of these tests of UIP.

                                                                                                     3
The dependent variable in this regression is constructed from vector autoregressions, as described
below. Our findings here in sub-samples are fragile, as they depend heavily on the estimated
                                                                                             
persistence of interest rates. That is, the estimated responsiveness of Et   it*+ j - it + j  depends
                                                                            j =1             
crucially on how persistent the interest differential is measured to be ­ the more persistent, the
greater the response. But the persistence is estimated imprecisely in small samples. For the whole
sample, we generally find  L is not statistically significant, though for one currency it is

significantly negative and for another it is significantly positive.
       What should we make of this apparent parameter instability? One possibility is suggested
by West (2012). Building on the work of Engel and West (2005), that paper demonstrates that the
slope coefficient estimate in the Fama regression may be nearly inconsistent if the exchange rate
is generated as in a large class of present-value exchange-rate models. In those models, even ones
in which uncovered interest parity is posited, the exchange rate is determined by an expected
present value of current and future economic fundamental variables. West shows that as the
discount factor approaches unity in value, the ordinary least squares estimate of the slope
coefficient becomes inconsistent. Intuitively, when the appropriate discount factor is nearly one,
the slope coefficient estimates will be unstable over sub-samples, as we find.
       An alternative possibility is that the slope coefficient estimates, particularly in samples
from the 1980s and 1990s, were reflecting the outcome of some underlying economic process, but
that process changed in the 2000s and 2010s. Much of the literature has been devoted to building
models of a foreign exchange risk premium to explain the Fama puzzle. However, that literature,
in general, does not effectively account for the parameter instability of the Fama regression. Farhi
and Gabaix (2016) is one approach that allows for a change in the slope coefficient, but we shall
see that it is not well-suited to explaining the U.S. data. That model posits that one currency has
an apparent low expected return during normal times and a high expected return during times of
global economic stress. But, for example, while the slope coefficient in regression (3) is estimated
to be negative consistently in the 1980s and 1990s, the sign of the regressor changes frequently for
most U.S. dollar currency pairs. That implies that it is not the case that one of the currencies
consistently offers an ex ante excess excess return over this period, in contrast to the implications
of Farhi and Gabaix.


                                                                                                   4
        Instead, we look at the possibility that a change in how monetary policy is conducted is
responsible for the inconsistent sign in regression (3) over sub-samples in rolling regressions. As
inflation subsided in the high-income countries, nominal interest rates sank toward zero. At the
zero-lower bound, central banks introduced alternative monetary policy tools ­ "unconventional
monetary policy (UMP)" such as forward guidance and quantitative easing. The relationship
between interest rates and excess returns may have changed post-2000 because the instruments of
monetary policy changed.
        One strand of the literature has tried to account for the Fama puzzle by examining the
market's reaction to monetary policy changes. Froot and Thaler ( 1990) and then Eichenbaum and
Evans (1995) have suggested that there is a delayed reaction to interest rate changes engineered
by monetary policymakers. When money is tightened in the home country, so it - it* rises, the home

currency appreciates, so st falls. However, in contrast to the implications of the classic Dornbusch

(1976) model that assumes UIP and rational expectations, this approach suggests that the
maximum appreciation of the home currency does not occur initially when policy is changed.
Instead, there is "delayed overshooting" because markets react slowly to the shock to it - it* . While

some market players react quickly and st falls, others adjust their portfolios more slowly, so that

the home currency continues to appreciate beyond the initial period of the shock. st +1 falls more

relative to st , which then implies the negative relationship between st +1 - st and it - it* that Fama

found empirically. This process is formally modeled in Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2010), with
further implications demonstrated in Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2019), in a model in which
agents find it costly to adjust their portfolios constantly, and hence the full reaction of the exchange
rate to monetary policy changes does not occur immediately. 3
        A related explanation comes from Gourinchas and Tornell (2004), which posits that
investors underestimate the persistence of monetary policy changes. For example when it - it* rises,

investors are surprised in period t + 1 that the increase has not dissipated more than it actually does
on average. This surprise acts like an unanticipated tightening of monetary policy leading the home
currency to be stronger at time t + 1 than it would be under rational expectations of monetary



3
 See also the related papers on slow portfolio adjustment of Bacchetta, Tieèche and van Wincoop (2020) and
Bacchetta, van Wincoop and Young (2020).

                                                                                                             5
policy. This finding is consistent with the model of expectations formation in Molavi et al. (2021)
that posits there is a limit to the complexity of statistical models that agents can assess. Market
participants may only be able to assess a model with k factors driving excess returns. If the true
model is comprised of more than k factors and the true data generating process decays more slowly
than the traders perceive, the slope coefficient in regression (1) will be less than one.
         We address the possibility that the UIP puzzle is related to monetary policy by estimating
short-run, medium-run and long-run regressions that are analogous to equations (3), (4), and (5),
but with year-on-year inflation differences as the regressor:


(6)      st +1 - st + it* - it =  +  ( t -  t* ) + ut

                            - st + j + it*+ j - it + j =  M +  M ( t -  t* ) + utM
          12
(7)      sj =1
                 t + j +1



                                                   
(8)      Et   st + j +1 - st + j + it*+ j - it + j  =  L +  L ( t -  t* ) + utL
             j =1                                  


where  t -  t* is the home minus foreign inflation rate in the 12 months leading up to period t.

Although all our empirical analysis uses monthly data, we employ the year-on-year inflation rates
because they might better measure policymaker's expectations of inflation compared to noisy
monthly inflation rates.4
         We find consistent evidence that the slope coefficients in all these regressions are negative.
That finding accords with the stories of delayed reaction by markets, or underestimation of the
persistence of monetary policy, when the monetary policy response to inflation is a contraction
that causes a currency appreciation. When home inflation rises relative to foreign inflation (  t -  t*

rises), policymakers may react immediately or with some delay to tighten monetary policy. The
home currency should appreciate with a sufficient tightening, but if investors react slowly or do
not correctly anticipate the persistence of policy, st +1 - st will fall more than (or not rise as much

as) under rational expectations and there will be predictable excess returns on the home currency.



4
 Engel et al. (2019) find evidence that monthly inflation helps predict returns in the post-2000 era for a subset of
currencies considered in this study.

                                                                                                                       6
        This prediction does not necessarily depend on how monetary policy is implemented ­
whether interest rates are the instrument of policy or whether the central bank uses unconventional
monetary policy. If the central bank can react sufficiently to inflation changes, the exchange rate
behavior may be similar under either regime. In line with this, we find that the estimated slope
coefficients do not change sign and are consistently negative over time.
        We estimate equations (3) - (8) over four time periods: the entire sample we have for each
country (which runs from 1979:06 to 2020:09 for most countries, but starting in 1986:01 for
Norway, 1987:01 for Sweden, 1989:01 for Australia and 1997:04 for New Zealand); a sample
starting in the mid-1980s that coincides with the inflation-targeting era; a pre-crisis sample,
1987:01 ­ 2006:12; and a sample that includes the low interest rate era, 2007:01-2020:09. For the
short-term and medium-term regressions, (3), (4), (6), and (7), we also report rolling regression
results with 10-year windows using all of the data we have for each exchange rate.5 In all of our
estimates, we use statistics that offer analytical corrections for small-sample bias and serial
correlation.
        As we shall see, the predictive power of the inflation variable does not become consistently
strong until the samples that begin in the mid-1980s. That observation is consistent with the notion
that markets have a delayed reaction to monetary policy. Only when central banks began to target
inflation more consistently do the markets begin to react to year-on-year inflation as a signal of
future monetary policy. As in Clarida and Waldman (2008), bad news about inflation (i.e., high
relative inflation) is good news for the currency (i.e., the currency appreciates). Moreover, in the
2000s, as interest rates approached the effective lower bound, central banks found unconventional
monetary policy tools to use to control inflation. During this period, in which the predictive power
of interest rates vanishes, y.o.y. inflation differentials continue to have predictive power for excess
returns.
        All our empirical results relate to the time-series relationship between interest rates and
excess returns, or inflation rates and excess returns. We do not, in other words, look at broad cross-
sections of returns as in the pioneering work of Lustig and Verdelhan (2007).6 Hassan and Mano




5
 The Supplemental Appendix reports also results with 5-year rolling windows, which result in similar conclusions.
6
 See also Lustig et al. (2011, 2014), Verdelhan (2018), Menkhoff et al. (2012a, 2012b), Hassan and Mano (2019)
and many others.

                                                                                                                    7
(2019) emphasize the differing implications of cross-section and time-series tests of uncovered
interest parity.
        Our empirical work is all for U.S. dollar exchange rates, as the failure of UIP in time series
has been shown in the literature to be stronger for the dollar than other currencies. We look at the
dollar against the G10 currencies, and in our longer samples, with the German mark, French franc
and Italian lira in place of the euro.
        Section 1 presents our findings regarding the short-run excess returns. We present results
from medium-run tests and long-run tests in sections 2 and 3, respectively. We offer some
conclusions and interpretation in section 4.


1.      Short-Run


        We begin by presenting estimates of the Fama regression, equation (2) for the different
time periods mentioned above. Stambaugh (1999) showed that in such a regression, if the regressor
(the interest rate differential in this case) is serially correlated, and if innovations to the regressor
are correlated with the innovations in equation (2), the OLS estimate of the slope coefficient as
well as the t-statistic will be biased. In the tables below, we present estimates of  from equation
(2) and standard errors with the bias corrections derived by Amihud and Hurvich (2004).
        Table 1 presents estimates based on the full sample for each currency and includes the
sample dates. Recall that a finding that   1 constitutes a rejection of uncovered interest parity,
which is equivalent to   0 in equation (3). Moreover, for comparability with the subsequent tests

we present as well as with the literature, recall that the literature has tended to find that when it - it*

increases, there is a decline in the excess return on foreign bonds, st +1 - st + it* - it . That is, the

literature usually finds   1 (and frequently,   0 ), which, given that  =  -1 , is equivalent to
  0 (   -1 ).
        The exchange rates we examine are the Australian dollar (AUD), Canadian dollar (CAD),
Swiss franc (CHF), German mark (DEM), French franc (FRF), GBP (British pound), Italian lira
(ITL), Japanese yen (JPY), Norwegian krone (NOK), New Zealand dollar (NZD), and Swedish
krona (SEK). We convert the mark, French franc and lira into euros using the euro using the
conversion rates at the time of origination of the euro in January 1999.

                                                                                                          8
         All the estimated slope coefficients are less than one, consistent with the literature.
However, using the bias-corrected estimates, we find that the 95 percent confidence interval
contains unity for all but five of the currencies (CAD, CHF, DEM, GBP, and JPY.) Hence, we find
with our full sample that the evidence against UIP is not as strong as has been previously reported
in the literature.
         The estimates reported in Table 1 use the full sample we have for each currency. Not all
currencies have LIBOR rates for the entire period 1979:06 ­ 2020:09. Three of these currencies
converted into the euro. Table 2 reports the results for the sample that begins in the mid-1980s,
1987:01 ­ 2020:09 (except NZD, for which the interest rate data begin in 1997, and AUD which
begins in 1989.)
         The findings from Table 2 are like those of Table 1. All the estimated slope coefficients
are less than one. Only three of the confidence intervals exclude the UIP null ­ for the Canadian
dollar, Swiss franc, and Japanese yen. There are two reasons for the differences between Tables 1
and 2. First, Table 2 has no data prior to 1989, and the Fama puzzle was stronger in the data in the
1980s. Second, because the sample is shorter, the standard errors are larger in Table 2.
         In fact, when we split the common sample into the pre-Global Financial Crisis (GFC) and
the period that includes the GFC, we find the slope coefficient estimates are dramatically different.
Table 3 reports estimates of equation (2) for the period 1987:01 ­ 2006:12, and Table 4 reports the
estimates for the 2007:1 ­ 2020:09 period. In the earlier time period, all the point estimates for the
slope coefficient lie below one, though the 95 percent confidence intervals exclude unity only for
CAD, CHF, JPY, and NZD. In other words, the findings are almost identical to the full sample
results reported in Table 1.7 On the other hand, all the slope coefficients in the later period are
estimated to be positive, but, importantly, the confidence intervals are very wide and all contain
unity.
         In Figures 1 ­ 11, we report estimates of the slope coefficient and 95 percent confidence
intervals using 10-year rolling regressions.8 These Figures highlight the instability of the
coefficient estimate of the Fama regression. In the graphs, the dates along the horizontal axis
mark the beginning of each 10-year sample. The blue shaded areas represent the time periods in


7
  Table 1 reports that the slope coefficient is less than one for the German mark in the full sample, while in the
1989:01 ­ 2016:12 sample, the 95 percent confidence interval does barely contain one.
8
  The Supplemental Appendix reports results from rolling regressions with 5-year windows. They are similar to
those we report in the text with 10-year windows, but the confidence intervals are wider.

                                                                                                                     9
which the estimated slope coefficient is significantly less than one at the five percent level. The
pink areas are when the estimated coefficient is less than one, but not significantly so. The green
areas are dates in which the estimated coefficient is greater than one. The purple areas are times
in which the slope coefficient is significantly greater than one at the five percent level.
          The picture that emerges is fairly incoherent, and that is the important lesson. While the
Fama puzzle arises from findings that the slope coefficient is significantly less than one, for most
of the currencies the time periods over which that is true are relatively short and concentrated in
the pre-2000 period. Most of the time, the 95 percent confidence interval includes unity. For
some of the currencies, such as the New Zealand dollar, there are extended periods of time for
which the estimated coefficient is greater than one.
          In no case is there a sample that starts after January 1999 that has a slope coefficient in
the Fama regression that is less than one. Put another way, no sample that ends after the start of
either the global financial crisis or the start of the very-low interest rate era evinces the Fama
puzzle.
          We do not perform any joint tests of significance, but it is notable that the estimated slope
coefficients rise during the latter part of the sample for all the currencies. There are two possible
interpretations of these graphs of rolling estimates of the slope coefficient: The first is that the
parameter estimate is very unstable, and there is no true underlying relationship between it - it*

and st +1 - st + it* - it estimated by regression (2). This possibility is consistent with West's (2012)

observation that the parameter estimate is nearly inconsistent as the discount factor in present value
models of the exchange rate approaches one. The second possibility is that there is a significant
change in the underlying economic relationship between interest rates and excess returns, but we
have not detected statistical significance because we have not used a joint test of significance, and
because the 10-year window is relatively short.
          We can ask if there are some regularities in the data that can account for this rise in the
estimated slope coefficient. Figures 12-22 plot the estimated slope coefficients from the 10-year
rolling Fama regressions and the inverse of the variance of it - it* estimated over the same 10-year

time window.
          These graphs show a clear and strong positive correlation between the reciprocal of the
variance of it - it* and the slope coefficient estimates from rolling regressions of equation (2). Table


                                                                                                        10
5 confirms this by reporting estimates of the correlation between the slope coefficient from these
rolling regressions beginning with 1989:1, and various measures of the volatility of it - it* , using

both 5-year and 10-year windows.
        What economic forces lead to this pattern of correlations? One explanation that has been
advanced for the puzzling finding of   1 in the Fama regression is that there is a "peso problem"
or the market is incorporating the possibility of a "rare disaster". Farhi and Gabaix (2016) offer a
model of such a phenomenon. That model posits that high-interest rate currencies incorporate a
risk premium during "good times" because they are currencies that will depreciate greatly during
times of global uncertainty. Thus, the finding of   1 in the Fama regression arises both because
the high-interest-rate currency has a higher expected return than lower-interest-rate currencies, and
because of a peso problem in which the sample that contains only good times does not incorporate
periods in which the high-interest-rate currency has a large depreciation. During bad times, this
same currency has a high interest rate, but the currency depreciates, leading to a slope coefficient
less than one in the Fama regression.
        The Farhi and Gabaix (2016) model could account for our findings. The paper
demonstrates that the regression coefficient in equation (2), the Fama regression, is always less
than one. If the sample over which the model is estimated does not include a "disaster", the slope
coefficient should be negative in their formulation. In the full sample that includes the disaster, the
slope increases, but we should still find   1 , as we do in our full sample. (However, we have
noted that the slope is statistically significantly less than one for fewer than half the countries.)
        Figures 23-25, however, demonstrate some difficulties with this interpretation for the
variation in the slope coefficient estimate from equation (2) for the U.S. dollar. The figures plot
the interest rates for the U.S. and the other countries. The problem, as the graphs illustrate, is that
there is not a sustained period in which the U.S. is either the low-interest-rate currency or the high-
interest-rate currency in the pre-2007 period. In the Farhi and Gabaix (2016) model, the country
with the low interest rate is the less risky country, but in the data that would imply the riskiness of
the country would have to switch frequently as the sign of the interest rate differential switched.
That is, we cannot identify the dollar as, for example, a low-interest-rate currency that is expected
to appreciate during times of global uncertainty. Sometimes its interest rate is lower than each of
the other countries, and sometimes it is higher. The graphs do reveal that the interest rate of Japan,
and to a lesser extent Switzerland, were consistently lower than that of the U.S. pre-2007, but the
                                                                                                        11
puzzling behavior of the slope coefficient in regression (2) applies to U.S. dollar regressions, not
yen or Swiss franc regressions.
        We also can see in Table 6 that the correlation of the slope coefficients from the Fama
regression with the market measure of uncertainty, VIX, are not as high as those reported in Table
5. That is, we would expect under the peso problem/rare disaster explanation a strong negative
correlation between the Fama coefficient and VIX in the 5-year or 10-year moving average, but
that is not the case in fact.
        We tentatively offer a different interpretation. As is well known and confirmed by Figures
23-25, nominal interest rates in these high-income countries were near zero or below beginning
very soon after the onset of the GFC. At such low levels, interest rates are no longer the most
useful policy instrument for central banks. Instead, central banks implemented a variety of
unconventional policies such as quantitative easing and forward guidance. Our hypothesis is that
the change in the slope coefficient in the Fama regression is related to this change in the principle
monetary policy instrument. Indeed, post-2007, while the slope coefficient estimates are positive,
the confidence intervals are very wide. We think the interest rate differentials may be misleading
guides to the relative monetary policy stance in this era. After 2007, U.S. interest rates, while
historically close to zero, were higher than in most other countries. At the same time, the Federal
Reserve pursued unconventional monetary policies more aggressively than most other countries,
and so their overall stance may have been more accommodative.
        In other words, prior to the GFC, the finding of   1 in equation (2) could be explained
by the models of "delayed reaction" to monetary policy changes. When the Fed, for example,
tightened monetary policy, it , and hence it - it* increased, which led to an immediate appreciation

of the dollar (a drop in st .) However, perhaps because markets did not perceive how persistent the

decline in the interest rate differential would be, or perhaps because expectations are sticky, or
perhaps because portfolio adjustment is costly, or perhaps because of balance sheet constraints,
the initial appreciation was not the maximum appreciation. Exchange rates continued to fall, so
st +1 - st + it* - it fell when it - it* increased.

        That same slow reaction to monetary policy changes may have been at work in the post-
2007 era, but monetary policy stance is not well captured by the interest rate differential. To shed
some potential light on the subject, we estimated equation (6). The regressor in this equation is


                                                                                                  12
 t -  t* , the difference in the year-on-year inflation rate in the U.S. relative to the foreign country.
Our notion is this: year-on-year inflation is a proxy for policymakers' expectations of inflation.
When  t -  t* rises, the U.S. will very soon tighten monetary policy relative to the foreign country.

Then, following the logic of the previous paragraph, delayed reaction by markets will lead to high
returns on dollar assets relative to the foreign country, implying a negative slope coefficient in this
regression.
       We report estimates for the same time periods as we have for the Fama regression. As with
the Fama regression, these coefficient estimates and standard errors are bias-corrected using the
statistics of Amihud and Hurvich (2004).
       The full-sample results are reported in Table 7. Australia and New Zealand are absent from
this table because those countries do not report monthly inflation rates.
       We can see that all the estimated slope coefficients are negative, with the exception of
France (with a slope of 0.001). Additionally, most are significantly negative at the 5 percent level
(in a two-sided test.) The results are not overwhelmingly strong, allowing for the possibility that
these findings are simply noise, but we note that the fact that all slope coefficients save one are
negative is evidence of a strong pattern.
       Table 8 reports the outcome of estimating equation (6) using the longest common sample,
1987:01 ­ 2020:09. In this common sample, the findings are quite strong. All the slope coefficient
estimates are negative, and all but two (Japan and Norway) are significantly negative at the five
percent level. The stronger findings over this time period, which excludes the 1980s, relative to
the full sample in reported in Table 7 perhaps reflects the stronger commitment of central banks
to target inflation post-1987:01.
       Importantly, when we look at subsamples of the 1987:01 ­ 2020:09. period, the story is not
much changed. The number of significant coefficient estimates is reduced because the sample is
shorter, but in both the 1987:01 ­ 2006:12 period and the 2007:1 ­ 2020:09 period, the estimated
slope coefficients are all negative (with the sole exception of Japan in the latter period, where the
coefficient is slightly positive), as Tables 9 and 10 demonstrate and most are still statistically
significant at the 5 percent level. The notable point is that there is no qualitative change in these
regressions between the pre-crisis era and the later time period in which unconventional monetary
policies were predominant.


                                                                                                      13
          Figures 26-34 present the slope coefficient estimates from rolling regressions of equation
(6). Here we see that the coefficient estimates tend to be consistently negative for all the countries
for almost the entire sample after the mid-1980s. In these figures, the dates along the x-axis are the
starting dates for each 10-year regression window. The areas shaded blue are for a slope coefficient
that is significantly negative at the 5 percent level. Pink areas represent sample periods for which
the slope coefficient is negative but not significant at the 5 percent level. Green areas are for times
of positive coefficient estimates ­ none of which are significant at the 5 percent level for any time
period.
          The overwhelming impression from these graphs is that the slope coefficient estimates of
equation (6) are negative. There are very few periods of positive coefficients. For a few currencies,
the estimated coefficient is positive for a short window early in the sample (that is, 10-year
estimation windows beginning in the early 1980s.) That window is longer for the Norwegian
krone. The latter part of the sample for the Japanese yen also produces some positive coefficient
estimates. But overall, the picture is clear that higher  t -  t* is associated with lower ex post

returns on the foreign currency, st +1 - st + it* - it . Even during periods in which the Fama puzzle

was seen to hold, prior to 2007, the empirical regularity from this regression is much more
consistent. That is, year-on-year inflation is a better predictor of excess returns than the nominal
interest rate differential, even prior to 2007. However, for many of the countries, the slope
coefficient is not significantly negative at the 5 percent level over many of the subsamples, so it is
only tentatively that we conclude that an increase in inflation abroad tends to predict higher excess
returns on foreign deposits.
          The Supplemental Appendix reports estimates from regressions that include both interest
rate differentials and year-on-year inflation rate differences:


(9)       st +1 - st + it* - it =  +  1 ( it - it* ) +  2 ( t -  t* ) + ut +1 .



The econometrics literature does not provide analytical corrections for bias in the coefficient
estimates and standard errors when there is more than one regressor, as is the case here. However,
based on the OLS estimates and Newey-West standard errors, we can draw the following
inferences. First, the evidence for a negative relationship between it - it* and st +1 - st + it* - it is


                                                                                                      14
much weaker when the inflation differential is included in the regression, especially in samples
that begin in the mid-1989s.. On the other hand, the evidence for a negative relationship between
 t -  t* and st +1 - st + it* - it remains strong even when it - it* is included in the regression, except
for the three countries of Switzerland, Japan and Norway. This suggests the following
interpretation: The usual finding that the slope coefficient is less than one in the Fama regression,
(2), really is picking up the reaction to monetary policy. The inflation rate over the previous 12
months,  t -  t* is a stronger measure of monetary policy stance than the interest rate differential.

When controlling for year-on-year inflation, there is little evidence of additional explanatory
power from it - it* except perhaps in the 1979-1988 period for currencies for which we have data.

When inflation targeting became more central to monetary policy, both before and after 2007 when
interest rates were very low and unconventional monetary policy became more common, it - it*

has little explanatory power for excess returns once relative inflation is controlled for.




2.     Medium Run


       In this section, we consider estimates of equations (4) and (7). The dependent variable in
these regressions can be interpreted as the return on an investment strategy of buying foreign
exchange, investing in one-month foreign-currency deposits, rolling those deposits over for 12
months then converting the gross investment back into dollars compared to the return from rolling
over one-month dollar deposits for 12 months. Our purpose for looking at the medium horizon is
to assess whether these predicted excess returns are persistent, which may shed further light on
why returns might be predictable.
       These regressions are also subject to the bias in parameter estimates and standard errors
originally noted by Stambaugh (1999) but are also subject to the problems attendant with "long-
horizon" returns regressions. We make use of the bias corrections in the recent study of Boudoukh
et al. (2020), using Newey-West standard errors.
       We consider the same four estimation periods as we did for our short-run return
regressions: the entire sample we have for each country; our longest common sample, 1987:01-



                                                                                                       15
2020:09; a pre-crisis common sample, 1987:01 ­ 2006:12; and a common sample that includes the
low interest rate era, 2007:01-2020:09.9
           These results are reported in Tables 11 ­ 14. For the full sample in Table 11, all the
estimated coefficients are negative, except that for the Italian lira. As the short-term interest
differential for the U.S. relative to the foreign country increases ( it - it* ), the excess return on the

foreign investment falls. These coefficients are significantly less than zero at the five percent level
for ten of the currencies, and at the ten percent level for one more. Only for the Italian lira and
Swedish krona do we fail to reject the null of no predictability at the medium horizon. The findings
for this relationship are much stronger than what we found over the full sample for the short-run
returns in the Fama regression.
           The findings are similar when we use our longest common sample, as reported in Table 12.
Here all the point estimates of the slope coefficient are negative, and seven are significantly less
than zero at the five percent confidence level. These findings are echoed in Table 13 for the pre-
GFC sample of 1989:01 ­ 2006:12. All the slope coefficient estimates are negative, and seven are
significantly (at the five percent level) negative.
           The findings are different in the post-2007:01 sample reported in Table 14. There, five of
the nine estimated coefficients from regression (4) are positive.10 Three are significantly positive
at the five percent level, and none are significantly negative.
           As with the short-run Fama regressions, before 2007, there is strong evidence of a negative
slope across the currencies, but after 2007 the evidence is mixed. There is no currency that shows
a significantly negative coefficient in either the short-run or medium-run regressions in the post-
2007 period.
           We also perform rolling regressions, reported in Figures 35 ­ 45, which highlight this
sudden shift. The horizontal axis gives the starting date for each 10-year estimation window. The
blue-shaded areas represent a slope coefficient significantly negative at the 5 percent level. Pink
areas are for sample periods for which the slope coefficient is negative but insignificant at the 5
percent level. The area is shaded green for times of positive coefficient estimates that are not
significant, and purple when the coefficient is positive and significant.



9
    Again, we note that New Zealand's sample does not begin until 1999.
10
    There are only nine currencies in this period because the euro replaced the mark, French franc and lira.

                                                                                                               16
        The graphs all show a large swing in the coefficient estimates in the later part of the sample
compared to the earlier part. For almost all the currencies, that shift begins with 10-year samples
that start in the early 2000s, which coincides with samples in which near-zero interest rates become
predominant. In samples that are primarily drawn from the low-interest rate era, the slope
coefficients are positive, and usually significantly so. We can conclude that we see the same
parameter instability as in the Fama regressions, but with more evidence of a shift in regime from
negative to positive coefficients. That is, the finding of the shift in sign of the slope coefficient is
more likely to be a genuine shift in the relationship rather than just sampling error.
        We turn next to estimates of equation (7), in which excess medium-term returns is again
the dependent variable, and year-on-year inflation is the regressor. We report the slope parameter
estimates and standard errors in Tables 15 ­ 18 for the different time periods.
        The most striking takeaway from these tables is that all the slope coefficient estimates for
all the currencies and time periods are negative, apart from the French franc and British pound for
the full sample, and Japan in the last sample, which are marginally positive. The French franc and
British pound full sample estimates come from samples that begin in 1979. As we have seen with
the one-month excess returns, the empirical evidence that increases in  t -  t* predict declines in

excess returns on foreign deposits is weaker when the 1980s are included in the sample. If our
working hypothesis is correct, this can be explained by the fact that inflation targeting by central
banks was not as strongly followed in the 1980s as in later periods. That view is perhaps also
bolstered by the case of Japan in recent years that has found its efforts to boost inflation
unsuccessful and turned to various non-monetary policies such as fiscal expansion.
        In Table 15, which is for the full sample period for each currency, the estimated value of
the slope parameter is strongly significantly negative for six of the nine currencies (and
insignificant but negative for the lira.) In Table 16, which presents evidence for the 1989:01 -
2017:01 period, all parameter estimates are negative, and significantly so at the 5 percent level for
six. For the period 1989:01 ­ 2006:12, the findings are similar. For the later period when interest
rates were near zero, the coefficient estimates are all negative, though fewer are statistically
significant.
        Figures 46-54 show the slope estimates from rolling regressions with 10-year windows.
The figures show that the estimated slope coefficient is negative almost all of the time for all of
the currencies, with very few exceptions. For some currencies, windows that start in the early

                                                                                                     17
1980s yield positive parameter values, and the Japanese yen shows a period of positive (but
insignificant) parameters at the end of the sample.
           Figures 55-63 offer some perspective into the channel through which inflation is generating
expected excess returns. These charts plot the parameter estimates of k from the regressions:



(10)                             (                          )
            st +k - st -1 =  + k  t -  t* - ( t -1 -  t*-1 ) +  t +k , k = 0,1, 2,


Note that the dependent variable is the change in the exchange rate from time t - 1 to time t + k
(not the change in time t to t + k .) For example, when k = 0 , 0 gives us the association between

the change in the exchange rate between t - 1 and t and changes at time t in the inflation rate
differential.
           We can give a causal explanation to these graphs that is consistent with our hypothesis
about delayed reaction to monetary policy, or underestimation of the persistence of monetary
policy. For each Figure, the first panel shows estimates of (10) for the pre-GFC period of 1989:01
­ 2006:12, and the second graph for the period 2007:01 ­ 2020:09. We find that the k quickly

turn negative (though not in all cases immediately) as one would expect if monetary policymakers
were targeting inflation, as a tighter monetary policy leads to an appreciation. 11 However, the
maximum appreciation does not occur immediately, but instead many months later. If investors
were adjusting their portfolios continuously to their desired level, and if they had rational
expectations of the persistence of monetary policy, the maximum appreciation should occur as
soon as the market recognizes that policy will be tightened. Although these graphs are not literally
impulse response functions to monetary policy changes or even to news about inflation, they have
that flavor. They show us that exchange rates react slowly to changes in inflation in ways that can
be anticipated. We know that these predictable exchange rate changes are not mirrored in interest
rate changes, and hence there are predictable excess returns.
           We note that the pattern holds well in both periods, pre- and post-2007:01. Even though
the preferred monetary policy instruments changed, the exchange rate reaction to changes in year-
on-year inflation is consistent across time.



11
     The main exception to this pattern is for Japan, and to a lesser extent for the oil exporters, Canada and Norway.

                                                                                                                         18
3.      Long-Run
        To understand the regressions with expected long-run returns as the dependent variable,
equations (5) and (8), take expectations of the "medium-run" regressions. For example, to motivate
(5), begin by taking the expectation at time t of the dependent variable in equation (4), summing
up returns until k periods in the future:


            k                                     
        Et   st + j +1 - st + j + it*+ j - it + j 
            j =1                                  


Now subtract the unconditional mean changes in exchange rates, and the unconditional mean
interest rate differential:

                                                    (           ( ))
                                             k -1
        Et st + k - st - k ( s+1 - s ) - Et  it + j - it*+ j - i - i*
                                             j =0


Then take the limit as k goes to infinity:

                                                            (           ( ))
                                                         
(11)    lim  Et st + k - st - k ( s+1 - s )  - Et  it + j - it*+ j - i - i*
        k                                         j =0


The term lim  Et st + k - st - k ( s+1 - s )  is (minus) the transitory component of the exchange rate in
         k                                   
a Beveridge and Nelson (1981) decomposition. Recall any variable with a unit root can be
decomposed into a component that is a pure random walk, and a component that is transitory. We
shall use a vector autoregression (VAR) to compute a measure of the transitory component of the
exchange rate.
        The second term on the left-hand-side is the "uncovered interest parity level" of the
transitory component of the exchange rate, as defined in Engel (2016). That is, if UIP held, the

                                                     (          ( ))
                                              
exchange rate would equal to - Et  it + j - it*+ j - i - i* . This can be seen by rearranging the UIP
                                              j =0


condition, (1), and iterating forward as in Engel (2016). We can also obtain an estimate of this
component from the same VAR mentioned above.
        We then regress the measure obtained for the expression in equation (11) on it - it* as in

equation (5), or on  t -  t* , as in equation (8).

                                                                                                      19
           There are two questions we must address that turn out to be very important for the estimates
of the quantities in (11). First, what variables belong in the VAR that we use to produce the
dependent variable? Second, how important are small sample considerations in the estimate of the
VAR? As it turns out, the two questions are related, and both suggest that results based on shorter
samples may not be very reliable.
           Since we are interested in the response of exchange rates to interest rate changes and
inflation, it seems natural that at a minimum, the VAR that we use should include exchange rates,
interest rates and inflation. A key question, though, is whether we model the real exchange rate as
stationary or not. Define the log of the real exchange rate as qt  st + pt* - pt , where pt is the log

of the consumer price level in the U.S., and pt* is the log of the consumer price level in the foreign

country. There is considerable disagreement in the literature about whether the real exchange rate
is better modeled as converging or as containing a unit root. In fact, Engel (2000) argues that the
question is in essence unresolvable without much longer time series than we use in typical studies.
There are plausible reasons why the real exchange rate may be stationary but converging very
slowly so that it appears to have a unit root when it does not. Conversely, even if one rejects a unit
root using standard tests, there may still be a permanent component that has a small innovation
variance and is only detectable in very long samples.
           We settle on a VAR that contains the vector of variables  qt      it - it*  t -  t*  , but also

consider a variant that uses the vector  st - st -1 it - it  t -  t 
                                                          *       *   12
                                                                     . Because the interest rate
differential and the inflation rate differential are more indisputably stationary, the former vector
imposes that the real exchange rate is stationary, and the latter vector imposes that it is non-
stationary. Recent empirical literature has settled on modeling the U.S real exchange rate as
stationary (even though there may be a small permanent component), but that is persistent so that
the convergence is only detectable in longer samples. We report findings based on the first vector
of variables here, and report results under the non-stationarity assumption in the supplemental
appendix. We emphasize results estimated from the entire sample, rather than from sub-samples,
because of the slow convergence of the real exchange rate.




12
     Our estimates for the alternative VAR are reported in the appendix.

                                                                                                       20
           The second reason why using longer samples is important is because of small-sample bias
in estimating the VAR. This bias is likely to be important in our analysis. From equation (11), we

can see that the dependent variable depends on the response of lim  Et st + k - st - k ( s+1 - s )  relative
                                                               k                                   

                                        (        ( )) to a change in the regressor. Consider this example.
                                     
to the response of Et  it + j - it*+ j - i - i*
                                 j =0


Take the case in which the regressor is the interest rate differential, it - it* , and suppose it turns out

that the interest differential follows a first-order autoregression with serial correlation of  . Then

                                 (           ( )) is given by 1 -1^ (i - i ) , where ^ is the estimate of  .
                           
our estimate of Et  it + j - it*+ j - i - i*                               t
                                                                               *
                                                                               t
                          j =0


It is well known that the estimate of serial correlation is biased downward. This could have
important implications when it - it* is very persistent. If the true value of  is 0.99, but the


                                                                (         ( )) to the interest rate is lowered
                                                         
estimated value is 0.98, the response of Et  it + j - it*+ j - i - i*
                                                         j =0


from the true value of 100 ( it - it* ) down to 50 ( it - it* ) . Such a large mismeasurement could

certainly influence our determination of the sign of the effect of the dependent variable in (11).
           The literature has proposed several ways of dealing with this bias in VAR estimation.13 We
found that when we used some of the corrections from the literature, we were left with VARs that
had estimated roots greater than one. Here we have used the small-sample bias correction from
West (2016), with which we did not encounter the root greater than one problem. However,
especially in the estimates in shorter samples, the slope estimates for regressions (5) and (8) were
very sensitive to small differences in the bias correction. Here we report our estimates only for the
full sample for each currency because of this problem.
           The estimates reported in Table 19 and 20 for the slope coefficients have the opposite sign
of equations (5) and (8). That is, these regressions are of the form:


(12)        stT - stIP =  L +  L ( it - it* ) + utL




13
     See Bauer et al. (2012), Engsted and Pedersen (2014), Pope (1990).

                                                                                                           21
(13)    stT - stIP =  L +  L ( t -  t* ) + utL ,



where stT  - lim  Et st + k - st - k ( s+1 - s )  is the transitory component of the exchange rate from
             k                                   

                                                                 (       ( ))
                                                           
the Beveridge-Nelson decomposition, and stIP = - Et  it + j - it*+ j - i - i*      is the value of the
                                                          j =0


exchange rate if UIP held. In other words, a positive coefficient in these regressions is analogous
to a negative coefficient in our previous regressions because they imply that when it - it* or  t -  t*

increase, expected returns on foreign deposits (over the infinite horizon) rise.
        The rightmost column in Table 19 reports the estimates of  L from equation (12). The

estimated coefficient has the expected positive sign for seven of the nine currencies. There are
three currencies for which the estimated slope is significantly positive at the one percent level for
equation (12) in which the interest-rate differential is the regressor. Interestingly, these results
imply that there is not excess reaction of the exchange rate to changes in either interest rates or
inflation rates, in contrast to the findings of Engel (2016). The difference is attributable to the small
sample correction that increases the volatility of stIP . That is, when the interest differential is

estimated to be more persistent, the UIP value of the exchange rate becomes more volatile.
        Table 19 also displays the estimated slope coefficients from regressing stT and stIP

separately on the interest rate differential. As one would expect, all of the estimated slope
coefficients are negative. The fact that in most cases the reaction of the transitory exchange rate is
smaller (in absolute value) than the reaction of the interest-parity exchange rate demonstrates the
finding of no excess volatility. However, the estimates of the response of the interest-parity
exchange rate is quite sensitive to the estimated persistence of the interest-rate differential.
        Tables 20 tells a similar story. The rightmost column reports the estimate of the slope
parameter in equation (13), The slope estimates are all positive at the one percent level for all the
currencies in equation (13), which uses the year-on-year inflation rate differential as the regressor,
and statistically significant at the one percent level for eight of the nine. The table also reports the
slope parameter estimates from regressing stT and stIP separately on the year-on-year inflation

differential. Again, (almost) all of the estimated slope coefficients are negative, as we would



                                                                                                      22
expect, but the transitory component of the exchange rate appears to respond less than the interest-
parity component.
        Indeed with the correction we have implemented for the small-sample bias in estimating
the VAR, there is still mixed evidence of excess volatility of exchange rates, as Table 21 shows.
That table reports estimates of the variance of stIP and stT , and we in only around half of the cases

(5 of 9) that var ( stT )  var ( stIP ) . In our experience with the estimates, this conclusion is sensitive

to the sample period, so the evidence is ambiguous about excess volatility.
        The overall picture remains the same ­ that inflation differentials are a stronger predictor
of future excess returns than interest rate differentials, and when the U.S. inflation rate rises, the
expected return on foreign deposits declines.




4.      Conclusions
        We find that the famous UIP puzzle is not such a robust puzzle. In fact, the slope coefficient
in the Fama regression changes signs in the 2000s. This has been noted previously by, among
others, Engel et al. (2019) and Bussiére et al. (2018).
        One possible explanation for this parameter instability is that, in fact, excess foreign
currency returns are unpredictable and the UIP puzzle is merely an illusion. West (2012) has shown
that many exchange rate models actually have the implication that UIP holds but that the parameter
in the Fama regression will be unstable over time.
        Another possible explanation for the parameter instability is that it is related to a genuine
change in economic regime. A likely suspect is the change in monetary policy operating
procedures. The Fama regression falls apart just when interest rates approach the zero-lower
bound. We have offered an explanation for the findings based on the hypotheses of Froot and
Thaler (1990), Eichenbaum and Evans (1995), Gourinchas and Tornell (2004), Molavi et al.
(2021), and Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2010, 2019). That explanation is supported by empirical
examination of the relationship between future excess returns and the current year-on-year
inflation rates. Indeed, this relationship emerges in the mid-1980s as inflation targeting became
more prevalent and continues in the 2000s even when unconventional monetary policy instruments
become more common.


                                                                                                         23
       Bussiére et al. (2018) also finds that the Fama regression no longer produces a negative
slope coefficient in the 2000s. However, when the dependent variable (ex post excess returns) is
replaced with expected excess returns, where expectations of the future exchange rate are
measured from surveys, the slope coefficient is not significantly different than one. That is,
uncovered interest parity holds well if the rational expectations hypothesis is jettisoned and
replaced with expectations based on surveys of foreign exchange traders (which fail the test of
rational expectations.) This is consistent with the possibility that agents do not foresee the
persistence of monetary policy changes, as argued by Gourinchas and Tornell (2004) and Molavi
et al. (2021) as we have explained above.
       Galí (2020) finds that exchange rates underreact to interest rate changes on long-term bonds
but overreact to interest rate changes on short-term bonds. Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2019)
demonstrate that this pattern may occur in a model with delayed portfolio adjustment.
       We emphasize that the findings here are not definitive. The economic relationships that
determine ex ante excess returns are probably too complicated to be captured in univariate
regressions. Our findings do provide evidence that the Fama puzzle is not a stable relationship,
and the Fama regression does not generate stable parameter estimates over time. Future research
is needed to determine whether, in fact, the data support the hypothesis of delayed portfolio
adjustment that may arise from barriers to reallocating assets or from biased expectations.




                                                                                                24
5.     References


Amihud, Yakov and Clifford M. Hurvich. 2004. "Predictive Regressions: A Reduced Bias
     Method." Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 39, 813-841.

Bacchetta, Philippe; Simon Tièche; and Eric van Wincoop. 2020. "International Portfolio Choice
      with Frictions: Evidence from Mutual Funds." Centre for Economic Policy Research,
      Discussion Paper 14898.

Bacchetta, Philippe, and Eric van Wincoop. 2010. "Infrequent Portfolio Decisions: A Solution to
      the Forward Discount Puzzle." American Economic Review 100, 870-904.

Bacchetta, Philippe, and Eric van Wincoop. 2019. "Puzzling Exchange Rate Dynamics and
      Delayed Portfolio Adjustment." Working paper, University of Virginia.

Bacchetta, Philippe; Eric van Wincoop; and, Eric R Young. 2020. "Infrequent Random Portfolio
      Decisions in an Open Economy Model." Working paper, University of Virginia.

Bauer, Michael D.; Glenn D. Rudebusch; Jing Cynthia Wu. 2012. "Correcting Estimation Bias in
       Dynamic Term Structure Models." Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 30, 454-
       467.

Bekaert, Geert, and Robert Hodrick. 2018. International Financial Management, Third Edition.
       Cambridge University Press.

Beveridge, Stephen, and Charles R. Nelson. 1981. "A New Approach to Decomposition of
       Economic Time Series into Permanent and Transitory Components with Particular
       Attention to Measurement of the `Business Cycle'." Journal of Monetary Economics 7,
       151-174.

Bilson, John F.O. 1981. "The `Speculative Efficiency' Hypothesis." The Journal of Business 54,
       435-451.

Boudoukh, Jacob; Ronen Israel; and, Matthew P. Richardson. 2020. "Biases in Long -Horizon
      Predictive Regressions." National Bureau of Economic Research, working paper no.
      27410.

Bussiére, Matthieu; Menzie Chinn; Laurent Ferrara; and, Jonas Heipertz. 2018. "The New Fama
       Puzzle." National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper no. 24342.

Clarida, Richard, and Daniel Waldman. 2008. "Is Bad News about I nflation Good News for the
       Exchange Rate? And If So, Can That Tell Us Anything about the Conduct of Monetary
       Policy?" In Asset Prices and Monetary Policy, John Y.Campbell, ed. (Chicago: National
       Bureau of Economic Research).



                                                                                            25
Eichenbaum, Martin, and Charles L. Evans. 1995. "Some Empirical Evidence on the Effects of
      Shocks to Monetary Policy on Exchange Rates." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 110,
      975-1009.

Engel, Charles. 1996. "The Forward Discount Anomaly and the Risk Premium: A Survey of
       Recent Evidence." Journal of Empirical Finance 3, 123-192.

Engel, Charles. 2000. "Long-Run PPP May Not Hold After All." Journal of International
       Economics 51, 243-273.

Engel, Charles. 2014. "Exchange Rates and Interest Parity." Handbook of International
       Economics, vol. 4 453-522.

Engel, Charles. 2016. "Interest Rates, Exchange Rates and the Risk Premium." American
       Economic Review 106, 436-474.

Engel, Charles and Kenneth D. West. 2005. "Exchange Rates and Fundamentals." Journal of
       Political Economy 113, 485-517.

Engel, Charles; Dohyeon Lee; Chang Liu; Chenxin Liu; and, Steve Pak Yeung Wu. 2019. "The
       Uncovered Interest Rate Parity Puzzle, Exchange Rate Forecasting, and T aylor Rules."
       Journal of International Money and Finance 95, 317-331.

Engsted, Tom, and Thomas Q. Pedersen. 2014. "Bias-Correction in Vector Autoregressive
       Models: A Simulation Study." Econometrics 2, 45-71.

Fama, Eugene F. 1984. "Forward and Spot Exchange Rates." Journal of Monetary Economics 14,
      319-338.

Farhi, Emmanuel, and Xavier Gabaix. "Rare Disasters and Exchange Rates." Quarterly Journal of
        Economics 131, 1-52.

Froot, Kenneth, and Richard H. Thaler. 1990. "Anomalies: Foreign Exchange." Journal of
       Economic Perspectives 4, 179-192.

Galí, Jordi. 2020. "Uncovered Interest Parity, Forward Guidance and the Exchange Rate." Journal
        of Money, Credit and Banking, forthcoming.

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Aaron Tornell. 2004. "Exchange Rate Puzzles and Distorted
      Beliefs." Journal of International Economics 64, 303-333.

Hassan, Tarek A., and Rui C. Mano. 2019. "Forward and Spot Exchange Rates in a Multi-Currency
       World." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 134, 397-450.

Kilian, Lutz. 1998. "Small-Sample Confidence Intervals for Impulse Response Functions."
       Review of Economics and Statistics 80, 218-230.


                                                                                            26
Lustig, Hanno, and Adrien Verdelhan. 2007. "The Cross Section of Foreign Currency Risk Premia
        and Consumption Growth Risk." The American Economic Review 97, 89-117.

Lustig, Hanno; Nick Roussanov; and, Adrien Verdelhan. 2011. "Common Risk Factors in
       Currency Markets." Review of Financial Studies 24, 3731-3777.

Lustig, Hanno; Nick Roussanov; and, Adrien Verdelhan. 2014. "Countercyclical Currency Risk
        Premia," Journal of Financial Economics 111, 527­553.

Menkhoff, Lukas; Lucio Sarno; Maik Schmeling; and, Andreas Schrimpf, 2012a. "Carry Trades
     and Global Foreign Exchange Rate Volatility," Journal of Finance 67, 681­718.

Menkhoff, Lukas; Lucio Sarno; Maik Schmeling; and, Andreas Schrimpf, 2012b. "Currency
     momentum strategies," Journal of Financial Economics 106, 660 ­ 684.

Molavi, Pooya; Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi, and Andrea Vedolin. 2021. "Model Complexity,
      Expectations and Asset Prices." Working paper, Kellogg School of Management,
      Northwestern University.

Pope, Alun Lloyd. 1990. "Biases of Estimators in Multivariate Non-Gaussian Autoregressions."
       Journal of Time Series Analysis 11, 249-258.

Stambaugh, Robert F. 1999. "Bias in Regressions with Lagged Stochastic Regressors." Working
      paper, University of Chicago.

Verdelhan, Adrien. 2018. "The Share of Systematic Variation in Bilateral Exchange Rates."
       Journal of Finance 73, 375-418.

West, Kenneth D. 2012. "Econometric Analysis of Present Value Models when the Discount
      Factor is Near One." Journal of Econometrics 171, 86-97.

West, Kenneth D. 2016. "Approximate Bias in Time Series Regressions." Working paper,
      University of Wisconsin.




                                                                                          27
                                                       Table 1
                    Slope Coefficient Estimates from Fama Regression, full sample
                  Currency             Time             Obs.        b         95% CI         p-value
                    AUD         1989/01-2020/09          381    -0.546      (-2.34, 1.24)      0.09
                    CAD         1979/06-2020/09          496    -1.031      (-2.18, 0.11)     < 0.01
                    CHF         1979/06-2020/09          496    -1.467 (-2.90, -0.04)         < 0.01
                    DEM         1979/06-2020/09          496    -0.919      (-2.51, 0.67)      0.02
                     FRF        1979/06-2020/09          496    -0.167      (-1.54, 1.20)      0.10
                    GBP         1979/06-2020/09          496    -1.759 (-3.42, -0.10)         < 0.01
                     ITL        1979/06-2020/09          496     0.467      (-0.43, 1.37)      0.25
                     JPY        1979/06-2020/09          496    -1.607 (-3.03, -0.18)         < 0.01
                    NOK         1986/01-2020/09          417     0.280      (-1.18, 1.74)      0.33
                    NZD         1997/04-2020/09          282    -0.110      (-3.10, 2.88)      0.46
                     SEK        1987/01-2020/09          405     0.658      (-1.06, 2.37)      0.70

                                                                                                                  )
Notes: This table reports the slope coefficient estimates (b) from Fama regression, +1 -  =  + ( -                  +  ,
based on the full sample (the longest covers 1979:06-2020:09) for each currency, including Australian dollar
(AUD), Canadian dollar (CAD), Swiss franc (CHF), German mark (DEM), French franc (FRF), British pound
(GBP), Italian lira (ITL), Japanese yen (JPY), Norwegian krone (NOK), New Zealand dollar (NZD), and Swedish
krona (SEK). The exchange rates are against US dollar, and  is the log of the exchange rate expressed as the home
currency (dollars) price of foreign currency. Exchange rates of the mark, French franc and lira are converted into
euros using the euro conversion rates at the time of origination of the euro in January 1999.  is the interest rate on a
                                                                          
riskless one-period deposit or security in the home country (U.S.) and      is the analogous interest rate in the foreign
country. Sample dates vary across currencies, especially for AUD, NOK, NZD, SEK, as shown in the Time column,
due to the data availability of interest rates. The CI column reports the 95% confidence intervals of the slope
coefficient, with the bias-corrected standard errors derived by Amihud and Hurvich (2004). The -value column
reports the -value of the two-sided -test for the slope coefficient 0:  = 1.




                                                                                                                      28
                                                       Table 2
             Slope Coefficient Estimates from Fama regression, longest common sample
                                                 1987:01-2020:09
                  Currency              Time             Obs.       b         95% CI        p-value
                     AUD        1989/01-2020/09          381     -0.546 (-2.34, 1.24)         0.09
                     CAD        1987/01-2020/09          405     -0.565 (-1.93, 0.80)         0.03
                     CHF        1987/01-2020/09          405     -1.416 (-3.47, 0.63)         0.02
                    DEM         1987/01-2020/09          405     -0.628 (-2.51, 1.26)         0.09
                     FRF        1987/01-2020/09          405     -0.386 (-2.18, 1.41)         0.13
                     GBP        1987/01-2020/09          405     -0.173 (-2.20, 1.86)         0.26
                     ITL        1987/01-2020/09          405     0.712      (-1.07, 2.50)     0.75
                     JPY        1987/01-2020/09          405     -1.061 (-2.86, 0.74)         0.03
                     NOK        1987/01-2020/09          405     0.461      (-1.05, 1.97)     0.48
                     NZD        1997/04-2020/09          282     -0.110 (-3.10, 2.88)         0.47
                     SEK        1987/01-2020/09          405     0.658      (-1.06, 2.37)     0.70

                                                                                                                )
Notes: This table reports the slope coefficient estimates (b) from Fama regression, +1 -  =  + ( -                 +  ,
based on the longest common sample (1987:01-2020:09, except for AUD, NZD, and SEK) of the currencies, including
Australian dollar (AUD), Canadian dollar (CAD), Swiss franc (CHF), German mark (DEM), French franc (FRF),
British pound (GBP), Italian lira (ITL), Japanese yen (JPY), Norwegian krone (NOK), New Zealand dollar (NZD),
and Swedish krona (SEK). The exchange rates are against US dollar, and  is the log of the exchange rate expressed
as the home currency (dollars) price of foreign currency. Exchange rates of the mark, French franc and lira are
converted into euros using the euro conversion rates at the time of origination of the euro in January 1999.  is the
                                                                                          
interest rate on a riskless one-period deposit or security in the home country (U.S.) and  is the analogous interest rate
in the foreign country. Sample dates are different for AUD, NZD, and SEK, as shown in the Time column, due to the
data availability of interest rates. The CI column reports the 95% confidence intervals of the slope coefficient, with
the bias-corrected standard errors derived by Amihud and Hurvich (2004). The -value column reports the -value of
the two-sided -test for the slope coefficient 0:  = 1.




                                                                                                                     29
                                                       Table 3
                 Slope Coefficient Estimates from Fama Regression, pre-GFC sample
                                                 1987:01-2006:12
                  Currency             Time             Obs.       b          95% CI         p-value
                    AUD          1989/01-2006/12        216     -0.813      (-2.77, 1.14)      0.07
                    CAD         1987/01-2006/12         240     -0.821      (-2.01, 0.36)     < 0.01
                    CHF         1987/01-2006/12         240     -1.653      (-3.95, 0.64)      0.02
                    DEM         1987/01-2006/12         240     -0.978      (-3.07, 1.12)      0.07
                     FRF        1987/01-2006/12         240     -0.611      (-2.65, 1.43)      0.12
                    GBP         1987/01-2006/12         240     -0.109      (-2.65, 2.43)      0.39
                     ITL        1987/01-2006/12         240      0.823      (-1.40, 3.04)      0.88
                     JPY        1987/01-2006/12         240     -2.448 (-4.60, -0.30)         < 0.01
                    NOK         1987/01-2006/12         240      0.378      (-1.32, 2.08)      0.47
                    NZD         1997/04-2006/12         117     -3.714 (-7.38, -0.05)          0.01
                     SEK        1987/01-2006/12         240      0.823      (-1.14, 2.79)      0.86

                                                                                                                )
Notes: This table reports the slope coefficient estimates (b) from Fama regression, +1 -  =  + ( -                 +  ,
based on the pre-Global Financial Crisis (GFC) common-sample period (1987:01-2006:12, except for AUD and NZD)
for each currency, including Australian dollar (AUD), Canadian dollar (CAD), Swiss franc (CHF), German mark
(DEM), French franc (FRF), British pound (GBP), Italian lira (ITL), Japanese yen (JPY), Norwegian krone (NOK),
New Zealand dollar (NZD), and Swedish krona (SEK). The exchange rates are against US dollar, and  is the log of
the exchange rate expressed as the home currency (dollars) price of foreign currency. Exchange rates of the mark,
French franc and lira are converted into euros using the euro conversion rates at the time of origination of the euro in
                                                                                                                     
January 1999.  is the interest rate on a riskless one-period deposit or security in the home country (U.S.) and        is
the analogous interest rate in the foreign country. Sample dates vary across currencies, especially for AUD and NZD,
as shown in the Time column, due to the data availability of interest rates. The CI column reports the 95% confidence
intervals of the slope coefficient, with the bias-corrected standard errors derived by Amihud and Hurvich (2004). The
-value column reports the -value of the two-sided -test for the slope coefficient 0 :  = 1.




                                                                                                                     30
                                                       Table 4
              Slope Coefficient Estimates from Fama Regression, post-2007:01 sample
                                                 2007:01-2020:09
                  Currency             Time             Obs        b         95% CI         p-value
                    AUD         2007/01-2020/09 165 0.022                 (-4.13, 4.17)       0.65
                    CAD         2007/01-2020/09 165              4.56    (-4.82, 13.94)       0.46
                     CHF        2007/01-2020/09 165 0.885                  (-3.38 5.15)       0.96
                     EUR        2007/01-2020/09 165 1.507                 (-3.11, 6.12)       0.83
                     GBP        2007/01-2020/09 165 4.564                 (-0.86, 9.99)       0.20
                     JPY        2007/01-2020/09 165 3.609                  (0.22, 7.00)       0.13
                    NOK         2007/01-2020/09 165 2.955                 (-2.02, 7.93)       0.44
                    NZD         2007/01-2020/09 165 3.559                 (-0.95, 8.07)       0.27
                     SEK        2007/01-2020/09 165 0.775                 (-3.17, 4.72)       0.91

                                                                                                                 )
Notes: This table reports the slope coefficient estimates (b) from Fama regression, +1 -  =  + ( -                 +  ,
based on the 2007:01-2020:09 period for each currency, including Australian dollar (AUD), Canadian dollar (CAD),
Swiss franc (CHF), euro (EUR), British pound (GBP), Japanese yen (JPY), Norwegian krone (NOK), New Zealand
dollar (NZD), and Swedish krona (SEK). The exchange rates are against US dollar, and  is the log of the exchange
rate expressed as the home currency (dollars) price of foreign currency. Exchange rates of the mark, French franc and
lira are converted into euros using the euro conversion rates at the time of origination of the euro in January 1999, so
during this time period, DEM, FRF, and ITL have the exactly same results.  is the interest rate on a riskless one-
                                                            
period deposit or security in the home country (U.S.) and     is the analogous interest rate in the foreign country. The
CI column reports the 95% confidence intervals of the slope coefficient, with the bias-corrected standard errors derived
by Amihud and Hurvich (2004). The -value column reports the -value of the two-sided -test for the slope
coefficient 0 :  = 1.




                                                                                                                    31
                                                Table 5
                                                                            
                  Correlation Between Fama Coefficient and Volatility of  - 
                                                               1                         1
                                                                                            
 Currency       ( -            )       . . ( -     )          ( -  )                . . ( -  )
              10-year      5-year     10-year    5-year    10-year     5-year     10-year     5-year
   AUD        -0.223       -0.132     -0.285     -0.176     0.402       0.307      0.377      0.269
   CAD        -0.343       -0.282     -0.457     -0.373     0.657       0.331      0.637      0.420
   CHF        -0.087       -0.047     -0.148     -0.056     0.432      -0.289      0.341      -0.177
   DEM        -0.041       -0.003     -0.148     -0.070     0.543       0.164      0.428      0.189
   FRF        -0.038       -0.050     -0.106     -0.134     0.456       0.361      0.340      0.357
   GBP        -0.510       -0.385     -0.539     -0.513     0.606       0.824      0.600      0.799
    ITL       -0.045       -0.128     -0.082     -0.213     0.354       0.388      0.255      0.394
   JPY        -0.668       -0.298     -0.760     -0.436     0.830       0.330      0.846      0.444
   NOK        -0.133       -0.084     -0.257     -0.195     0.563       0.154      0.499      0.245
   NZD        -0.829       -0.560     -0.855     -0.595     0.906       0.415      0.895      0.526
   SEK         0.233          0.182   0.170      0.083      0.170       0.187      0.047      0.140
    All       -0.108       -0.095     -0.204     -0.213     0.436       0.377      0.413      0.421




Notes: This table presents the correlation coefficient of the Fama slope coefficient and the volatility
         
of  -     , for each currency, including Australian dollar (AUD), Canadian dollar (CAD), Swiss
franc (CHF), German mark (DEM), French franc (FRF), British pound (GBP), Italian lira (ITL),
Japanese yen (JPY), Norwegian krone (NOK), New Zealand dollar (NZD), Swedish krona (SEK),
as well as the combined all-country sample. The estimates of the slope coefficient (b) using 10-
                                                                      )
year or 5-year rolling Fama regression, +1 -  =  + ( -                   +  , based on the longest
sample for each currency, as in Figure 12-22. The coefficients are bias-corrected following
                                                                                                
Amihud and Hurvich (2004). The volatility of  -          is measured by its variance ( -         ), its
                                                                       1
standard deviation . . ( -        ), the inverse of its variance ( -  ), and the inverse of its
                                                                           
                          1
standard deviation             . For the all-country sample, both the coefficient estimates and
                       ..( -  )
                               
volatility measures are demeaned for each country before calculating the correlation.




                                                                                                    32
                                            Table 6
                        Correlation Between Fama Coefficient and VIX
                              Country           ( , )
                                             10-year       5-year
                                AUD          -0.130        -0.095
                                CAD          -0.599        -0.437
                                CHF          -0.334        0.011
                                DEM          -0.268        -0.066
                                FRF          -0.313        -0.131
                                GBP          -0.128        0.041
                                 ITL         -0.289        -0.211
                                JPY          -0.332        -0.010
                                NOK          -0.267        0.003
                                NZD           0.121        0.065
                                SEK          -0.365        -0.008




Notes: This table presents the correlation coefficient of the Fama slope coefficient and VIX, for
each currency, including Australian dollar (AUD), Canadian dollar (CAD), Swiss franc (CHF),
German mark (DEM), French franc (FRF), British pound (GBP), Italian lira (ITL), Japanese yen
(JPY), Norwegian krone (NOK), New Zealand dollar (NZD), and Swedish krona (SEK). The
estimates of the slope coefficient (b) using 10-year or 5-year rolling Fama regression, +1 -  =
             )
 + ( -          +  , based on the longest sample for each currency, as in Figure 12-22. The
coefficients are bias-corrected following Amihud and Hurvich (2004).




                                                                                              33
                                                      Table 7
                  Slope Coefficient from Equation (6), Full Sample for Each Country
           Currency             Time            # of Obs.        d             95% CI             p-value
             CAD         1979/06-2020/09            481       -0.137     (-0.263, -0.0111)          0.03
             CHF         1979/06-2020/09            481       -0.357      (-0.574, -0.141)        < 0.01
             DEM         1979/06-2020/09            481       -0.326      (-0.521, -0.132)        < 0.01
             FRF         1979/06-2020/09            481        0.001       (-0.169, 0.170)         0.995
             GBP         1979/06-2020/09            481         -0.2     (-0.398, -0.00222)         0.05
              ITL        1979/06-2020/09            481       -0.019      (-0.105, 0.0682)          0.68
              JPY        1979/06-2020/09            481       -0.125      (-0.330, 0.0807)          0.24
             NOK         1986/01-2020/09            414       -0.137      (-0.293, 0.0189)         0.086
             SEK         1987/01-2020/09            402       -0.228     (-0.404, -0.0517)          0.01

                                                                                                       )
Notes: This table reports the slope coefficient estimates ( ) from equation (6), +1 -  - ( -              =  + ( -
  
 ) +  , based on the full sample (the longest covers 1979:06-2020:09) for each currency, including Canadian
dollar (CAD), Swiss franc (CHF), German mark (DEM), French franc (FRF), British pound (GBP), Italian lira
(ITL), Japanese yen (JPY), Norwegian krone (NOK), and Swedish krona (SEK). Australian dollar (AUD) and New
Zealand dollar (NZD) are excluded due to their lack of inflation data. The exchange rates are against US dollar, and
 is the log of the exchange rate expressed as the home currency (dollars) price of foreign currency. Exchange rates
of the mark, French franc and lira are converted into euros using the euro conversion rates at the time of origination
of the euro in January 1999.  is the interest rate on a riskless one-period deposit or security in the home country
                                                                                                             
(U.S.) and     is the analogous interest rate in the foreign country.  is the inflation rate in the U.S. and  is the
inflation rate in the foreign country. Sample dates vary across currencies, especially for NOK and SEK, as shown in
the Time column, due to the data availability of interest rates. The CI column reports the 95% confidence intervals
of the slope coefficient, with the bias-corrected standard errors derived by Amihud and Hurvich (2004). The -value
column reports the -value of the two-sided -test for the slope coefficient 0 :  = 0.




                                                                                                                   34
                                                       Table 8
                          Slope Coefficient from Equation (6), 1987:01-2020:09
           Currency             Time             # of Obs.         d             95% CI             p-value
             CAD         1987/01-2020/09             402       -0.319      (-0.570, -0.0682)          0.01
              CHF        1987/01-2020/09             402       -0.356 (-0.709, -0.00382)              0.05
             DEM         1987/01-2020/09             402       -0.358      (-0.626, -0.0905)          0.01
              FRF        1987/01-2020/09             402       -0.805       (-1.211, -0.400)         < 0.01
              GBP        1987/01-2020/09             402       -0.285      (-0.521, -0.0494)          0.02
              ITL        1987/01-2020/09             402       -0.383       (-0.614, -0.153)         < 0.01
              JPY        1987/01-2020/09             402       -0.016       (-0.233, 0.202)           0.89
             NOK         1987/01-2020/09             402       -0.116       (-0.280, 0.0468)          0.16
              SEK        1987/01-2020/09             402       -0.228      (-0.404, -0.0517)          0.01

                                                                                                          )
Notes: This table reports the slope coefficient estimates ( ) from equation (6), +1 -  - ( -                 =  + ( -
  
 ) +  , based on the longest common sample (1987:01-2020:09, except for SEK) of the currencies, including
Canadian dollar (CAD), Swiss franc (CHF), German mark (DEM), French franc (FRF), British pound (GBP), Italian
lira (ITL), Japanese yen (JPY), Norwegian krone (NOK), and Swedish krona (SEK). Australian dollar (AUD) and
New Zealand dollar (NZD) are excluded due to their lack of inflation data. The exchange rates are against US dollar,
and  is the log of the exchange rate expressed as the home currency (dollars) price of foreign currency. Exchange
rates of the mark, French franc and lira are converted into euros using the euro conversion rates at the time of
origination of the euro in January 1999.  is the interest rate on a riskless one-period deposit or security in the home
                                                                                                                      
country (U.S.) and      is the analogous interest rate in the foreign country.  is the inflation rate in the U.S. and  is
the inflation rate in the foreign country. The CI column reports the 95% confidence intervals of the slope coefficient,
with the bias-corrected standard errors derived by Amihud and Hurvich (2004). The -value column reports the -
value of the two-sided -test for the slope coefficient 0:  = 0.




                                                                                                                     35
                                                        Table 9
                          Slope Coefficient from Equation (6), 1987:01-2006:12
           Currency              Time             # of Obs.        d              95% CI             p-value
             CAD         1987/01-2006/12             239        -0.291      (-0.484, -0.0982)        < 0.01
              CHF        1987/01-2006/12             239        -0.308      (-0.703, 0.0858)           0.13
             DEM         1987/01-2006/12             239        -0.273      (-0.575, 0.0287)           0.08
              FRF        1987/01-2006/12             239        -0.897      (-1.346, -0.448)         < 0.01
              GBP        1987/01-2006/12             239        -0.233      (-0.511, 0.0453)           0.10
              ITL        1987/01-2006/12             239        -0.327      (-0.628, -0.0257)          0.03
              JPY        1987/01-2006/12             239        -0.213       (-0.601, 0.174)           0.28
             NOK         1987/01-2006/12             239        -0.117      (-0.282, 0.0489)           0.17
              SEK        1987/01-2006/12             239        -0.183 (-0.363, -0.00161)              0.05

                                                                                                        )
Notes: This table reports the slope coefficient estimates ( ) from equation (6), +1 -  - ( -              =  + ( -
  
 ) +  , based on the pre-Global Financial Crisis (GFC) common-sample period (1987:01-2006:12) for each
currency, including Canadian dollar (CAD), Swiss franc (CHF), German mark (DEM), French franc (FRF), British
pound (GBP), Italian lira (ITL), Japanese yen (JPY), Norwegian krone (NOK), and Swedish krona (SEK). Australian
dollar (AUD) and New Zealand dollar (NZD) are excluded due to their lack of inflation data. The exchange rates are
against US dollar, and  is the log of the exchange rate expressed as the home currency (dollars) price of foreign
currency. Exchange rates of the mark, French franc and lira are converted into euros using the euro conversion rates
at the time of origination of the euro in January 1999.  is the interest rate on a riskless one-period deposit or security
                                   
in the home country (U.S.) and       is the analogous interest rate in the foreign country.  is the inflation rate in the
            
U.S. and  is the inflation rate in the foreign country. The CI column reports the 95% confidence intervals of the
slope coefficient, with the bias-corrected standard errors derived by Amihud and Hurvich (2004). The -value column
reports the -value of the two-sided -test for the slope coefficient 0:  = 0.




                                                                                                                      36
                                                       Table 10
                          Slope Coefficient from Equation (6), 2007:01-2020:09
            Currency              Time             # of Obs.         d            95% CI             p-value
              CAD         2007/01-2020/09             162        -0.471       (-1.159, 0.217)          0.18
               CHF        2007/01-2020/09             162        -0.541       (-1.346, 0.264)          0.19
              DEM         2007/01-2020/09             162         -1.08      (-1.752, -0.409)        < 0.01
               FRF        2007/01-2020/09             162        -0.902      (-1.676, -0.127)          0.02
               GBP        2007/01-2020/09             162        -0.549 (-1.040, -0.0583)              0.03
               ITL        2007/01-2020/09             162        -0.592 (-1.135, -0.0492)              0.03
               JPY        2007/01-2020/09             162         0.187      (-0.0955, 0.470)          0.20
              NOK         2007/01-2020/09             162        -0.151       (-0.487, 0.186)          0.38
               SEK        2007/01-2020/09             162        -0.683 (-1.345, -0.0211)              0.04

                                                                                                         )
Notes: This table reports the slope coefficient estimates ( ) from equation (6), +1 -  - ( -                 =  + ( -
  
 ) +  , based on the 2007:01-2020:09 period for each currency, including Canadian dollar (CAD), Swiss franc
(CHF), German mark (DEM), French franc (FRF), British pound (GBP), Italian lira (ITL), Japanese yen (JPY),
Norwegian krone (NOK), and Swedish krona (SEK). Australian dollar (AUD) and New Zealand dollar (NZD) are
excluded due to their lack of inflation data. The exchange rates are against US dollar, and  is the log of the exchange
rate expressed as the home currency (dollars) price of foreign currency. Exchange rates of the mark, French franc and
lira are converted into euros using the euro conversion rates at the time of origination of the euro in January 1999. 
                                                                                                        
is the interest rate on a riskless one-period deposit or security in the home country (U.S.) and          is the analogous
                                                                             
interest rate in the foreign country.  is the inflation rate in the U.S. and  is the inflation rate in the foreign country.
The CI column reports the 95% confidence intervals of the slope coefficient, with the bias-corrected standard errors
derived by Amihud and Hurvich (2004). The -value column reports the -value of the two-sided -test for the slope
coefficient 0 :  = 0.




                                                                                                                       37
                                                        Table 11
        Slope Coefficient from Medium-Run Regression (4), Full Sample for Each Country
   Currency                Time                  Obs.                                    CI                p-value
     AUD           1989/01-2020/09               369             -19.787         (-31.870, -7.704)          0.001
     CAD           1979/06-2020/09               484               -8.851        (-17.360, -0.342)          0.042
      CHF          1979/06-2020/09               484             -19.938        (-27.353, -12.523)          0.000
     DEM           1979/06-2020/09               484             -17.274         (-25.271, -9.278)          0.000
      FRF          1979/06-2020/09               484               -5.629        (-11.282, 0.025)           0.052
      GBP          1979/06-2020/09               484             -16.529         (-24.898, -8.160)          0.000
      ITL          1979/06-2020/09               484               1.267          (-3.285, 5.819)           0.586
      JPY          1979/06-2020/09               484             -21.122        (-29.625, -12.619)          0.000
     NOK           1986/01-2020/09               405             -11.178         (-18.397, -3.959)          0.003
     NZD           1997/04-2020/09               270             -28.036         (-48.468, -7.604)          0.008
      SEK          1987/01-2020/09               393               -3.689        (-10.915, 3.536)           0.318

Notes: This table reports the slope coefficient estimates ( ) from equation (4), 12    =1 ++1 - + + + - + =
                                                                                                           
                 )       
 +  ( -              +    , based on the full sample (the longest covers 1979:06-2020:09) for each currency, including
Australian dollar (AUD), Canadian dollar (CAD), Swiss franc (CHF), German mark (DEM), French franc (FRF),
British pound (GBP), Italian lira (ITL), Japanese yen (JPY), Norwegian krone (NOK), New Zealand dollar (NZD),
and Swedish krona (SEK). The exchange rates are against US dollar, and  is the log of the exchange rate expressed
as the home currency (dollars) price of foreign currency. Exchange rates of the mark, French franc and lira are
converted into euros using the euro conversion rates at the time of origination of the euro in January 1999.  is the
                                                                                          
interest rate on a riskless one-period deposit or security in the home country (U.S.) and  is the analogous interest rate
in the foreign country. Sample dates vary across currencies, especially for AUD, NOK, NZD, SEK, as shown in the
Time column, due to the data availability of interest rates. The CI column reports the 95% confidence intervals of the
slope coefficient, with the bias-corrected standard errors derived by Boudoukh et al. (2020) The -value column
reports the -value of the two-sided -test for the slope coefficient 0:  = 0.




                                                                                                                     38
                                                        Table 12
                Slope Coefficient from Medium-Run Regression (4), 1987:01-2020:09
   Currency                Time                  Obs.                                    CI                p-value
     AUD           1989/01-2020/09               369             -19.787         (-31.870, -7.704)          0.001
     CAD           1987/01-2020/09               393               -8.178        (-19.613, 3.257)           0.162
      CHF          1987/01-2020/09               393             -22.346        (-33.727, -10.964)          0.000
     DEM           1987/01-2020/09               393             -18.530         (-28.882, -8.178)          0.001
      FRF          1987/01-2020/09               393             -14.573         (-23.786, -5.360)          0.002
      GBP          1987/01-2020/09               393               -9.341        (-19.476, 0.793)           0.072
      ITL          1987/01-2020/09               393               -2.414         (-9.878, 5.050)           0.527
      JPY          1987/01-2020/09               393             -24.409        (-35.542, -13.277)          0.000
     NOK           1987/01-2020/09               393               -8.159        (-15.568, -0.751)          0.031
     NZD           1997/04-2020/09               270             -28.036         (-48.468, -7.604)          0.008
      SEK          1987/01-2020/09               393               -3.689        (-10.915, 3.536)           0.318

Notes: This table reports the slope coefficient estimates ( ) from equation (4), 12    =1 ++1 - + + + - + =
                                                                                                           
                       
 +  ( -  ) +  , based on the longest common sample (1987:01-2020:09, except for AUD, NZD, and SEK)
of the currencies, including Australian dollar (AUD), Canadian dollar (CAD), Swiss franc (CHF), German mark
(DEM), French franc (FRF), British pound (GBP), Italian lira (ITL), Japanese yen (JPY), Norwegian krone (NOK),
New Zealand dollar (NZD), and Swedish krona (SEK). The exchange rates are against US dollar, and  is the log of
the exchange rate expressed as the home currency (dollars) price of foreign currency. Exchange rates of the mark,
French franc and lira are converted into euros using the euro conversion rates at the time of origination of the euro in
                                                                                                                     
January 1999.  is the interest rate on a riskless one-period deposit or security in the home country (U.S.) and        is
the analogous interest rate in the foreign country. Sample dates vary across currencies, especially for AUD, NOK,
NZD, SEK, as shown in the Time column, due to the data availability of interest rates. The CI column reports the 95%
confidence intervals of the slope coefficient, with the bias-corrected standard errors derived by Boudoukh et al. (2020)
The -value column reports the -value of the two-sided -test for the slope coefficient 0 :  = 0.




                                                                                                                     39
                                                        Table 13
                Slope Coefficient from Medium-Run Regression (4), 1987:01-2006:12
   Currency                Time                  Obs.                                     CI                p-value
     AUD           1989/01-2006/12               216             -21.367         (-33.021, -9.714)           0.000
     CAD           1987/01-2006/12               240             -10.180         (-19.230, -1.1303)          0.028
      CHF          1987/01-2006/12               240             -24.631         (-37.127, -12.135)          0.000
     DEM           1987/01-2006/12               240             -22.294         (-33.510, -11.077)          0.000
      FRF          1987/01-2006/12               240             -16.304         (-26.317, -6.291)           0.002
      GBP          1987/01-2006/12               240               -5.086         (-18.001, 7.828)           0.441
      ITL          1987/01-2006/12               240               -0.169          (-8.887, 8.549)           0.970
      JPY          1987/01-2006/12               240             -40.053         (-54.569, -25.537)          0.000
     NOK           1987/01-2006/12               240               -6.554         (-13.874, 0.765)           0.081
     NZD           1997/04-2006/12               117             -53.738         (-77.247, -30.230)          0.000
      SEK          1987/01-2006/12               240               -1.965          (-9.652, 5.722)           0.617

Notes: This table reports the slope coefficient estimates ( ) from equation (4), 12     =1 ++1 - + + + - + =
                                                                                                              
                )       
 +  ( -             +     , based on the pre-Global Financial Crisis (GFC) common-sample period (1987:01-2006:12,
except for AUD and NZD) for each currency, including Australian dollar (AUD), Canadian dollar (CAD), Swiss franc
(CHF), German mark (DEM), French franc (FRF), British pound (GBP), Italian lira (ITL), Japanese yen (JPY),
Norwegian krone (NOK), New Zealand dollar (NZD), and Swedish krona (SEK). The exchange rates are against US
dollar, and  is the log of the exchange rate expressed as the home currency (dollars) price of foreign currency.
Exchange rates of the mark, French franc and lira are converted into euros using the euro conversion rates at the time
of origination of the euro in January 1999.  is the interest rate on a riskless one-period deposit or security in the home
                       
country (U.S.) and       is the analogous interest rate in the foreign country. Sample dates vary across currencies,
especially for AUD, NOK, NZD, SEK, as shown in the Time column, due to the data availability of interest rates. The
CI column reports the 95% confidence intervals of the slope coefficient, with the bias-corrected standard errors derived
by Boudoukh et al. (2020) The -value column reports the -value of the two-sided -test for the slope coefficient
0:  = 0.




                                                                                                                      40
                                                       Table 14
                Slope Coefficient from Medium-Run Regression (4), 2007:01-2020:09
   Currency                Time                 Obs.                                    CI               p-value
     AUD           2007/01-2020/09               153            -17.828        (-46.201, 10.546)          0.220
     CAD           2007/01-2020/09               153              51.697        (2.709, 100.684)          0.040
      CHF          2007/01-2020/09               153              -1.000       (-31.822, 29.823)          0.949
     EUR           2007/01-2020/09               153              5.187        (-22.743, 33.116)          0.716
      GBP          2007/01-2020/09               153              36.078         (4.929, 67.226)          0.025
      JPY          2007/01-2020/09               153              29.128         (5.357, 52.898)          0.018
     NOK           2007/01-2020/09               153              -1.488       (-31.520, 28.544)          0.923
     NZD           2007/01-2020/09               153              0.476        (-33.039, 33.991)          0.978
      SEK          2007/01-2020/09               153              -0.229       (-25.730, 25.273)          0.986

Notes: This table reports the slope coefficient estimates ( ) from equation (4), 12   =1 ++1 - + + + - + =
                                                                                                           
                 )    
 +  ( -            +    , based on the 2007:01-2020:09 period for each currency, including Australian dollar (AUD),
Canadian dollar (CAD), Swiss franc (CHF), euro (EUR), British pound (GBP), Japanese yen (JPY), Norwegian krone
(NOK), New Zealand dollar (NZD), and Swedish krona (SEK). The exchange rates are against US dollar, and  is
the log of the exchange rate expressed as the home currency (dollars) price of foreign currency. Exchange rates of the
mark, French franc and lira are converted into euros using the euro conversion rates at the time of origination of the
euro in January 1999.  is the interest rate on a riskless one-period deposit or security in the home country (U.S.) and
 
   is the analogous interest rate in the foreign country. The CI column reports the 95% confidence intervals of the
slope coefficient, with the bias-corrected standard errors derived by Boudoukh et al. (2020) The -value column
reports the -value of the two-sided -test for the slope coefficient 0:  = 0.




                                                                                                                   41
                                                        Table 15
       Slope Coefficient from Medium-Run Regression (7), Full Sample for Each Currency
   Currency                Time                  Obs.                                    CI                p-value
     CAD            1979/06-2020/09               472              -0.868        (-1.713, -0.023)           0.045
      CHF           1979/06-2020/09               472              -2.819        (-4.071, -1.567)           0.000
     DEM            1979/06-2020/09               472              -2.154        (-3.300, -1.008)           0.000
      FRF           1979/06-2020/09               472              0.082         (-0.876, 1.040)            0.867
      GBP           1979/06-2020/09               472              0.124         (-1.076, 1.324)            0.840
      ITL           1979/06-2020/09               472              -0.144        (-0.733, 0.445)            0.632
      JPY           1979/06-2020/09               472              -2.493        (-3.744, -1.241)           0.000
     NOK            1986/01-2020/09               405              -1.232        (-2.253, -0.210)           0.019
      SEK           1987/01-2020/09               393              -2.457        (-3.524, -1.390)           0.000

Notes: This table reports the slope coefficient estimates ( ) from equation (7), 12     =1 ++1 - + + + - + =
                                                                                                              
                          
 +  ( -             ) +     , based on the full sample (the longest covers 1979:06-2020:09) for each currency, including
Canadian dollar (CAD), Swiss franc (CHF), German mark (DEM), French franc (FRF), British pound (GBP), Italian
lira (ITL), Japanese yen (JPY), Norwegian krone (NOK), and Swedish krona (SEK). Australian dollar (AUD) and
New Zealand dollar (NZD) are excluded due to their lack of inflation data. The exchange rates are against US dollar,
and  is the log of the exchange rate expressed as the home currency (dollars) price of foreign currency. Exchange
rates of the mark, French franc and lira are converted into euros using the euro conversion rates at the time of
origination of the euro in January 1999.  is the interest rate on a riskless one-period deposit or security in the home
                                                                                                                      
country (U.S.) and      is the analogous interest rate in the foreign country.  is the inflation rate in the U.S. and  is
the inflation rate in the foreign country. Sample dates vary across currencies, especially for NOK and SEK, as shown
in the Time column, due to the data availability of interest rates. The CI column reports the 95% confidence intervals
of the slope coefficient, with the bias-corrected standard errors derived by Boudoukh et al. (2020). The -value column
reports the -value of the two-sided -test for the slope coefficient 0:  = 0.




                                                                                                                     42
                                                       Table 16
                Slope Coefficient from Medium-Run Regression (7), 1987:01-2020:09
  Currency               Time                Obs.                                         CI                p-value
    CAD          1987/01-2020/09              393              -2.116           (-3.505, -0.726)             0.003
     CHF         1987/01-2020/09              393              -2.358           (-4.138, -0.577)             0.010
    DEM          1987/01-2020/09              393              -2.036           (-3.474, -0.598)             0.006
     FRF         1987/01-2020/09              393              -4.051           (-6.326, -1.777)             0.001
     GBP         1987/01-2020/09              393              -0.926           (-2.294, 0.443)              0.186
     ITL         1987/01-2020/09              393              -2.323           (-3.795, -0.852)             0.002
     JPY         1987/01-2020/09              393              -1.386           (-2.791, 0.018)              0.054
    NOK          1987/01-2020/09              393              -0.610           (-1.723, 0.504)              0.284
     SEK         1987/01-2020/09              393              -2.457           (-3.524, -1.390)             0.000

Notes: This table reports the slope coefficient estimates ( ) from equation (7), 12     =1 ++1 - + + + - + =
                                                                                                              
                          
 +  ( -             ) +     , based on the longest common sample (1987:01-2020:09) of the currencies, including
Canadian dollar (CAD), Swiss franc (CHF), German mark (DEM), French franc (FRF), British pound (GBP), Italian
lira (ITL), Japanese yen (JPY), Norwegian krone (NOK), and Swedish krona (SEK). Australian dollar (AUD) and
New Zealand dollar (NZD) are excluded due to their lack of inflation data. The exchange rates are against US dollar,
and  is the log of the exchange rate expressed as the home currency (dollars) price of foreign currency. Exchange
rates of the mark, French franc and lira are converted into euros using the euro conversion rates at the time of
origination of the euro in January 1999.  is the interest rate on a riskless one-period deposit or security in the home
                                                                                                                      
country (U.S.) and      is the analogous interest rate in the foreign country.  is the inflation rate in the U.S. and  is
the inflation rate in the foreign country. The CI column reports the 95% confidence intervals of the slope coefficient,
with the bias-corrected standard errors derived by Boudoukh et al. (2020). The -value column reports the -value of
the two-sided -test for the slope coefficient 0:  = 0.




                                                                                                                      43
                                                        Table 17
                Slope Coefficient from Medium-Run Regression (7), 1987:01-2006:12
   Currency                Time                   Obs.                                    CI               p-value
     CAD            1987/01-2006/12               240              -2.111         (-3.366, -0.856)           0.001
      CHF           1987/01-2006/12               240              -2.504         (-4.663, -0.345)           0.024
     DEM            1987/01-2006/12               240              -2.465         (-4.110, -0.819)           0.004
      FRF           1987/01-2006/12               240              -6.706         (-9.681, -3.731)           0.000
      GBP           1987/01-2006/12               240              -0.361         (-2.012, 1.289)            0.668
      ITL           1987/01-2006/12               240              -1.851         (-3.826, 0.125)            0.068
      JPY           1987/01-2006/12               240              -4.327         (-6.578, -2.076)           0.000
     NOK            1987/01-2006/12               240              -0.804         (-2.120, 0.513)            0.233
      SEK           1987/01-2006/12               240              -2.239         (-3.323, -1.155)           0.000

Notes: This table reports the slope coefficient estimates ( ) from equation (7), 12     =1 ++1 - + + + - + =
                                                                                                             
                         
 +  ( -            ) +     , based on the pre-Global Financial Crisis (GFC) common-sample period (1987:01-2006:12)
for each currency, including Canadian dollar (CAD), Swiss franc (CHF), German mark (DEM), French franc (FRF),
British pound (GBP), Italian lira (ITL), Japanese yen (JPY), Norwegian krone (NOK), and Swedish krona (SEK).
Australian dollar (AUD) and New Zealand dollar (NZD) are excluded due to their lack of inflation data. The exchange
rates are against US dollar, and  is the log of the exchange rate expressed as the home currency (dollars) price of
foreign currency. Exchange rates of the mark, French franc and lira are converted into euros using the euro conversion
rates at the time of origination of the euro in January 1999.  is the interest rate on a riskless one-period deposit or
                                            
security in the home country (U.S.) and      is the analogous interest rate in the foreign country.  is the inflation rate
                  
in the U.S. and  is the inflation rate in the foreign country. The CI column reports the 95% confidence intervals of
the slope coefficient, with the bias-corrected standard errors derived by Boudoukh et al. (2020). The -value column
reports the -value of the two-sided -test for the slope coefficient 0:  = 0.




                                                                                                                      44
                                                        Table 18
                Slope Coefficient from Medium-Run Regression (7), 2007:01-2020:09
   Currency                Time                   Obs.                                    CI               p-value
     CAD            2007/01-2020/09               153              -3.508         (-6.813, -0.203)           0.039
      CHF           2007/01-2020/09               153              -2.655         (-5.972, 0.662)            0.119
     DEM            2007/01-2020/09               153              -2.252         (-5.716, 1.212)            0.204
      FRF           2007/01-2020/09               153              -2.167         (-5.915, 1.580)            0.259
      GBP           2007/01-2020/09               153              -4.264         (-6.808, -1.720)           0.001
      ITL           2007/01-2020/09               153              -2.567         (-5.360, 0.227)            0.074
      JPY           2007/01-2020/09               153              1.386          (-0.473, 3.244)            0.146
     NOK            2007/01-2020/09               153              -0.947         (-2.960, 1.066)            0.358
      SEK           2007/01-2020/09               153              -3.436         (-7.275, 0.403)            0.081

Notes: This table reports the slope coefficient estimates ( ) from equation (7), 12    =1 ++1 - + + + - + =
                                                                                                             
                        
 +  ( -             ) +   , based on the 2007:01-2020:09 period for each currency, including Canadian dollar (CAD),
Swiss franc (CHF), German mark (DEM), French franc (FRF), British pound (GBP), Italian lira (ITL), Japanese yen
(JPY), Norwegian krone (NOK), and Swedish krona (SEK). Australian dollar (AUD) and New Zealand dollar (NZD)
are excluded due to their lack of inflation data. The exchange rates are against US dollar, and  is the log of the
exchange rate expressed as the home currency (dollars) price of foreign currency. Exchange rates of the mark, French
franc and lira are converted into euros using the euro conversion rates at the time of origination of the euro in January
                                                                                                                  
1999.  is the interest rate on a riskless one-period deposit or security in the home country (U.S.) and             is the
                                                                                             
analogous interest rate in the foreign country.  is the inflation rate in the U.S. and  is the inflation rate in the
foreign country. The CI column reports the 95% confidence intervals of the slope coefficient, with the bias-corrected
standard errors derived by Boudoukh et al. (2020). The -value column reports the -value of the two-sided -test for
the slope coefficient 0 :  = 0.




                                                                                                                      45
                                        Table 19
     Slope Coefficient from Long-Run Regression (12), Full Sample for Each Currency
                             Transitory Component     UIP measure          Difference
                                                     
Currency     Time/Obs.          /95%CI/p-val          /95%CI/p-val       /95%CI/p-val
 CAD       1979/06-2020/09          -53.498              -100.12             46.622
                477             (-67.38, -39.62)     (-118.7, -81.55)      (41.24, 52)
                                    < 0.01               < 0.01              < 0.01
 CHF       1979/06-2020/09          -32.333              -22.543             -9.789
                477             (-41.48, -23.19)     (-25.38, -19.71)    (-20.68, 1.098)
                                    < 0.01               < 0.01              0.0787
 DEM       1979/06-2020/09          -38.909              -40.381             1.472
                477             (-48.84, -28.98)     (-41.36, -39.40)    (-9.012, 11.96)
                                    < 0.01               < 0.01              0.783
  FRF      1979/06-2020/09          -21.947              -26.692             4.744
                477             (-29.14, -14.76)     (-31.77, -21.62)    (-2.018, 11.51)
                                    < 0.01               < 0.01               0.17
 GBP       1979/06-2020/09          -17.412              -14.112             -3.301
                477             (-30.71, -4.112)     (-15.06, -13.16)    (-17.50, 10.90)
                                    0.0106               < 0.01              0.649
  ITL      1979/06-2020/09          -82.55               -87.232             4.683
                477             (-95.31, -69.79)     (-103.7, -70.73)    (-1.403, 10.77)
                                    < 0.01               < 0.01              0.132
  JPY      1979/06-2020/09          -4.509               -16.29              11.781
                477             (-16.85, 7.829)      (-19.84, -12.74)    (-3.947, 27.51)
                                     0.474               < 0.01              0.143
 NOK       1986/01-2020/09          -29.421              -79.913             50.492
                410             (-36.58, -22.26)     (-85.92, -73.91)    (45.52, 55.47)
                                    < 0.01               < 0.01              < 0.01
 SEK       1987/01-2020/09         -109.265             -168.964             59.699
                398              (-144, -74.54)      (-230.2, -107.8)    (32.41, 86.99)
                                    < 0.01               < 0.01              < 0.01

                                                                                           46
                                                                                   (            
Notes: This table reports the slope coefficient estimates ( ) from      =      +      -  ) +  (Transitory component
                           (      )                                                                                 )    
column),  =  +   -  +  (UIP measure column), and equation (12),  -  =  +  ( -                                         + 
(Difference column), based on the full sample (the longest covers 1979:06-2020:09) for each currency, including
Canadian dollar (CAD), Swiss franc (CHF), German mark (DEM), French franc (FRF), British pound (GBP), Italian
                                                                                               
lira (ITL), Japanese yen (JPY), Norwegian krone (NOK) and Swedish krona (SEK).                   = - lim [ + -  -
                                                                                                       
  
(+1 - )] is the transitory component of the exchange rate from the Beveridge-Nelson decomposition, and                 
                                                                                                                         =
       
- =0(+ - + - (                  
                             -  )) is the value of exchange rate if UIP held. We use a vector autoregression (VAR) to
compute the two measures of exchange rate in the stationary case, and adopt the small-sample bias correction from
West (2016), with which we did not encounter the root greater than one problem. The exchange rates are against US
dollar, and  is the log of the exchange rate expressed as the home currency (dollars) price of foreign currency.
Exchange rates of the mark, French franc and lira are converted into euros using the euro conversion rates at the time
of origination of the euro in January 1999.  is the interest rate on a riskless one-period deposit or security in the home
                       
country (U.S.) and       is the analogous interest rate in the foreign country. Sample dates vary across currencies,
especially for NOK and SEK, as shown in the Time column, due to the data availability of interest rates. The CI
column reports the 95% confidence intervals of the slope coefficient. The -value column reports the -value of the
two-sided -test for the slope coefficient 0 :  = 0.




                                                                                                                      47
                                       Table 20
    Slope Coefficient from Long-Run Regression (13), Full Sample for Each Currency
                             Transitory Component     UIP measure         Difference
                                                    
Currency     Time/Obs.          /95%CI/p-val         /95%CI/p-val        /95%CI/p-val
 CAD       1979/06-2020/09          -1.822               -4.618             2.796
                477            (-3.147, -0.496)      (-6.450, -2.786)   (2.215, 3.377)
                                    <0.01                 <0.01             <0.01
 CHF       1979/06-2020/09          0.994                -3.615             4.609
                477             (-1.165, 3.153)      (-4.304, -2.927)   (3.001, 6.217)
                                    0.367                 <0.01             <0.01
 DEM       1979/06-2020/09          -2.186               -4.344             2.158
                477            (-3.862, -0.510)      (-5.165, -3.524)   (0.842, 3.474)
                                    0.0109                <0.01             <0.01
  FRF      1979/06-2020/09          -1.748               -4.667             2.919
                477            (-2.973, -0.523)      (-5.081, -4.253)   (1.963, 3.874)
                                    <0.01                 <0.01             <0.01
 GBP       1979/06-2020/09          -0.218               -0.498              0.28
                477             (-1.871, 1.436)     (-0.906, -0.0896)   (-1.360, 1.920)
                                    0.797                0.0172             0.738
  ITL      1979/06-2020/09         -10.495               -12.071            1.576
                477            (-10.88, -10.11)      (-12.49, -11.66)   (1.158, 1.994)
                                    <0.01                 <0.01             <0.01
  JPY      1979/06-2020/09           1.89                -2.713             4.603
                477             (0.0907, 3.690)      (-3.201, -2.225)   (2.408, 6.798)
                                    0.0401                <0.01             <0.01
 NOK       1986/01-2020/09           -0.2                -4.115             3.915
                410             (-1.539, 1.139)      (-6.129, -2.101)   (2.847, 4.983)
                                     0.77                 <0.01             <0.01
 SEK       1987/01-2020/09         -12.124               -23.257            11.133
                398            (-14.90, -9.353)      (-26.84, -19.68)   (10.32, 11.95)
                                    <0.01                 <0.01             <0.01

                                                                                         48
                                                                                           (              
Notes: This table reports the slope coefficient estimates ( ) from             =      +        -  ) +  (Transitory
                                      (         )                                                            
component column),  =  +                   -  +  (UIP measure column), and equation (13),  -  =  +
                  
 ( -  ) +  (Difference column), based on the full sample (the longest covers 1979:06-2020:09) for each
currency, including Canadian dollar (CAD), Swiss franc (CHF), German mark (DEM), French franc (FRF), British
                                                                                                                   
pound (GBP), Italian lira (ITL), Japanese yen (JPY), Norwegian krone (NOK) and Swedish krona (SEK).                  =
                        
- lim [ + -  - (+1 - )] is the transitory component of the exchange rate from the Beveridge-Nelson
  
decomposition, and    
                         = -                              
                                  =0(+ - + - ( -  )) is the value of exchange rate if UIP held. We use a vector
autoregression (VAR) to compute the two measures of exchange rate in the stationary case, and adopt the small-
sample bias correction from West (2016), with which we did not encounter the root greater than one problem. The
exchange rates are against US dollar, and  is the log of the exchange rate expressed as the home currency (dollars)
price of foreign currency. Exchange rates of the mark, French franc and lira are converted into euros using the euro
conversion rates at the time of origination of the euro in January 1999.  is the interest rate on a riskless one-period
                                                      
deposit or security in the home country (U.S.) and      is the analogous interest rate in the foreign country.  is the
                                 
inflation rate in the U.S. and  is the inflation rate in the foreign country. Sample dates vary across currencies,
especially for NOK and SEK, as shown in the Time column, due to the data availability of interest rates. The CI
column reports the 95% confidence intervals of the slope coefficient. The -value column reports the -value of the
two-sided -test for the slope coefficient 0 :  = 0.




                                                                                                                   49
                                                       Table 21
                                        Estimated variances of   and  
   Currency                 Time                   Obs.              var(  )            var(  )             F-stat
      CAD            1979/06-2020/09                477              0.0219             0.0458             0.4777
      CHF            1979/06-2020/09                477              0.0222             0.0031             7.1136
      DEM            1979/06-2020/09                477              0.0232             0.0070             3.3279
      FRF            1979/06-2020/09                477              0.0184             0.0087             2.1206
      GBP            1979/06-2020/09                477              0.0135             0.0008             17.9024
       ITL           1979/06-2020/09                477              0.0967             0.1254             0.7710
       JPY           1979/06-2020/09                477              0.0247             0.0034             7.2763
      NOK            1986/01-2020/09                410              0.0192             0.0432             0.4454
      SEK            1987/01-2020/09                398              0.1509             0.3475             0.4341

                                                     
Notes: This table reports the variance of     and      , based on the full sample (the longest covers 1979:06-2020:09)
for each currency, including Canadian dollar (CAD), Swiss franc (CHF), German mark (DEM), French franc (FRF),
                                                                                                                      
British pound (GBP), Italian lira (ITL), Japanese yen (JPY), Norwegian krone (NOK) and Swedish krona (SEK).             =
- lim [ + -  - (               - ) ] is the transitory  component   of  the exchange     rate from  the  Beveridge-Nelson
                            +1
  
decomposition, and     
                          = -                               
                                   =0(+ - + - ( -  )) is the value of exchange rate if UIP held. We use a vector
autoregression (VAR) to compute the two measures of exchange rate in the stationary case, and adopt the small-
sample bias correction from West (2016), with which we did not encounter the root greater than one problem. The
exchange rates are against US dollar, and  is the log of the exchange rate expressed as the home currency (dollars)
price of foreign currency. Exchange rates of the mark, French franc and lira are converted into euros using the euro
conversion rates at the time of origination of the euro in January 1999.  is the interest rate on a riskless one-period
                                                     
deposit or security in the home country (U.S.) and     is the analogous interest rate in the foreign country. Sample dates
vary across currencies, especially for NOK and SEK, as shown in the Time column, due to the data availability of
interest rates. The CI column reports the 95% confidence intervals of the slope coefficient. The  -stat column reports
                                                                            )                                          )/
the  -statistics of the  -test for the variance difference 0: (               > (          ), specifically,  = (
       
( ).




                                                                                                                      50
                                 Figure 1 10- year Rolling Regressions: AUD




Notes: This figure presents the estimates of the slope coefficient (b) and 95% confident intervals using 10-year rolling
                                              )
Fama regression, +1 -  =  + ( -                 +  , using Australia dollar (AUD) data during 1989:01-2020:09.  is
the log of the exchange rate expressed as the home currency (US dollar) price of Australian dollar.  is the interest
                                                                                        
rate on a riskless one-period deposit or security in the home country (U.S.) and          is the analogous interest rate in
Australia. The dates along the horizontal axis mark the beginning of each 10-year sample. The maroon line shows the
estimates of the slope coefficient and navy lines draw the 95% confident intervals for each 10-year sample. The blue
shaded areas represent the time periods in which the estimated slope coefficient is significantly less than one at the
five percent level. The pink areas are when the estimated coefficient is less than one, but not significantly so. The
green areas are dates in which the estimated coefficient is greater than one. The purple areas are times in which the
slope coefficient is significantly greater than one at the five percent level. The 0 (black dashed line) and 1 (red dashed
line) horizontal lines are drawn for reference. The coefficients and 95% confident intervals are bias-corrected
following Amihud and Hurvich (2004).




                                                                                                                       51
                                 Figure 2 10-year Rolling Regressions: CAD




Notes: This figure presents the estimates of the slope coefficient (b) and 95% confident intervals using 10-year rolling
                                              )
Fama regression, +1 -  =  + ( -                 +  , using Canadian dollar (CAD) data during 1979:06-2020:09.  is
the log of the exchange rate expressed as the home currency (US dollar) price of Canadian dollar.  is the interest rate
                                                                                
on a riskless one-period deposit or security in the home country (U.S.) and      is the analogous interest rate in Canada.
The dates along the horizontal axis mark the beginning of each 10-year sample. The maroon line shows the estimates
of the slope coefficient and navy lines draw the 95% confident intervals for each 10-year sample. The blue shaded
areas represent the time periods in which the estimated slope coefficient is significantly less than one at the five percent
level. The pink areas are when the estimated coefficient is less than one, but not significantly so. The green areas are
dates in which the estimated coefficient is greater than one. The purple areas are times in which the slope coefficient
is significantly greater than one at the five percent level. The 0 (black dashed line) and 1 (red dashed line) horizontal
lines are drawn for reference. The coefficients and 95% confident intervals are bias-corrected following Amihud and
Hurvich (2004).




                                                                                                                        52
                                  Figure 3 10-year Rolling Regressions: CHF




Notes: This figure presents the estimates of the slope coefficient (b) and 95% confident intervals using 10-year rolling
                                              )
Fama regression, +1 -  =  + ( -                 +  , using Swiss franc (CHF) data during 1979:06-2020:09.  is the
log of the exchange rate expressed as the home currency (US dollar) price of Swiss franc.  is the interest rate on a
                                                                           
riskless one-period deposit or security in the home country (U.S.) and      is the analogous interest rate in Switzerland.
The dates along the horizontal axis mark the beginning of each 10-year sample. The maroon line shows the estimates
of the slope coefficient and navy lines draw the 95% confident intervals for each 10-year sample. The blue shaded
areas represent the time periods in which the estimated slope coefficient is significantly less than one at the five percent
level. The pink areas are when the estimated coefficient is less than one, but not significantly so. The green areas are
dates in which the estimated coefficient is greater than one. The purple areas are times in which the slope coefficient
is significantly greater than one at the five percent level. The 0 (black dashed line) and 1 (red dashed line) horizontal
lines are drawn for reference. The coefficients and 95% confident intervals are bias-corrected following Amihud and
Hurvich (2004).




                                                                                                                        53
                                 Figure 4 10-year Rolling Regressions: DEM




Notes: This figure presents the estimates of the slope coefficient (b) and 95% confident intervals using 10-year rolling
                                              )
Fama regression, +1 -  =  + ( -                 +  , using German mark (DEM) data during 1979:06-2020:09.  is the
log of the exchange rate expressed as the home currency (US dollar) price of German mark. The exchange rate is
converted into euros using the euro conversion rates at the time of origination of the euro in January 1999.  is the
                                                                                            
interest rate on a riskless one-period deposit or security in the home country (U.S.) and     is the analogous interest rate
in Germany. The dates along the horizontal axis mark the beginning of each 10-year sample. The maroon line shows
the estimates of the slope coefficient and navy lines draw the 95% confident intervals for each 10-year sample. The
blue shaded areas represent the time periods in which the estimated slope coefficient is significantly less than one at
the five percent level. The pink areas are when the estimated coefficient is less than one, but not significantly so. The
green areas are dates in which the estimated coefficient is greater than one. The purple areas are times in which the
slope coefficient is significantly greater than one at the five percent level. The 0 (black dashed line) and 1 (red dashed
line) horizontal lines are drawn for reference. The coefficients and 95% confident intervals are bias-corrected
following Amihud and Hurvich (2004).




                                                                                                                        54
                                  Figure 5 10-year Rolling Regressions: FRF




Notes: This figure presents the estimates of the slope coefficient (b) and 95% confident intervals using 10-year rolling
                                              )
Fama regression, +1 -  =  + ( -                 +  , using French franc (FRF) data during 1979:06-2020:09.  is the
log of the exchange rate expressed as the home currency (US dollar) price of French franc. The exchange rate is
converted into euros using the euro conversion rates at the time of origination of the euro in January 1999.  is the
                                                                                             
interest rate on a riskless one-period deposit or security in the home country (U.S.) and     is the analogous interest rate
in France. The dates along the horizontal axis mark the beginning of each 10-year sample. The maroon line shows the
estimates of the slope coefficient and navy lines draw the 95% confident intervals for each 10-year sample. The blue
shaded areas represent the time periods in which the estimated slope coefficient is significantly less than one at the
five percent level. The pink areas are when the estimated coefficient is less than one, but not significantly so. The
green areas are dates in which the estimated coefficient is greater than one. The purple areas are times in which the
slope coefficient is significantly greater than one at the five percent level. The 0 (black dashed line) and 1 (red dashed
line) horizontal lines are drawn for reference. The coefficients and 95% confident intervals are bias-corrected
following Amihud and Hurvich (2004).




                                                                                                                        55
                                 Figure 6 10-year Rolling Regressions: GBP




Notes: This figure presents the estimates of the slope coefficient (b) and 95% confident intervals using 10-year rolling
                                              )
Fama regression, +1 -  =  + ( -                 +  , using British pound (GBP) data during 1979:06-2020:09.  is the
log of the exchange rate expressed as the home currency (US dollar) price of British pound.  is the interest rate on a
                                                                           
riskless one-period deposit or security in the home country (U.S.) and      is the analogous interest rate in the UK. The
dates along the horizontal axis mark the beginning of each 10-year sample. The maroon line shows the estimates of
the slope coefficient and navy lines draw the 95% confident intervals for each 10-year sample. The blue shaded areas
represent the time periods in which the estimated slope coefficient is significantly less than one at the five percent
level. The pink areas are when the estimated coefficient is less than one, but not significantly so. The green areas are
dates in which the estimated coefficient is greater than one. The purple areas are times in which the slope coefficient
is significantly greater than one at the five percent level. The 0 (black dashed line) and 1 (red dashed line) horizontal
lines are drawn for reference. The coefficients and 95% confident intervals are bias-corrected following Amihud and
Hurvich (2004).




                                                                                                                     56
                                  Figure 7 10-year Rolling Regressions: ITL




Notes: This figure presents the estimates of the slope coefficient (b) and 95% confident intervals using 10-year rolling
                                              )
Fama regression, +1 -  =  + ( -                 +  , using Italian lira data during 1979:06-2020:09.  is the log of the
exchange rate expressed as the home currency (US dollar) price of Italian lira. The exchange rate is converted into
euros using the euro conversion rates at the time of origination of the euro in January 1999.  is the interest rate on a
                                                                             
riskless one-period deposit or security in the home country (U.S.) and        is the analogous interest rate in Italy. The
dates along the horizontal axis mark the beginning of each 10-year sample. The maroon line shows the estimates of
the slope coefficient and navy lines draw the 95% confident intervals for each 10-year sample. The blue shaded areas
represent the time periods in which the estimated slope coefficient is significantly less than one at the five percent
level. The pink areas are when the estimated coefficient is less than one, but not significantly so. The green areas are
dates in which the estimated coefficient is greater than one. The purple areas are times in which the slope coefficient
is significantly greater than one at the five percent level. The 0 (black dashed line) and 1 (red dashed line) horizontal
lines are drawn for reference. The coefficients and 95% confident intervals are bias-corrected following Amihud and
Hurvich (2004).




                                                                                                                      57
                                 Figure 8 10-year Rolling Regressions: JPY




Notes: This figure presents the estimates of the slope coefficient (b) and 95% confident intervals using 10-year rolling
                                              )
Fama regression, +1 -  =  + ( -                 +  , using Japanese yen (JPY) data during 1979:06-2020:09.  is the
log of the exchange rate expressed as the home currency (US dollar) price of Japanese yen.  is the interest rate on a
                                                                            
riskless one-period deposit or security in the home country (U.S.) and       is the analogous interest rate in Japan. The
dates along the horizontal axis mark the beginning of each 10-year sample. The maroon line shows the estimates of
the slope coefficient and navy lines draw the 95% confident intervals for each 10-year sample. The blue shaded areas
represent the time periods in which the estimated slope coefficient is significantly less than one at the five percent
level. The pink areas are when the estimated coefficient is less than one, but not significantly so. The green areas are
dates in which the estimated coefficient is greater than one. The purple areas are times in which the slope coefficient
is significantly greater than one at the five percent level. The 0 (black dashed line) and 1 (red dashed line) horizontal
lines are drawn for reference. The coefficients and 95% confident intervals are bias-corrected following Amihud and
Hurvich (2004).




                                                                                                                     58
                                 Figure 9 10-year Rolling Regressions: NOK




Notes: This figure presents the estimates of the slope coefficient (b) and 95% confident intervals using 10-year rolling
                                              )
Fama regression, +1 -  =  + ( -                  +  , using Norwegian krone (NOK) data during 1979:06-2020:09. 
is the log of the exchange rate expressed as the home currency (US dollar) price of Norwegian krone.  is the interest
                                                                                         
rate on a riskless one-period deposit or security in the home country (U.S.) and          is the analogous interest rate in
Norway. The dates along the horizontal axis mark the beginning of each 10-year sample. The maroon line shows the
estimates of the slope coefficient and navy lines draw the 95% confident intervals for each 10-year sample. The blue
shaded areas represent the time periods in which the estimated slope coefficient is significantly less than one at the
five percent level. The pink areas are when the estimated coefficient is less than one, but not significantly so. The
green areas are dates in which the estimated coefficient is greater than one. The purple areas are times in which the
slope coefficient is significantly greater than one at the five percent level. The 0 (black dashed line) and 1 (red dashed
line) horizontal lines are drawn for reference. The coefficients and 95% confident intervals are bias-corrected
following Amihud and Hurvich (2004).




                                                                                                                       59
                                Figure 10 10-year Rolling Regressions: NZD




Notes: This figure presents the estimates of the slope coefficient (b) and 95% confident intervals using 10-year rolling
                                             )
Fama regression, +1 -  =  + ( -                 +  , using New Zealand dollar (NZD) data during 1979:06-2020:09. 
is the log of the exchange rate expressed as the home currency (US dollar) price of New Zealand dollar.  is the
                                                                                          
interest rate on a riskless one-period deposit or security in the home country (U.S.) and   is the analogous interest rate
in New Zealand. The dates along the horizontal axis mark the beginning of each 10-year sample. The maroon line
shows the estimates of the slope coefficient and navy lines draw the 95% confident intervals for each 10-year sample.
The blue shaded areas represent the time periods in which the estimated slope coefficient is significantly less than one
at the five percent level. The pink areas are when the estimated coefficient is less than one, but not significantly so.
The green areas are dates in which the estimated coefficient is greater than one. The purple areas are times in which
the slope coefficient is significantly greater than one at the five percent level. The 0 (black dashed line) and 1 (red
dashed line) horizontal lines are drawn for reference. The coefficients and 95% confident intervals are bias-corrected
following Amihud and Hurvich (2004).




                                                                                                                      60
                                 Figure 11 10-year Rolling Regressions: SEK




Notes: This figure presents the estimates of the slope coefficient (b) and 95% confident intervals using 10-year rolling
                                             )
Fama regression, +1 -  =  + ( -                 +  , using Swedish krona (SEK) data during 1979:06-2020:09.  is the
log of the exchange rate expressed as the home currency (US dollar) price of Swedish krona.  is the interest rate on
                                                                              
a riskless one-period deposit or security in the home country (U.S.) and        is the analogous interest rate in Sweden.
The dates along the horizontal axis mark the beginning of each 10-year sample. The maroon line shows the estimates
of the slope coefficient and navy lines draw the 95% confident intervals for each 10-year sample. The blue shaded
areas represent the time periods in which the estimated slope coefficient is significantly less than one at the five percent
level. The pink areas are when the estimated coefficient is less than one, but not significantly so. The green areas are
dates in which the estimated coefficient is greater than one. The purple areas are times in which the slope coefficient
is significantly greater than one at the five percent level. The 0 (black dashed line) and 1 (red dashed line) horizontal
lines are drawn for reference. The coefficients and 95% confident intervals are bias-corrected following Amihud and
Hurvich (2004).




                                                                                                                        61
                                                                             
             Figure 12: Fama Slope Coefficient and Inverse of Variance of  -  : AUD




                                                                                                                  
Notes: This figure presents the co-movement of the Fama slope coefficient and the inverse of variance of  -        . The
                                                                                                          )
estimates of the slope coefficient (b) using 10-year rolling Fama regression, +1 -  =  + ( -  +  , based
on Australia dollar (AUD) data during 1989:01-2020:09, as in Figure 1. The maroon line shows the estimates of the
slope for each 10-year sample, with starting date in the x-axis, and magnitudes in the right-y-axis. The coefficients are
bias-corrected following Amihud and Hurvich (2004). The 0 (red dashed line) and 1 (green dashed line) horizontal
                                                                                                
lines are drawn for reference of coefficient estimates. The navy line shows the inverse of  -     in each corresponding
10-year sample, and values are in the left-y-axis.




                                                                                                                     62
                                                                             
             Figure 13: Fama Slope Coefficient and Inverse of Variance of  -  : CAD




                                                                                                                  
Notes: This figure presents the co-movement of the Fama slope coefficient and the inverse of variance of  -        . The
                                                                                                          )
estimates of the slope coefficient (b) using 10-year rolling Fama regression, +1 -  =  + ( -  +  , based
on Canadian dollar (CAD) data during 1979:06-2020:09, as in Figure 2. The maroon line shows the estimates of the
slope for each 10-year sample, with starting date in the x-axis, and magnitudes in the right-y-axis. The coefficients are
bias-corrected following Amihud and Hurvich (2004). The 0 (red dashed line) and 1 (green dashed line) horizontal
                                                                                                
lines are drawn for reference of coefficient estimates. The navy line shows the inverse of  -     in each corresponding
10-year sample, and values are in the left-y-axis.




                                                                                                                     63
                                                                             
             Figure 14: Fama Slope Coefficient and Inverse of Variance of  -  : CHF




                                                                                                                  
Notes: This figure presents the co-movement of the Fama slope coefficient and the inverse of variance of  -        . The
                                                                                                          )
estimates of the slope coefficient (b) using 10-year rolling Fama regression, +1 -  =  + ( -  +  , based
on Swiss franc (CHF) data during 1979:06-2020:09, as in Figure 3. The maroon line shows the estimates of the slope
for each 10-year sample, with starting date in the x-axis, and magnitudes in the right-y-axis. The coefficients are bias-
corrected following Amihud and Hurvich (2004). The 0 (red dashed line) and 1 (green dashed line) horizontal lines
                                                                                            
are drawn for reference of coefficient estimates. The navy line shows the inverse of  -       in each corresponding 10-
year sample, and values are in the left-y-axis.




                                                                                                                     64
                                                                             
             Figure 15: Fama Slope Coefficient and Inverse of Variance of  -  : DEM




                                                                                                                  
Notes: This figure presents the co-movement of the Fama slope coefficient and the inverse of variance of  -        . The
                                                                                                          )
estimates of the slope coefficient (b) using 10-year rolling Fama regression, +1 -  =  + ( -  +  , based
on German mark (DEM) data during 1979:06-2020:09, as in Figure 4. The maroon line shows the estimates of the
slope for each 10-year sample, with starting date in the x-axis, and magnitudes in the right-y-axis. The coefficients are
bias-corrected following Amihud and Hurvich (2004). The 0 (red dashed line) and 1 (green dashed line) horizontal
                                                                                                
lines are drawn for reference of coefficient estimates. The navy line shows the inverse of  -     in each corresponding
10-year sample, and values are in the left-y-axis.




                                                                                                                     65
                                                                             
             Figure 16: Fama Slope Coefficient and Inverse of Variance of  -  : FRF




                                                                                                                  
Notes: This figure presents the co-movement of the Fama slope coefficient and the inverse of variance of  -        . The
                                                                                                          )
estimates of the slope coefficient (b) using 10-year rolling Fama regression, +1 -  =  + ( -  +  , based
on French franc (FRF) data during 1979:06-2020:09, as in Figure 5. The maroon line shows the estimates of the slope
for each 10-year sample, with starting date in the x-axis, and magnitudes in the right-y-axis. The coefficients are bias-
corrected following Amihud and Hurvich (2004). The 0 (red dashed line) and 1 (green dashed line) horizontal lines
                                                                                            
are drawn for reference of coefficient estimates. The navy line shows the inverse of  -       in each corresponding 10-
year sample, and values are in the left-y-axis.




                                                                                                                     66
                                                                             
             Figure 17: Fama Slope Coefficient and Inverse of Variance of  -  : GBP




                                                                                                                  
Notes: This figure presents the co-movement of the Fama slope coefficient and the inverse of variance of  -        . The
                                                                                                          )
estimates of the slope coefficient (b) using 10-year rolling Fama regression, +1 -  =  + ( -  +  , based
on British pound (GBP) data during 1979:06-2020:09, as in Figure 6. The maroon line shows the estimates of the
slope for each 10-year sample, with starting date in the x-axis, and magnitudes in the right-y-axis. The coefficients are
bias-corrected following Amihud and Hurvich (2004). The 0 (red dashed line) and 1 (green dashed line) horizontal
                                                                                                
lines are drawn for reference of coefficient estimates. The navy line shows the inverse of  -     in each corresponding
10-year sample, and values are in the left-y-axis.




                                                                                                                     67
                                                                              
              Figure 18: Fama Slope Coefficient and Inverse of Variance of  -  : ITL




                                                                                                                   
Notes: This figure presents the co-movement of the Fama slope coefficient and the inverse of variance of  -         . The
                                                                                                           )
estimates of the slope coefficient (b) using 10-year rolling Fama regression, +1 -  =  + ( -  +  , based
on Italian lira data during 1979:06-2020:09, as in Figure 7. The maroon line shows the estimates of the slope for each
10-year sample, with starting date in the x-axis, and magnitudes in the right-y-axis. The coefficients are bias-corrected
following Amihud and Hurvich (2004). The 0 (red dashed line) and 1 (green dashed line) horizontal lines are drawn
                                                                                       
for reference of coefficient estimates. The navy line shows the inverse of  -           in each corresponding 10-year
sample, and values are in the left-y-axis.




                                                                                                                     68
                                                                              
              Figure 19: Fama Slope Coefficient and Inverse of Variance of  -  : JPY




                                                                                                                  
Notes: This figure presents the co-movement of the Fama slope coefficient and the inverse of variance of  -        . The
                                                                                                          )
estimates of the slope coefficient (b) using 10-year rolling Fama regression, +1 -  =  + ( -  +  , based
on Japanese yen (JPY) data during 1979:06-2020:09, as in Figure 8. The maroon line shows the estimates of the slope
for each 10-year sample, with starting date in the x-axis, and magnitudes in the right-y-axis. The coefficients are bias-
corrected following Amihud and Hurvich (2004). The 0 (red dashed line) and 1 (green dashed line) horizontal lines
                                                                                            
are drawn for reference of coefficient estimates. The navy line shows the inverse of  -       in each corresponding 10-
year sample, and values are in the left-y-axis.




                                                                                                                     69
                                                                             
             Figure 20: Fama Slope Coefficient and Inverse of Variance of  -  : NOK




                                                                                                                  
Notes: This figure presents the co-movement of the Fama slope coefficient and the inverse of variance of  -        . The
                                                                                                          )
estimates of the slope coefficient (b) using 10-year rolling Fama regression, +1 -  =  + ( -  +  , based
on Norwegian krone (NOK) data during 1979:06-2020:09, as in Figure 9. The maroon line shows the estimates of the
slope for each 10-year sample, with starting date in the x-axis, and magnitudes in the right-y-axis. The coefficients are
bias-corrected following Amihud and Hurvich (2004). The 0 (red dashed line) and 1 (green dashed line) horizontal
                                                                                                
lines are drawn for reference of coefficient estimates. The navy line shows the inverse of  -     in each corresponding
10-year sample, and values are in the left-y-axis.




                                                                                                                     70
                                                                             
             Figure 21: Fama Slope Coefficient and Inverse of Variance of  -  : NZD




                                                                                                                   
Notes: This figure presents the co-movement of the Fama slope coefficient and the inverse of variance of  -         . The
                                                                                                          )
estimates of the slope coefficient (b) using 10-year rolling Fama regression, +1 -  =  + ( -  +  , based
on New Zealand dollar (NZD) data during 1979:06-2020:09, as in Figure 10. The maroon line shows the estimates of
the slope for each 10-year sample, with starting date in the x-axis, and magnitudes in the right-y-axis. The coefficients
are bias-corrected following Amihud and Hurvich (2004). The 0 (red dashed line) and 1 (green dashed line) horizontal
                                                                                                 
lines are drawn for reference of coefficient estimates. The navy line shows the inverse of  -     in each corresponding
10-year sample, and values are in the left-y-axis.




                                                                                                                     71
                                                                             
             Figure 22: Fama Slope Coefficient and Inverse of Variance of  -  : SEK




                                                                                                                  
Notes: This figure presents the co-movement of the Fama slope coefficient and the inverse of variance of  -        . The
                                                                                                          )
estimates of the slope coefficient (b) using 10-year rolling Fama regression, +1 -  =  + ( -  +  , based
on Swedish krona (SEK) data during 1979:06-2020:09, as in Figure 11. The maroon line shows the estimates of the
slope for each 10-year sample, with starting date in the x-axis, and magnitudes in the right-y-axis. The coefficients are
bias-corrected following Amihud and Hurvich (2004). The 0 (red dashed line) and 1 (green dashed line) horizontal
                                                                                                
lines are drawn for reference of coefficient estimates. The navy line shows the inverse of  -     in each corresponding
10-year sample, and values are in the left-y-axis.




                                                                                                                     72
                        Figure 23: Interest Rates of the U.S. and Other Countries




Notes: This figure presents the interest rate of the U.S. (black line), Germany (navy line), France (maroon line), and
Italy (green line), from 1979:06-2020:09. After the time of origination of the euro in January 1999, all three foreign
interest rates are the same, and are the euro interest rates.




                                                                                                                   73
                        Figure 24: Interest Rates of the U.S. and Other Countries




Notes: This figure presents the interest rate of the U.S. (black line), Switzerland (navy line), the U.K. (maroon line),
Norway (green line), and Sweden (orange line), from 1979:06-2020:09. Sample length are different for different
countries.




                                                                                                                    74
                         Figure 25: Interest Rates of the U.S. and Other Countries




Notes: This figure presents the interest rate of the U.S. (black line), Australia (navy line), Canada (maroon line), Japan
(green line), and New Zealand (orange line), from 1979:06-2020:09. Sample length are different for different
countries.




                                                                                                                      75
                        Figure 26 10-year Rolling Regressions, Equation (6): CAD




Notes: This figure presents the estimates of the slope coefficient ( ) and 95% confident intervals using 10-year rolling
                                                  )                   
regression of equation (6), +1 -  - ( -             =  + ( -           ) +  , using Canadian dollar (CAD) data during
1979:06-2020:09.  is the log of the exchange rate expressed as the home currency (US dollar) price of Canadian
                                                                                                                  
dollar.  is the interest rate on a riskless one-period deposit or security in the home country (U.S.) and            is the
                                                                               
analogous interest rate in Canada.  is the inflation rate in the U.S. and  is the inflation rate in Canada. The dates
along the horizontal axis mark the beginning of each 10-year sample. The maroon line shows the estimates of the
slope coefficient and navy lines draw the 95% confident intervals for each 10-year sample. The blue shaded areas
represent the time periods in which the estimated slope coefficient is significantly less than zero at the five percent
level. The pink areas are when the estimated coefficient is less than zero, but not significantly so. The green areas are
dates in which the estimated coefficient is greater than zero. The purple areas are times in which the slope coefficient
is significantly greater than zero at the five percent level. The 0 (black dashed line) and 1 (red dashed line) horizontal
lines are drawn for reference. The coefficients and 95% confident intervals are bias-corrected following Amihud and
Hurvich (2004).




                                                                                                                       76
                        Figure 27 10-year Rolling Regressions, Equation (6): CHF




Notes: This figure presents the estimates of the slope coefficient ( ) and 95% confident intervals using 10-year rolling
                                                    )                   
regression of equation (6), +1 -  - ( -                =  + ( -          ) +  , using Swiss franc (CHF) data during
1979:06-2020:09.  is the log of the exchange rate expressed as the home currency (US dollar) price of Swiss franc.
                                                                                                       
 is the interest rate on a riskless one-period deposit or security in the home country (U.S.) and        is the analogous
                                                                          
interest rate in Switzerland.  is the inflation rate in the U.S. and  is the inflation rate in Switzerland. The dates
along the horizontal axis mark the beginning of each 10-year sample. The maroon line shows the estimates of the
slope coefficient and navy lines draw the 95% confident intervals for each 10-year sample. The blue shaded areas
represent the time periods in which the estimated slope coefficient is significantly less than zero at the five percent
level. The pink areas are when the estimated coefficient is less than zero, but not significantly so. The green areas are
dates in which the estimated coefficient is greater than zero. The purple areas are times in which the slope coefficient
is significantly greater than zero at the five percent level. The 0 (black dashed line) and 1 (red dashed line) horizontal
lines are drawn for reference. The coefficients and 95% confident intervals are bias-corrected following Amihud and
Hurvich (2004).




                                                                                                                      77
                       Figure 28 10-year Rolling Regressions, Equation (6): DEM




Notes: This figure presents the estimates of the slope coefficient ( ) and 95% confident intervals using 10-year rolling
                                                   )                   
regression of equation (6), +1 -  - ( -              =  + ( -           ) +  , using German mark (DEM) data during
1979:06-2020:09.  is the log of the exchange rate expressed as the home currency (US dollar) price of German mark.
The exchange rate is converted into euros using the euro conversion rates at the time of origination of the euro in
                                                                                                                      
January 1999.  is the interest rate on a riskless one-period deposit or security in the home country (U.S.) and         is
                                                                                  
the analogous interest rate in Canada.  is the inflation rate in the U.S. and  is the inflation rate in Germany. The
dates along the horizontal axis mark the beginning of each 10-year sample. The maroon line shows the estimates of
the slope coefficient and navy lines draw the 95% confident intervals for each 10-year sample. The blue shaded areas
represent the time periods in which the estimated slope coefficient is significantly less than zero at the five percent
level. The pink areas are when the estimated coefficient is less than zero, but not significantly so. The green areas are
dates in which the estimated coefficient is greater than zero. The purple areas are times in which the slope coefficient
is significantly greater than zero at the five percent level. The 0 (black dashed line) and 1 (red dashed line) horizontal
lines are drawn for reference. The coefficients and 95% confident intervals are bias-corrected following Amihud and
Hurvich (2004).




                                                                                                                      78
                        Figure 29 10-year Rolling Regressions, Equation (6): FRF




Notes: This figure presents the estimates of the slope coefficient ( ) and 95% confident intervals using 10-year rolling
                                                    )                   
regression of equation (6), +1 -  - ( -               =  + ( -           ) +  , using French franc (FRF) data during
1979:06-2020:09.  is the log of the exchange rate expressed as the home currency (US dollar) price of French franc.
The exchange rate is converted into euros using the euro conversion rates at the time of origination of the euro in
                                                                                                                      
January 1999.  is the interest rate on a riskless one-period deposit or security in the home country (U.S.) and         is
                                                                                
the analogous interest rate in France.  is the inflation rate in the U.S. and  is the inflation rate in France. The dates
along the horizontal axis mark the beginning of each 10-year sample. The maroon line shows the estimates of the
slope coefficient and navy lines draw the 95% confident intervals for each 10-year sample. The blue shaded areas
represent the time periods in which the estimated slope coefficient is significantly less than zero at the five percent
level. The pink areas are when the estimated coefficient is less than zero, but not significantly so. The green areas are
dates in which the estimated coefficient is greater than zero. The purple areas are times in which the slope coefficient
is significantly greater than zero at the five percent level. The 0 (black dashed line) and 1 (red dashed line) horizontal
lines are drawn for reference. The coefficients and 95% confident intervals are bias-corrected following Amihud and
Hurvich (2004).




                                                                                                                      79
                       Figure 30 10-year Rolling Regressions, Equation (6): GBP




Notes: This figure presents the estimates of the slope coefficient ( ) and 95% confident intervals using 10-year rolling
                                                  )                   
regression of equation (6), +1 -  - ( -              =  + ( -          ) +  , using British pound (GBP) data during
1979:06-2020:09.  is the log of the exchange rate expressed as the home currency (US dollar) price of British pound.
                                                                                                      
 is the interest rate on a riskless one-period deposit or security in the home country (U.S.) and       is the analogous
                                                                   
interest rate in the UK.  is the inflation rate in the U.S. and  is the inflation rate in the UK. The dates along the
horizontal axis mark the beginning of each 10-year sample. The maroon line shows the estimates of the slope
coefficient and navy lines draw the 95% confident intervals for each 10-year sample. The blue shaded areas represent
the time periods in which the estimated slope coefficient is significantly less than zero at the five percent level. The
pink areas are when the estimated coefficient is less than zero, but not significantly so. The green areas are dates in
which the estimated coefficient is greater than zero. The purple areas are times in which the slope coefficient is
significantly greater than zero at the five percent level. The 0 (black dashed line) and 1 (red dashed line) horizontal
lines are drawn for reference. The coefficients and 95% confident intervals are bias-corrected following Amihud and
Hurvich (2004).




                                                                                                                    80
                        Figure 31 10-year Rolling Regressions, Equation (6): ITL




Notes: This figure presents the estimates of the slope coefficient ( ) and 95% confident intervals using 10-year rolling
                                                  )                   
regression of equation (6), +1 -  - ( -              =  + ( -          ) +  , using Italian lira data during 1979:06-
2020:09.  is the log of the exchange rate expressed as the home currency (US dollar) price of Italian lira. The
exchange rate is converted into euros using the euro conversion rates at the time of origination of the euro in January
                                                                                                                  
1999.  is the interest rate on a riskless one-period deposit or security in the home country (U.S.) and             is the
                                                                          
analogous interest rate in Italy.  is the inflation rate in the U.S. and  is the inflation rate in Italy. The dates along
the horizontal axis mark the beginning of each 10-year sample. The maroon line shows the estimates of the slope
coefficient and navy lines draw the 95% confident intervals for each 10-year sample. The blue shaded areas represent
the time periods in which the estimated slope coefficient is significantly less than zero at the five percent level. The
pink areas are when the estimated coefficient is less than zero, but not significantly so. The green areas are dates in
which the estimated coefficient is greater than zero. The purple areas are times in which the slope coefficient is
significantly greater than zero at the five percent level. The 0 (black dashed line) and 1 (red dashed line) horizontal
lines are drawn for reference. The coefficients and 95% confident intervals are bias-corrected following Amihud and
Hurvich (2004).




                                                                                                                      81
                        Figure 32 10-year Rolling Regressions, Equation (6): JPY




Notes: This figure presents the estimates of the slope coefficient ( ) and 95% confident intervals using 10-year rolling
                                                  )                    
regression of equation (6), +1 -  - ( -              =  + ( -           ) +  , using Japanese yen (JPY) data during
1979:06-2020:09.  is the log of the exchange rate expressed as the home currency (US dollar) price of Japanese yen.
                                                                                                      
 is the interest rate on a riskless one-period deposit or security in the home country (U.S.) and       is the analogous
                                                                   
interest rate in Japan.  is the inflation rate in the U.S. and  is the inflation rate in Japan. The dates along the
horizontal axis mark the beginning of each 10-year sample. The maroon line shows the estimates of the slope
coefficient and navy lines draw the 95% confident intervals for each 10-year sample. The blue shaded areas represent
the time periods in which the estimated slope coefficient is significantly less than zero at the five percent level. The
pink areas are when the estimated coefficient is less than zero, but not significantly so. The green areas are dates in
which the estimated coefficient is greater than zero. The purple areas are times in which the slope coefficient is
significantly greater than zero at the five percent level. The 0 (black dashed line) and 1 (red dashed line) horizontal
lines are drawn for reference. The coefficients and 95% confident intervals are bias-corrected following Amihud and
Hurvich (2004).




                                                                                                                    82
                        Figure 33 10-year Rolling Regressions, Equation (6): NOK




Notes: This figure presents the estimates of the slope coefficient ( ) and 95% confident intervals using 10-year rolling
                                                 )                    
regression of equation (6), +1 -  - ( -             =  + ( -           ) +  , using Norwegian krone (NOK) data during
1979:06-2020:09.  is the log of the exchange rate expressed as the home currency (US dollar) price of Norwegian
                                                                                                                  
krone.  is the interest rate on a riskless one-period deposit or security in the home country (U.S.) and             is the
                                                                              
analogous interest rate in Norway.  is the inflation rate in the U.S. and  is the inflation rate in Norway. The dates
along the horizontal axis mark the beginning of each 10-year sample. The maroon line shows the estimates of the
slope coefficient and navy lines draw the 95% confident intervals for each 10-year sample. The blue shaded areas
represent the time periods in which the estimated slope coefficient is significantly less than zero at the five percent
level. The pink areas are when the estimated coefficient is less than zero, but not significantly so. The green areas are
dates in which the estimated coefficient is greater than zero. The purple areas are times in which the slope coefficient
is significantly greater than zero at the five percent level. The 0 (black dashed line) and 1 (red dashed line) horizontal
lines are drawn for reference. The coefficients and 95% confident intervals are bias-corrected following Amihud and
Hurvich (2004).




                                                                                                                       83
                        Figure 34 10-year Rolling Regressions, Equation (6): SEK




Notes: This figure presents the estimates of the slope coefficient ( ) and 95% confident intervals using 10-year rolling
                                                   )                   
regression of equation (6), +1 -  - ( -              =  + ( -           ) +  , using Swedish krona (SEK) data during
1979:06-2020:09.  is the log of the exchange rate expressed as the home currency (US dollar) price of Swedish
                                                                                                                  
krona.  is the interest rate on a riskless one-period deposit or security in the home country (U.S.) and             is the
                                                                              
analogous interest rate in Sweden.  is the inflation rate in the U.S. and  is the inflation rate in Sweden. The dates
along the horizontal axis mark the beginning of each 10-year sample. The maroon line shows the estimates of the
slope coefficient and navy lines draw the 95% confident intervals for each 10-year sample. The blue shaded areas
represent the time periods in which the estimated slope coefficient is significantly less than zero at the five percent
level. The pink areas are when the estimated coefficient is less than zero, but not significantly so. The green areas are
dates in which the estimated coefficient is greater than zero. The purple areas are times in which the slope coefficient
is significantly greater than zero at the five percent level. The 0 (black dashed line) and 1 (red dashed line) horizontal
lines are drawn for reference. The coefficients and 95% confident intervals are bias-corrected following Amihud and
Hurvich (2004).




                                                                                                                       84
                       Figure 35: 10-year Rolling Medium-Run Regressions: AUD




Notes: This figure presents the estimates of the slope coefficient ( ) and 95% confident intervals using 10-year
rolling of equation (4), 12                                                             
                             =1 ++1 - + + + - + =  +  ( -  ) +  , using Australia dollar (AUD)
data during 1989:01-2020:09.  is the log of the exchange rate expressed as the home currency (US dollar) price of
                                                                                                                           
Australian dollar.  is the interest rate on a riskless one-period deposit or security in the home country (U.S.) and 
is the analogous interest rate in Australia. The dates along the horizontal axis mark the beginning of each 10-year
sample. The maroon line shows the estimates of the slope coefficient and navy lines draw the 95% confident intervals
for each 10-year sample. The blue shaded areas represent the time periods in which the estimated slope coefficient is
significantly less than zero at the five percent level. The pink areas are when the estimated coefficient is less than zero,
but not significantly so. The green areas are dates in which the estimated coefficient is greater than zero. The purple
areas are times in which the slope coefficient is significantly greater than zero at the five percent level. The 0 (black
dashed line) and 1 (red dashed line) horizontal lines are drawn for reference. The coefficients and 95% confident
intervals are bias-corrected following Boudoukh et al. (2020).




                                                                                                                        85
                       Figure 36: 10-year Rolling Medium-Run Regressions: CAD




Notes: This figure presents the estimates of the slope coefficient ( ) and 95% confident intervals using 10-year
rolling of equation (4), 12                                                             
                             =1 ++1 - + + + - + =  +  ( -  ) +  , Canadian dollar (CAD) data
during 1979:06-2020:09.  is the log of the exchange rate expressed as the home currency (US dollar) price of
                                                                                                                         
Canadian dollar.  is the interest rate on a riskless one-period deposit or security in the home country (U.S.) and        is
the analogous interest rate in Canada. The dates along the horizontal axis mark the beginning of each 10-year sample.
The maroon line shows the estimates of the slope coefficient and navy lines draw the 95% confident intervals for each
10-year sample. The blue shaded areas represent the time periods in which the estimated slope coefficient is
significantly less than zero at the five percent level. The pink areas are when the estimated coefficient is less than zero,
but not significantly so. The green areas are dates in which the estimated coefficient is greater than zero. The purple
areas are times in which the slope coefficient is significantly greater than zero at the five percent level. The 0 (black
dashed line) and 1 (red dashed line) horizontal lines are drawn for reference. The coefficients and 95% confident
intervals are bias-corrected following Boudoukh et al. (2020).




                                                                                                                        86
                        Figure 37: 10-year Rolling Medium-Run Regressions: CHF




Notes: This figure presents the estimates of the slope coefficient ( ) and 95% confident intervals using 10-year
rolling of equation (4), 12                                                             
                            =1 ++1 - + + + - + =  +  ( -  ) +  , using Swiss franc (CHF) data
during 1979:06-2020:09.  is the log of the exchange rate expressed as the home currency (US dollar) price of Swiss
                                                                                                                    
franc.  is the interest rate on a riskless one-period deposit or security in the home country (U.S.) and              is the
analogous interest rate in Switzerland. The dates along the horizontal axis mark the beginning of each 10-year sample.
The maroon line shows the estimates of the slope coefficient and navy lines draw the 95% confident intervals for each
10-year sample. The blue shaded areas represent the time periods in which the estimated slope coefficient is
significantly less than zero at the five percent level. The pink areas are when the estimated coefficient is less than zero,
but not significantly so. The green areas are dates in which the estimated coefficient is greater than zero. The purple
areas are times in which the slope coefficient is significantly greater than zero at the five percent level. The 0 (black
dashed line) and 1 (red dashed line) horizontal lines are drawn for reference. The coefficients and 95% confident
intervals are bias-corrected following Boudoukh et al. (2020).




                                                                                                                        87
                       Figure 38: 10-year Rolling Medium-Run Regressions: DEM




Notes: This figure presents the estimates of the slope coefficient ( ) and 95% confident intervals using 10-year
rolling of equation (4), 12                                                           
                           =1 ++1 - + + + - + =  +  ( -  ) +  , using German mark (DEM) data
during 1979:06-2020:09.  is the log of the exchange rate expressed as the home currency (US dollar) price of German
mark. The exchange rate is converted into euros using the euro conversion rates at the time of origination of the euro
                                                                                                                         
in January 1999.  is the interest rate on a riskless one-period deposit or security in the home country (U.S.) and        is
the analogous interest rate in Germany. The dates along the horizontal axis mark the beginning of each 10-year sample.
The maroon line shows the estimates of the slope coefficient and navy lines draw the 95% confident intervals for each
10-year sample. The blue shaded areas represent the time periods in which the estimated slope coefficient is
significantly less than zero at the five percent level. The pink areas are when the estimated coefficient is less than zero,
but not significantly so. The green areas are dates in which the estimated coefficient is greater than zero. The purple
areas are times in which the slope coefficient is significantly greater than zero at the five percent level. The 0 (black
dashed line) and 1 (red dashed line) horizontal lines are drawn for reference. The coefficients and 95% confident
intervals are bias-corrected following Boudoukh et al. (2020).




                                                                                                                        88
                        Figure 39: 10-year Rolling Medium-Run Regressions: FRF




Notes: This figure presents the estimates of the slope coefficient ( ) and 95% confident intervals using 10-year
rolling of equation (4), 12                                                             
                            =1 ++1 - + + + - + =  +  ( -  ) +  , using French franc (FRF) data
during 1979:06-2020:09.  is the log of the exchange rate expressed as the home currency (US dollar) price of French
franc. The exchange rate is converted into euros using the euro conversion rates at the time of origination of the euro
                                                                                                                         
in January 1999.  is the interest rate on a riskless one-period deposit or security in the home country (U.S.) and        is
the analogous interest rate in France. The dates along the horizontal axis mark the beginning of each 10-year sample.
The maroon line shows the estimates of the slope coefficient and navy lines draw the 95% confident intervals for each
10-year sample. The blue shaded areas represent the time periods in which the estimated slope coefficient is
significantly less than zero at the five percent level. The pink areas are when the estimated coefficient is less than zero,
but not significantly so. The green areas are dates in which the estimated coefficient is greater than zero. The purple
areas are times in which the slope coefficient is significantly greater than zero at the five percent level. The 0 (black
dashed line) and 1 (red dashed line) horizontal lines are drawn for reference. The coefficients and 95% confident
intervals are bias-corrected following Boudoukh et al. (2020).




                                                                                                                        89
                       Figure 40: 10-year Rolling Medium-Run Regressions: GBP




Notes: This figure presents the estimates of the slope coefficient ( ) and 95% confident intervals using 10-year
rolling of equation (4), 12                                                          
                           =1 ++1 - + + + - + =  +  ( -  ) +  , using British pound (GBP) data
during 1979:06-2020:09.  is the log of the exchange rate expressed as the home currency (US dollar) price of British
                                                                                                                 
pound.  is the interest rate on a riskless one-period deposit or security in the home country (U.S.) and           is the
analogous interest rate in the UK. The dates along the horizontal axis mark the beginning of each 10-year sample. The
maroon line shows the estimates of the slope coefficient and navy lines draw the 95% confident intervals for each 10-
year sample. The blue shaded areas represent the time periods in which the estimated slope coefficient is significantly
less than zero at the five percent level. The pink areas are when the estimated coefficient is less than zero, but not
significantly so. The green areas are dates in which the estimated coefficient is greater than zero. The purple areas are
times in which the slope coefficient is significantly greater than zero at the five percent level. The 0 (black dashed
line) and 1 (red dashed line) horizontal lines are drawn for reference. The coefficients and 95% confident intervals are
bias-corrected following Boudoukh et al. (2020).




                                                                                                                     90
                        Figure 41: 10-year Rolling Medium-Run Regressions: ITL




Notes: This figure presents the estimates of the slope coefficient ( ) and 95% confident intervals using 10-year
rolling of equation (4), 12                                                             
                             =1 ++1 - + + + - + =  +  ( -  ) +  , using Italian lira data during
1979:06-2020:09.  is the log of the exchange rate expressed as the home currency (US dollar) price of Italian lira.
The exchange rate is converted into euros using the euro conversion rates at the time of origination of the euro in
                                                                                                                        
January 1999.  is the interest rate on a riskless one-period deposit or security in the home country (U.S.) and           is
the analogous interest rate in Italy. The dates along the horizontal axis mark the beginning of each 10-year sample.
The maroon line shows the estimates of the slope coefficient and navy lines draw the 95% confident intervals for each
10-year sample. The blue shaded areas represent the time periods in which the estimated slope coefficient is
significantly less than zero at the five percent level. The pink areas are when the estimated coefficient is less than zero,
but not significantly so. The green areas are dates in which the estimated coefficient is greater than zero. The purple
areas are times in which the slope coefficient is significantly greater than zero at the five percent level. The 0 (black
dashed line) and 1 (red dashed line) horizontal lines are drawn for reference. The coefficients and 95% confident
intervals are bias-corrected following Boudoukh et al. (2020).




                                                                                                                        91
                       Figure 42: 10-year Rolling Medium-Run Regressions: JPY




Notes: This figure presents the estimates of the slope coefficient ( ) and 95% confident intervals using 10-year
rolling of equation (4), 12                                                           
                           =1 ++1 - + + + - + =  +  ( -  ) +  , using Japanese yen (JPY) data
during 1979:06-2020:09.  is the log of the exchange rate expressed as the home currency (US dollar) price of
                                                                                                                  
Japanese yen.  is the interest rate on a riskless one-period deposit or security in the home country (U.S.) and    is the
analogous interest rate in Japan. The dates along the horizontal axis mark the beginning of each 10-year sample. The
maroon line shows the estimates of the slope coefficient and navy lines draw the 95% confident intervals for each 10-
year sample. The blue shaded areas represent the time periods in which the estimated slope coefficient is significantly
less than zero at the five percent level. The pink areas are when the estimated coefficient is less than zero, but not
significantly so. The green areas are dates in which the estimated coefficient is greater than zero. The purple areas are
times in which the slope coefficient is significantly greater than zero at the five percent level. The 0 (black dashed
line) and 1 (red dashed line) horizontal lines are drawn for reference. The coefficients and 95% confident intervals are
bias-corrected following Boudoukh et al. (2020).




                                                                                                                     92
                       Figure 43: 10-year Rolling Medium-Run Regressions: NOK




Notes: This figure presents the estimates of the slope coefficient ( ) and 95% confident intervals using 10-year
rolling of equation (4), 12                                                            
                           =1 ++1 - + + + - + =  +  ( -  ) +  , using Norwegian krone (NOK)
data during 1979:06-2020:09.  is the log of the exchange rate expressed as the home currency (US dollar) price of
                                                                                                                           
Norwegian krone.  is the interest rate on a riskless one-period deposit or security in the home country (U.S.) and 
is the analogous interest rate in Norway. The dates along the horizontal axis mark the beginning of each 10-year
sample. The maroon line shows the estimates of the slope coefficient and navy lines draw the 95% confident intervals
for each 10-year sample. The blue shaded areas represent the time periods in which the estimated slope coefficient is
significantly less than zero at the five percent level. The pink areas are when the estimated coefficient is less than zero,
but not significantly so. The green areas are dates in which the estimated coefficient is greater than zero. The purple
areas are times in which the slope coefficient is significantly greater than zero at the five percent level. The 0 (black
dashed line) and 1 (red dashed line) horizontal lines are drawn for reference. The coefficients and 95% confident
intervals are bias-corrected following Boudoukh et al. (2020).




                                                                                                                        93
                       Figure 44: 10-year Rolling Medium-Run Regressions: NZD




Notes: This figure presents the estimates of the slope coefficient ( ) and 95% confident intervals using 10-year
rolling of equation (4), 12                                                           
                           =1 ++1 - + + + - + =  +  ( -  ) +  , using New Zealand dollar (NZD)
data during 1979:06-2020:09.  is the log of the exchange rate expressed as the home currency (US dollar) price of
New Zealand dollar.  is the interest rate on a riskless one-period deposit or security in the home country (U.S.) and
 
   is the analogous interest rate in New Zealand. The dates along the horizontal axis mark the beginning of each 10-
year sample. The maroon line shows the estimates of the slope coefficient and navy lines draw the 95% confident
intervals for each 10-year sample. The blue shaded areas represent the time periods in which the estimated slope
coefficient is significantly less than zero at the five percent level. The pink areas are when the estimated coefficient is
less than zero, but not significantly so. The green areas are dates in which the estimated coefficient is greater than
zero. The purple areas are times in which the slope coefficient is significantly greater than zero at the five percent
level. The 0 (black dashed line) and 1 (red dashed line) horizontal lines are drawn for reference. The coefficients and
95% confident intervals are bias-corrected following Boudoukh et al. (2020).




                                                                                                                       94
                        Figure 45: 10-year Rolling Medium-Run Regressions: SEK




Notes: This figure presents the estimates of the slope coefficient ( ) and 95% confident intervals using 10-year
rolling of equation (4), 12                                                           
                           =1 ++1 - + + + - + =  +  ( -  ) +  , using Swedish krona (SEK) data
during 1979:06-2020:09.  is the log of the exchange rate expressed as the home currency (US dollar) price of
                                                                                                                        
Swedish krona.  is the interest rate on a riskless one-period deposit or security in the home country (U.S.) and          is
the analogous interest rate in Sweden. The dates along the horizontal axis mark the beginning of each 10-year sample.
The maroon line shows the estimates of the slope coefficient and navy lines draw the 95% confident intervals for each
10-year sample. The blue shaded areas represent the time periods in which the estimated slope coefficient is
significantly less than zero at the five percent level. The pink areas are when the estimated coefficient is less than zero,
but not significantly so. The green areas are dates in which the estimated coefficient is greater than zero. The purple
areas are times in which the slope coefficient is significantly greater than zero at the five percent level. The 0 (black
dashed line) and 1 (red dashed line) horizontal lines are drawn for reference. The coefficients and 95% confident
intervals are bias-corrected following Boudoukh et al. (2020).




                                                                                                                        95
         Figure 46: 10-year Rolling Medium-Run Regression, Inflation as Regressor: CAD




Notes: This figure presents the estimates of the slope coefficient ( ) and 95% confident intervals using 10-year
rolling regression of equation (7), 12                            
                                          =1 ++1 - + + + - + =  +  ( -  ) +  , using Canadian
                                                                                                        

dollar (CAD) data during 1979:06-2020:09.  is the log of the exchange rate expressed as the home currency (US
dollar) price of Canadian dollar.  is the interest rate on a riskless one-period deposit or security in the home country
                                                                                                   
(U.S.) and    is the analogous interest rate in Canada.  is the inflation rate in the U.S. and        is the inflation rate in
Canada. The dates along the horizontal axis mark the beginning of each 10-year sample. The maroon line shows the
estimates of the slope coefficient and navy lines draw the 95% confident intervals for each 10-year sample. The blue
shaded areas represent the time periods in which the estimated slope coefficient is significantly less than zero at the
five percent level. The pink areas are when the estimated coefficient is less than zero, but not significantly so. The
green areas are dates in which the estimated coefficient is greater than zero. The purple areas are times in which the
slope coefficient is significantly greater than zero at the five percent level. The 0 (black dashed line) and 1 (red dashed
line) horizontal lines are drawn for reference. The coefficients and 95% confident intervals are bias-corrected
following Boudoukh et al. (2020).




                                                                                                                          96
         Figure 47: 10-year Rolling Medium-Run Regression, Inflation as Regressor: CHF




Notes: This figure presents the estimates of the slope coefficient ( ) and 95% confident intervals using 10-year
rolling regression of equation (7), 12                         
                                        =1 ++1 - + + + - + =  +  ( -  ) +  , using Swiss franc
                                                                                                      

(CHF) data during 1979:06-2020:09.  is the log of the exchange rate expressed as the home currency (US dollar)
price of Swiss franc.  is the interest rate on a riskless one-period deposit or security in the home country (U.S.) and
                                                                                           
   is the analogous interest rate in Switzerland.  is the inflation rate in the U.S. and    is the inflation rate in Canada.
The dates along the horizontal axis mark the beginning of each 10-year sample. The maroon line shows the estimates
of the slope coefficient and navy lines draw the 95% confident intervals for each 10-year sample. The blue shaded
areas represent the time periods in which the estimated slope coefficient is significantly less than zero at the five
percent level. The pink areas are when the estimated coefficient is less than zero, but not significantly so. The green
areas are dates in which the estimated coefficient is greater than zero. The purple areas are times in which the slope
coefficient is significantly greater than zero at the five percent level. The 0 (black dashed line) and 1 (red dashed line)
horizontal lines are drawn for reference. The coefficients and 95% confident intervals are bias-corrected following
Boudoukh et al. (2020).




                                                                                                                        97
         Figure 48: 10-year Rolling Medium-Run Regression, Inflation as Regressor: DEM




Notes: This figure presents the estimates of the slope coefficient ( ) and 95% confident intervals using 10-year
rolling regression of equation (7), 12                                                      
                                       =1 ++1 - + + + - + =  +  ( -  ) +  , using German mark
                                                                                                  

(DEM) data during 1979:06-2020:09.  is the log of the exchange rate expressed as the home currency (US dollar)
price of German mark. The exchange rate is converted into euros using the euro conversion rates at the time of
origination of the euro in January 1999.  is the interest rate on a riskless one-period deposit or security in the home
                                                                                                         
country (U.S.) and     is the analogous interest rate in Canada.  is the inflation rate in the U.S. and    is the inflation
                                                           
rate in Germany.  is the inflation rate in the U.S. and  is the inflation rate in Canada. The dates along the horizontal
axis mark the beginning of each 10-year sample. The maroon line shows the estimates of the slope coefficient and
navy lines draw the 95% confident intervals for each 10-year sample. The blue shaded areas represent the time periods
in which the estimated slope coefficient is significantly less than zero at the five percent level. The pink areas are
when the estimated coefficient is less than zero, but not significantly so. The green areas are dates in which the
estimated coefficient is greater than zero. The purple areas are times in which the slope coefficient is significantly
greater than zero at the five percent level. The 0 (black dashed line) and 1 (red dashed line) horizontal lines are drawn
for reference. The coefficients and 95% confident intervals are bias-corrected following Boudoukh et al. (2020).




                                                                                                                       98
          Figure 49: 10-year Rolling Medium-Run Regression, Inflation as Regressor: FRF




Notes: This figure presents the estimates of the slope coefficient ( ) and 95% confident intervals using 10-year
rolling regression of equation (7), 12                                                       
                                        =1 ++1 - + + + - + =  +  ( -  ) +  , using French franc
                                                                                                   

(FRF) data during 1979:06-2020:09.  is the log of the exchange rate expressed as the home currency (US dollar)
price of French franc. The exchange rate is converted into euros using the euro conversion rates at the time of
origination of the euro in January 1999.  is the interest rate on a riskless one-period deposit or security in the home
                                                                                                         
country (U.S.) and     is the analogous interest rate in France.  is the inflation rate in the U.S. and    is the inflation
                                                          
rate in France.  is the inflation rate in the U.S. and  is the inflation rate in Canada. The dates along the horizontal
axis mark the beginning of each 10-year sample. The maroon line shows the estimates of the slope coefficient and
navy lines draw the 95% confident intervals for each 10-year sample. The blue shaded areas represent the time periods
in which the estimated slope coefficient is significantly less than zero at the five percent level. The pink areas are
when the estimated coefficient is less than zero, but not significantly so. The green areas are dates in which the
estimated coefficient is greater than zero. The purple areas are times in which the slope coefficient is significantly
greater than zero at the five percent level. The 0 (black dashed line) and 1 (red dashed line) horizontal lines are drawn
for reference. The coefficients and 95% confident intervals are bias-corrected following Boudoukh et al. (2020).




                                                                                                                       99
         Figure 50: 10-year Rolling Medium-Run Regression, Inflation as Regressor: GBP




Notes: This figure presents the estimates of the slope coefficient ( ) and 95% confident intervals using 10-year
rolling regression of equation (7), 12                                                       
                                       =1 ++1 - + + + - + =  +  ( -  ) +  , using British pound
                                                                                                    

(GBP) data during 1979:06-2020:09.  is the log of the exchange rate expressed as the home currency (US dollar)
price of British pound.  is the interest rate on a riskless one-period deposit or security in the home country (U.S.)
                                                                                           
and    is the analogous interest rate in the UK.  is the inflation rate in the U.S. and     is the inflation rate in Canada.
The dates along the horizontal axis mark the beginning of each 10-year sample. The maroon line shows the estimates
of the slope coefficient and navy lines draw the 95% confident intervals for each 10-year sample. The blue shaded
areas represent the time periods in which the estimated slope coefficient is significantly less than zero at the five
percent level. The pink areas are when the estimated coefficient is less than zero, but not significantly so. The green
areas are dates in which the estimated coefficient is greater than zero. The purple areas are times in which the slope
coefficient is significantly greater than zero at the five percent level. The 0 (black dashed line) and 1 (red dashed line)
horizontal lines are drawn for reference. The coefficients and 95% confident intervals are bias-corrected following
Boudoukh et al. (2020).




                                                                                                                       100
          Figure 51: 10-year Rolling Medium-Run Regression, Inflation as Regressor: ITL




Notes: This figure presents the estimates of the slope coefficient ( ) and 95% confident intervals using 10-year
rolling regression of equation (7), 12                                                            
                                       =1 ++1 - + + + - + =  +  ( -  ) +  , using Italian lira data
during 1979:06-2020:09.  is the log of the exchange rate expressed as the home currency (US dollar) price of Italian
lira. The exchange rate is converted into euros using the euro conversion rates at the time of origination of the euro in
                                                                                                                         
January 1999.  is the interest rate on a riskless one-period deposit or security in the home country (U.S.) and           is
the analogous interest rate in Italy. The dates along the horizontal axis mark the beginning of each 10-year sample.
The maroon line shows the estimates of the slope coefficient and navy lines draw the 95% confident intervals for each
10-year sample. The blue shaded areas represent the time periods in which the estimated slope coefficient is
significantly less than zero at the five percent level. The pink areas are when the estimated coefficient is less than zero,
but not significantly so. The green areas are dates in which the estimated coefficient is greater than zero. The purple
areas are times in which the slope coefficient is significantly greater than zero at the five percent level. The 0 (black
dashed line) and 1 (red dashed line) horizontal lines are drawn for reference. The coefficients and 95% confident
intervals are bias-corrected following Boudoukh et al. (2020).




                                                                                                                       101
          Figure 52: 10-year Rolling Medium-Run Regression, Inflation as Regressor: JPY




Notes: This figure presents the estimates of the slope coefficient ( ) and 95% confident intervals using 10-year
rolling regression of equation (7), 12                                                      
                                        =1 ++1 - + + + - + =  +  ( -  ) +  , using Japanese yen
                                                                                                   

(JPY) data during 1979:06-2020:09.  is the log of the exchange rate expressed as the home currency (US dollar)
price of Japanese yen.  is the interest rate on a riskless one-period deposit or security in the home country (U.S.) and
 
   is the analogous interest rate in Japan. The dates along the horizontal axis mark the beginning of each 10-year
sample. The maroon line shows the estimates of the slope coefficient and navy lines draw the 95% confident intervals
for each 10-year sample. The blue shaded areas represent the time periods in which the estimated slope coefficient is
significantly less than zero at the five percent level. The pink areas are when the estimated coefficient is less than zero,
but not significantly so. The green areas are dates in which the estimated coefficient is greater than zero. The purple
areas are times in which the slope coefficient is significantly greater than zero at the five percent level. The 0 (black
dashed line) and 1 (red dashed line) horizontal lines are drawn for reference. The coefficients and 95% confident
intervals are bias-corrected following Boudoukh et al. (2020).




                                                                                                                       102
         Figure 53: 10-year Rolling Medium-Run Regression, Inflation as Regressor: NOK




Notes: This figure presents the estimates of the slope coefficient ( ) and 95% confident intervals using 10-year
rolling regression of equation (7), 12                          
                                         =1 ++1 - + + + - + =  +  ( -  ) +  , using Norwegian
                                                                                                       

krone (NOK) data during 1979:06-2020:09.  is the log of the exchange rate expressed as the home currency (US
dollar) price of Norwegian krone.  is the interest rate on a riskless one-period deposit or security in the home country
                                                                                                    
(U.S.) and     is the analogous interest rate in Norway.  is the inflation rate in the U.S. and       is the inflation rate in
Norway. The dates along the horizontal axis mark the beginning of each 10-year sample. The maroon line shows the
estimates of the slope coefficient and navy lines draw the 95% confident intervals for each 10-year sample. The blue
shaded areas represent the time periods in which the estimated slope coefficient is significantly less than zero at the
five percent level. The pink areas are when the estimated coefficient is less than zero, but not significantly so. The
green areas are dates in which the estimated coefficient is greater than zero. The purple areas are times in which the
slope coefficient is significantly greater than zero at the five percent level. The 0 (black dashed line) and 1 (red dashed
line) horizontal lines are drawn for reference. The coefficients and 95% confident intervals are bias-corrected
following Boudoukh et al. (2020).




                                                                                                                         103
         Figure 54: 10-year Rolling Medium-Run Regression, Inflation as Regressor: SEK




Notes: This figure presents the estimates of the slope coefficient ( ) and 95% confident intervals using 10-year
rolling regression of equation (7), 12                                                      
                                       =1 ++1 - + + + - + =  +  ( -  ) +  , using Swedish krona
                                                                                                    

(SEK) data during 1979:06-2020:09.  is the log of the exchange rate expressed as the home currency (US dollar)
price of Swedish krona.  is the interest rate on a riskless one-period deposit or security in the home country (U.S.)
                                                                                           
and    is the analogous interest rate in Sweden.  is the inflation rate in the U.S. and     is the inflation rate in Sweden.
The dates along the horizontal axis mark the beginning of each 10-year sample. The maroon line shows the estimates
of the slope coefficient and navy lines draw the 95% confident intervals for each 10-year sample. The blue shaded
areas represent the time periods in which the estimated slope coefficient is significantly less than zero at the five
percent level. The pink areas are when the estimated coefficient is less than zero, but not significantly so. The green
areas are dates in which the estimated coefficient is greater than zero. The purple areas are times in which the slope
coefficient is significantly greater than zero at the five percent level. The 0 (black dashed line) and 1 (red dashed line)
horizontal lines are drawn for reference. The coefficients and 95% confident intervals are bias-corrected following
Boudoukh et al. (2020).




                                                                                                                       104
            Figure 55: Reaction of Exchange Rate to Inflation Differential: CAD




Notes: This figure presents the estimates of the slope coefficient (k ) and 95% confident intervals from equation (10),
+ - -1 =  + k (t -                           
                              t - (t-1 - t-1 )) + + , k = 0, 1, 2, ..., 30. The upper figure corresponds to sample
period 1987:01-2006:12 and the lower figure corresponds to 2007:01-2020:07.




                                                                                                                  105
            Figure 56: Reaction of Exchange Rate to Inflation Differential: CHF




Notes: This figure presents the estimates of the slope coefficient (k ) and 95% confident intervals from equation (10),
+ - -1 =  + k (t -                           
                              t - (t-1 - t-1 )) + + , k = 0, 1, 2, ..., 30. The upper figure corresponds to sample
period 1987:01-2006:12 and the lower figure corresponds to 2007:01-2020:07.




                                                                                                                  106
           Figure 57: Reaction of Exchange Rate to Inflation Differential: DEM




Notes: This figure presents the estimates of the slope coefficient (k ) and 95% confident intervals from equation (10),
+ - -1 =  + k (t -                           
                              t - (t-1 - t-1 )) + + , k = 0, 1, 2, ..., 30. The upper figure corresponds to sample
period 1987:01-2006:12 and the lower figure corresponds to 2007:01-2020:07.




                                                                                                                  107
            Figure 58: Reaction of Exchange Rate to Inflation Differential: FRF




Notes: This figure presents the estimates of the slope coefficient (k ) and 95% confident intervals from equation (10),
+ - -1 =  + k (t -                           
                              t - (t-1 - t-1 )) + + , k = 0, 1, 2, ..., 30. The upper figure corresponds to sample
period 1987:01-2006:12 and the lower figure corresponds to 2007:01-2020:07.




                                                                                                                  108
            Figure 59: Reaction of Exchange Rate to Inflation Differential: GBP




Notes: This figure presents the estimates of the slope coefficient (k ) and 95% confident intervals from equation (10),
+ - -1 =  + k (t -                           
                              t - (t-1 - t-1 )) + + , k = 0, 1, 2, ..., 30. The upper figure corresponds to sample
period 1987:01-2006:12 and the lower figure corresponds to 2007:01-2020:07.




                                                                                                                  109
             Figure 60: Reaction of Exchange Rate to Inflation Differential: ITL




Notes: This figure presents the estimates of the slope coefficient (k ) and 95% confident intervals from equation (10),
+ - -1 =  + k (t -                           
                              t - (t-1 - t-1 )) + + , k = 0, 1, 2, ..., 30. The upper figure corresponds to sample
period 1987:01-2006:12 and the lower figure corresponds to 2007:01-2020:07.




                                                                                                                  110
            Figure 61: Reaction of Exchange Rate to Inflation Differential: JPY




Notes: This figure presents the estimates of the slope coefficient (k ) and 95% confident intervals from equation (10),
+ - -1 =  + k (t -                           
                              t - (t-1 - t-1 )) + + , k = 0, 1, 2, ..., 30. The upper figure corresponds to sample
period 1987:01-2006:12 and the lower figure corresponds to 2007:01-2020:07.




                                                                                                                  111
            Figure 62: Reaction of Exchange Rate to Inflation Differential: NOK




Notes: This figure presents the estimates of the slope coefficient (k ) and 95% confident intervals from equation (10),
+ - -1 =  + k (t -                           
                              t - (t-1 - t-1 )) + + , k = 0, 1, 2, ..., 30. The upper figure corresponds to sample
period 1987:01-2006:12 and the lower figure corresponds to 2007:01-2020:07.




                                                                                                                  112
            Figure 63: Reaction of Exchange Rate to Inflation Differential: SEK




Notes: This figure presents the estimates of the slope coefficient (k ) and 95% confident intervals from equation (10),
+ - -1 =  + k (t -                           
                              t - (t-1 - t-1 )) + + , k = 0, 1, 2, ..., 30. The upper figure corresponds to sample
period 1987:01-2006:12 and the lower figure corresponds to 2007:01-2020:07.




                                                                                                                  113
Appendix A1: Data source
                                  Table A1: Data source, exchange rates
  Currency                Data                         Time                      Source          Specific ticker
                                                1989/01-1998/12                  FRED              EXUSAL
    AUD           1989/01-2020/09
                                                1999/01-2020/09               DataStream           AUSTDO$
                                                1979/06-1998/12               DataStream           CNDOLL$
    CAD           1979/06-2020/09
                                                1999/01-2020/09               DataStream           CNDOLL$
                                                1979/06-1979/12               DataStream           SWISSF$
                                                1989/01-1989/12                  FRED               EXSZUS
     CHF          1979/06-2020/09
                                                1999/01-2017/11               DataStream           SWISSF$
                                                2017/12-2020/09                  FRED               EXSZUS
                                                1979/06-2017/11              DataStream*           USEURSP
    DEM           1979/06-2020/09
                                                2017/12-2020/02                 FRED*              EXUSEU
                  1979/06-2020/09               1979/06-2017/11             DataStream**           USEURSP
     FRF
                                                2017/12-2020/02                FRED**              EXUSEU
                  1979/06-2020/09               1979/06-2017/11               DataStream          USDOLLR
     GBP
                                                2017/12-2020/02                  FRED              EXUSUK
                                                1979/06-2017/11             DataStream***          USEURSP
     ITL          1979/06-2020/09
                                                2017/12-2020/02                FRED***             EXUSEU
                                                1979/06-2017/11               DataStream           JAPAYE$
     JPY          1979/06-2020/09
                                                2017/12-2020/02                  FRED               EXJPUS
                                                1986/01-1998/12                  FRED              EXNOUS
    NOK           1986/01-2020/09
                                                1999/01-2017/11               DataStream          NORKRO$
    NZD           1997/04-2020/09               1997/04-2020/09               DataStream           NZDOLL$
                                                1987/01-1998/12                  FRED               EXSDUS
     SEK          1987/01-2020/09               1999/01-2017/11               DataStream          SWEKRO$
                                                2017/12-2020/09                  FRED               EXSDUS

Notes: *, **, *** Exchange rates of the German mark, French francs, and Italian lira are converted into euros using
the euro conversion rates at the time of origination of the euro in January 1999, which are 1.95583 German mark for
1 euro, 6.55957 French francs for 1 euro, and 1,936.27 Italian lira for 1 euro. These conversion rates are from
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Enlargement_of_the_eurozone#Convergence_criteria.


                                                                                                               114
                                Table A2: Data source, 1M LIBOR rates
     Currency                 Data                   Time                 Source            Specific ticker
                                              1989/01-1998/12             FRED            AUD1MTD156N
        AUD            1989/01-2020/09
                                              1999/01-2020/09          DataStream             ECAUD1M
        CAD            1979/06-2020/09 1979/06-2020/09                 DataStream             ECCAD1M
        CHF            1979/06-2020/09 1979/06-2020/09                 DataStream             ECSWF1M
                                              1979/06-2017/11         DataStream*             ECEUR1M
       DEM             1979/06-2020/09
                                              2017/12-2020/02            FRED*             EUR1MTD156N
                                              1979/06-2017/11         DataStream*             ECEUR1M
        FRF            1979/06-2020/09
                                              2017/12-2020/02            FRED*             GBP1MTD156N
                                              1979/06-2017/11          DataStream             ECUKP1M
        GBP            1979/06-2020/09
                                              2017/12-2020/02             FRED             EUR1MTD156N
                                              1979/06-2017/11         DataStream*             ECEUR1M
        ITL            1979/06-2020/09
                                              2017/12-2020/02            FRED*             EUR1MTD156N
                                              1979/06-2017/11          DataStream             EUJPY1M
        JPY            1979/06-2020/09
                                              2017/12-2020/02             FRED             JPY1MTD156N
                                              1986/01-1998/12          Bloomberg          NIBOR1M Index
        NOK            1986/01-2020/09
                                              1999/01-2017/11          DataStream             ECNOR1M
        NZD            1997/04-2020/09 1997/04-2020/09                 DataStream             ECNZD1M
                                              1987/01-1989/12          Bloomberg           SK0001M Index
        SEK            1987/01-2020/09
                                              1999/01-2020/09          DataStream             ECSWE1M
                                              1979/06-2017/11          DataStream             ECUSD1M
        USD            1979/06-2020/09
                                              2017/12-2020/02             FRED             USD1MTD156N
Notes: * use EUR 1M LIBOR rate. Monthly data uses the last data-available day of each month from the daily data.




                                                                                                            115
              Table A3: Data source, consumption price index
Currency        Data              Source                 Specific ticker
 CAD       1979/06-2020/09        FRED               CANCPIALLMINMEI
 CHF       1979/06-2020/09        FRED               CHECPIALLMINMEI
 DEM       1979/06-2020/09        FRED               DEUCPIALLMINMEI
  FRF      1979/06-2020/09        FRED               FRACPIALLMINMEI
 GBP       1979/06-2020/09        FRED               GBRCPIALLMINMEI
  ITL      1979/06-2020/09        FRED                ITACPIALLMINMEI
  JPY      1979/06-2020/09        FRED                JPNCPIALLMINMEI
 NOK       1986/01-2020/09        FRED               NORCPIALLMINMEI
 SEK       1987/01-2020/09        FRED               SWECPIALLMINMEI
 USD       1979/06-2020/09        FRED               USACPIALLMINMEI




                                                                           116
                                           Supplemental Appendix to
"A Reconsideration of the Failure of Uncovered Interest Parity for the U.S. Dollar"
         by Charles Engel, Ekaterina Kazakova, Mengqi Wang, and Nan Xiang




                                                     Table S.1
                         Slope Coefficient Estimates from Equation (9), full sample
 Currency         Time         # of Obs.      1          95% CI         p-value1    2           95% CI          p-value2
   CAD      1979/06-2020/09      482        -1.657   (-2.826, -0.487)    0.01      -0.099   (-0.226, 0.0286)     0.13
   CHF      1979/06-2020/09      482        -2.177   (-3.646, -0.708)    < 0.01    -0.194   (-0.414, 0.0264)     0.09
   DEM      1979/06-2020/09      482        -1.078   (-2.751, 0.596)     0.21      -0.242   (-0.447, -0.0365)    0.02
   FRF      1979/06-2020/09      482        -1.500   (-3.053, 0.0540)    0.06      0.090    (-0.0877, 0.268)     0.32
   GBP      1979/06-2020/09      482        -2.583   (-4.385, -0.781)    0.01      -0.075   (-0.276, 0.125)      0.46
   ITL      1979/06-2020/09      482        -0.922   (-2.448, 0.605)     0.24      0.058    (-0.0962, 0.211)     0.46
   JPY      1979/06-2020/09      482        -2.542   (-4.267, -0.817)    < 0.01    0.054    (-0.182, 0.290)      0.65
   NOK      1986/01-2020/09      415        -0.351   (-2.106, 1.404)     0.70      -0.125   (-0.310, 0.0590)     0.18
   SEK      1987/01-2020/09      403         0.774   (-1.265, 2.813)     0.46      -0.288   (-0.530, -0.0463)    0.02


                                                                                                           )
Notes: This table reports the slope coefficient estimates (1 , 2 ) from equation (9), +1 -  - ( -             =  +
          )               
1 ( -        + 2 ( -       ) + +1 , based on the full sample (the longest covers 1979:06-2020:09) for each currency,
including Canadian dollar (CAD), Swiss franc (CHF), German mark (DEM), French franc (FRF), British pound
(GBP), Italian lira (ITL), Japanese yen (JPY), Norwegian krone (NOK), and Swedish krona (SEK). The exchange
rates are against US dollar, and  is the log of the exchange rate expressed as the home currency (dollars) price of
foreign currency. Exchange rates of the mark, French franc and lira are converted into euros using the euro
conversion rates at the time of origination of the euro in January 1999.  is the interest rate on a riskless one-period
                                                      
deposit or security in the home country (U.S.) and      is the analogous interest rate in the foreign country.  is the
                                
inflation rate in the U.S. and  is the inflation rate in the foreign country. Sample dates vary across currencies,
especially for NOK and SEK, as shown in the Time column, due to the data availability of interest rates. The two CI
column reports the 95% confidence intervals of the slope coefficients, with the bias-corrected standard errors
derived by Amihud and Hurvich (2004). The two -value columns report the -values of the two-sided -test for the
slope coefficient 0 : 1 = 0, and 0 : 2 = 0, respectively.




                                                                                                                    117
                                                        Table S.2
               Slope Coefficient Estimates from Equation (9), longest common sample
                                                     1987:01-2020:09
 Currency         Time         # of Obs.      1            95% CI         p-value1    2           95% CI          p-value2
   CAD      1987/01-2020/09       403       -1.230     (-2.661, 0.200)      0.09     -0.287   (-0.542, -0.0325)    0.03
   CHF      1987/01-2020/09       403       -1.644     (-4.144, 0.857)      0.20     -0.200   (-0.631, 0.230)      0.36
   DEM      1987/01-2020/09       403       -0.039     (-2.167, 2.088)      0.97     -0.358   (-0.664, -0.0518)    0.02
   FRF      1987/01-2020/09       403       -0.795     (-2.595, 1.006)      0.39     -0.786   (-1.196, -0.375)     < 0.01
   GBP      1987/01-2020/09       403       -0.278     (-2.505, 1.948)      0.81     -0.277   (-0.530, -0.0248)    0.03
   ITL      1987/01-2020/09       403       2.858      (0.181, 5.534)       0.04     -0.811   (-1.212, -0.410)     < 0.01
   JPY      1987/01-2020/09       403       -2.324     (-4.405, -0.242)     0.03     0.110    (-0.138, 0.359)      0.39
   NOK      1987/01-2020/09       403       -0.309     (-2.074, 1.455)      0.73     -0.118   (-0.302, 0.0673)     0.21
   SEK      1987/01-2020/09       403       0.774      (-1.265, 2.813)      0.46     -0.288   (-0.530, -0.0463)    0.02

                                                                                                                )
Notes: This table reports the slope coefficient estimates (1 , 2 ) from equation (9), +1 -  - ( -                  =  +
                          
1 ( -  ) + 2 ( -  ) + +1 , based on the longest common sample (1987:01-2020:09) of the currencies,
including Canadian dollar (CAD), Swiss franc (CHF), German mark (DEM), French franc (FRF), British pound
(GBP), Italian lira (ITL), Japanese yen (JPY), Norwegian krone (NOK), and Swedish krona (SEK). The exchange
rates are against US dollar, and  is the log of the exchange rate expressed as the home currency (dollars) price of
foreign currency. Exchange rates of the mark, French franc and lira are converted into euros using the euro conversion
rates at the time of origination of the euro in January 1999.  is the interest rate on a riskless one-period deposit or
                                           
security in the home country (U.S.) and      is the analogous interest rate in the foreign country.  is the inflation rate
                  
in the U.S. and  is the inflation rate in the foreign country. The two CI column reports the 95% confidence intervals
of the slope coefficients, with the bias-corrected standard errors derived by Amihud and Hurvich (2004). The two -
value columns report the -value of the two-sided -test for the slope coefficient 0: 1 = 0, and 0 : 2 = 0,
respectively.




                                                                                                                      118
                                                        Table S.3
                    Slope Coefficient Estimates from Equation (9), pre-GFC sample
                                                     1987:01-2006:12
 Currency         Time         # of Obs.      1            95% CI         p-value1    2           95% CI          p-value2
   CAD      1987/01-2006/12       240       -1.569     (-2.774, -0.363)     0.01     -0.223   (-0.423, -0.0231)    0.03
   CHF      1987/01-2006/12       240       -3.412     (-6.586, -0.238)     0.04     0.152    (-0.389, 0.693)      0.58
   DEM      1987/01-2006/12       240       -1.124     (-3.986, 1.739)      0.44     -0.153   (-0.575, 0.270)      0.48
   FRF      1987/01-2006/12       240       -0.702     (-2.842, 1.438)      0.52     -0.855   (-1.335, -0.375)     < 0.01
   GBP      1987/01-2006/12       240       1.044      (-2.967, 5.056)      0.61     -0.353   (-0.788, 0.0828)     0.11
   ITL      1987/01-2006/12       240       2.976      (-0.625, 6.577)      0.11     -0.893   (-1.493, -0.293)     < 0.01
   JPY      1987/01-2006/12       240       -3.426     (-5.916, -0.937)     0.01     -0.014   (-0.451, 0.423)      0.95
   NOK      1987/01-2006/12       240       -0.376     (-2.603, 1.852)      0.74     -0.095   (-0.342, 0.153)      0.45
   SEK      1987/01-2006/12       240       1.082      (-1.428, 3.593)      0.40     -0.272   (-0.559, 0.0153)     0.06


                                                                                                                 )
Notes: This table reports the slope coefficient estimates (1 , 2 ) from equation (9), +1 -  - ( -                   =  +
                          
1 ( -  ) + 2 ( -  ) + +1 , based on the pre-Global Financial Crisis (GFC) common-sample period (1987:01-
2006:12) for each currency, including Canadian dollar (CAD), Swiss franc (CHF), German mark (DEM), French franc
(FRF), British pound (GBP), Italian lira (ITL), Japanese yen (JPY), Norwegian krone (NOK), and Swedish krona
(SEK). The exchange rates are against US dollar, and  is the log of the exchange rate expressed as the home currency
(dollars) price of foreign currency. Exchange rates of the mark, French franc and lira are converted into euros using
the euro conversion rates at the time of origination of the euro in January 1999.  is the interest rate on a riskless one-
                                                             
period deposit or security in the home country (U.S.) and      is the analogous interest rate in the foreign country.  is
                                    
the inflation rate in the U.S. and  is the inflation rate in the foreign country. The two CI column reports the 95%
confidence intervals of the slope coefficients, with the bias-corrected standard errors derived by Amihud and Hurvich
(2004). The two -value columns report the -values of the two-sided -test for the slope coefficient 0: 1 = 0, and
0: 2 = 0, respectively.




                                                                                                                      119
                                                        Table S.4
                  Slope Coefficient Estimates from Equation (9), post-2007:01 sample
                                                     2007:01-2020:09
 Currency         Time          # of Obs.     1           95% CI         p-value1    2            95% CI          p-value2
   CAD       2007/01-2020/09      163        3.418     (-6.609, 13.44)    0.51      -0.477    (-1.159, 0.206)      0.17
   CHF       2007/01-2020/09      163        0.160     (-4.067, 4.386)    0.94      -0.534    (-1.333, 0.264)      0.19
   DEM       2007/01-2020/09      163        0.513     (-4.020, 5.047)    0.83      -1.052    (-1.727, -0.378)     < 0.01
   FRF       2007/01-2020/09      163        1.542     (-2.873, 5.956)    0.50      -0.945    (-1.696, -0.195)     0.01
   GBP       2007/01-2020/09      163        3.071     (-2.092, 8.235)    0.25      -0.550    (-1.022, -0.0788)    0.02
   ITL       2007/01-2020/09      163        3.941     (-0.506, 8.388)    0.08      -0.754    (-1.291, -0.217)     0.01
   JPY       2007/01-2020/09      163        2.482     (-1.273, 6.238)    0.20      0.150     (-0.145, 0.446)      0.32
   NOK       2007/01-2020/09      163        2.154     (-2.669, 6.978)    0.38      -0.183    (-0.509, 0.143)      0.27
   SEK       2007/01-2020/09      163       -0.887     (-5.134, 3.359)    0.68      -0.721    (-1.425, -0.0171)    0.05


                                                                                                                   )
Notes: This table reports the slope coefficient estimates (1 , 2 ) from equation (9), +1 -  - ( -                    =  +
                           
1 ( -  ) + 2 ( -  ) + +1 , based on the 2007:01-2020:09 period for each currency, including Canadian dollar
(CAD), Swiss franc (CHF), German mark (DEM), French franc (FRF), British pound (GBP), Italian lira (ITL),
Japanese yen (JPY), Norwegian krone (NOK), and Swedish krona (SEK). The exchange rates are against US dollar,
and  is the log of the exchange rate expressed as the home currency (dollars) price of foreign currency. Exchange
rates of the mark, French franc and lira are converted into euros using the euro conversion rates at the time of
origination of the euro in January 1999, so during this time period, DEM, FRF, and ITL have the exactly same results.
                                                                                                         
 is the interest rate on a riskless one-period deposit or security in the home country (U.S.) and          is the analogous
                                                                             
interest rate in the foreign country.  is the inflation rate in the U.S. and  is the inflation rate in the foreign country.
The two CI column reports the 95% confidence intervals of the slope coefficients, with the bias-corrected standard
errors derived by Amihud and Hurvich (2004). The two -value columns report the -values of the two-sided -test
for the slope coefficient 0 : 1 = 0, and 0 : 2 = 0, respectively.




                                                                                                                      120
                                                     Table S.5
                 Slope Coefficient Estimates from Equation (9), restricted, full sample
                    Currency         Time         # of Obs.      1           95% CI        p-value
                      CAD       1980/06-2020/07      482       0.126      (-0.002,0.254)    0.05
                      CHF       1980/06-2020/07      482       0.326      (0.098,0.555)     0.01
                      DEM       1980/06-2020/07      482       0.333      (0.128,0.537)    < 0.01
                      FRF       1980/06-2020/07      482       -0.030     (-0.203,0.143)    0.73
                      GBP       1980/06-2020/07      482       0.155      (-0.051,0.361)    0.14
                       ITL      1980/06-2020/07      482       0.013      (-0.082,0.108)    0.79
                       JPY      1980/06-2020/07      482       0.083      (-0.135,0.302)    0.46
                      NOK       1986/01-2020/07      415       0.135      (-0.031,0.301)    0.11
                      SEK       1987/01-2020/07      403       0.254      (0.059,0.449)     0.01


                                                                                                       )
Notes: This table reports the slope coefficient estimates 1 from equation (9), +1 -  - ( -                =  +
           )             
1 (( -  - ( -  )) + +1, based on the full sample (the longest covers 1979:06-2020:09) for each currency,
including Canadian dollar (CAD), Swiss franc (CHF), German mark (DEM), French franc (FRF), British pound
(GBP), Italian lira (ITL), Japanese yen (JPY), Norwegian krone (NOK), and Swedish krona (SEK). The exchange
rates are against US dollar, and  is the log of the exchange rate expressed as the home currency (dollars) price of
foreign currency. Exchange rates of the mark, French franc and lira are converted into euros using the euro
conversion rates at the time of origination of the euro in January 1999.  is the interest rate on a riskless one-period
                                                       
deposit or security in the home country (U.S.) and       is the analogous interest rate in the foreign country.  is the
                                
inflation rate in the U.S. and   is the inflation rate in the foreign country. Sample dates vary across currencies,
especially for NOK and SEK, as shown in the Time column, due to the data availability of interest rates. The two CI
column reports the 95% confidence intervals of the slope coefficients, with the bias-corrected standard errors
derived by Amihud and Hurvich (2004). The -value column reports the -value of the two-sided -test for the slope
coefficient 0 : 1 = 0.




                                                                                                                  121
                                                      Table S.6
         Slope Coefficient Estimates from Equation (9), restricted, longest common sample
                                                   1987:01-2020:09
                      Currency         Time         # of Obs.     1          95% CI         p-value
                        CAD      1987/01-2020/07       403       0.302    (0.046,0.558)      0.02
                        CHF      1987/01-2020/07       403       0.354    (-0.030,0.738)     0.07
                        DEM      1987/01-2020/07       403       0.386    (0.100,0.672)      0.01
                        FRF      1987/01-2020/07       403       0.732    (0.319,1.145)     < 0.01
                        GBP      1987/01-2020/07       403       0.293    (0.048,0.539)      0.02
                        ITL      1987/01-2020/07       403       0.508    (0.257,0.758)     < 0.01
                        JPY      1987/01-2020/07       403      -0.021    (-0.251,0.210)     0.86
                        NOK      1987/01-2020/07       403       0.111    (-0.065,0.287)     0.22
                        SEK      1987/01-2020/07       403       0.254    (0.059,0.449)      0.01


                                                                                                                )
Notes: This table reports the slope coefficient estimates 1 from equation (9), +1 -  - ( -                         =  +
           )            
1 (( -  - ( -  )) + +1, based on the longest common sample (1987:01-2020:09) of the currencies,
including Canadian dollar (CAD), Swiss franc (CHF), German mark (DEM), French franc (FRF), British pound
(GBP), Italian lira (ITL), Japanese yen (JPY), Norwegian krone (NOK), and Swedish krona (SEK). The exchange
rates are against US dollar, and  is the log of the exchange rate expressed as the home currency (dollars) price of
foreign currency. Exchange rates of the mark, French franc and lira are converted into euros using the euro conversion
rates at the time of origination of the euro in January 1999.  is the interest rate on a riskless one-period deposit or
                                           
security in the home country (U.S.) and      is the analogous interest rate in the foreign country.  is the inflation rate
                  
in the U.S. and  is the inflation rate in the foreign country. The two CI column reports the 95% confidence intervals
of the slope coefficients, with the bias-corrected standard errors derived by Amihud and Hurvich (2004). The -value
column reports the -value of the two-sided -test for the slope coefficient 0 : 1 = 0.




                                                                                                                     122
                                                      Table S.7
              Slope Coefficient Estimates from Equation (9), restricted, pre-GFC sample
                                                    1987:01-2006:12
                      Currency         Time         # of Obs.     1          95% CI         p-value
                        CAD      1987/01-2006/12       240       0.267     (0.068,0.466)     0.01
                        CHF      1987/01-2006/12       240       0.302    (-0.142,0.746)     0.18
                        DEM      1987/01-2006/12       240       0.291    (-0.043,0.626)     0.09
                        FRF      1987/01-2006/12       240       0.825     (0.345,1.304)    < 0.01
                        GBP      1987/01-2006/12       240       0.267    (-0.033,0.567)     0.08
                        ITL      1987/01-2006/12       240       0.476     (0.153,0.799)    < 0.01
                        JPY      1987/01-2006/12       240       0.132    (-0.292,0.555)     0.54
                        NOK      1987/01-2006/12       240       0.108    (-0.083,0.300)     0.27
                        SEK      1988/01-2006/12       240       0.208     (0.004,0.412)     0.05


                                                                                                                 )
Notes: This table reports the slope coefficient estimates 1 from equation (9), +1 -  - ( -                          =  +
           )             
1 (( -  - ( -  )) + +1, based on the pre-Global Financial Crisis (GFC) common-sample period (1987:01-
2006:12) for each currency, including Canadian dollar (CAD), Swiss franc (CHF), German mark (DEM), French franc
(FRF), British pound (GBP), Italian lira (ITL), Japanese yen (JPY), Norwegian krone (NOK), and Swedish krona
(SEK). The exchange rates are against US dollar, and  is the log of the exchange rate expressed as the home currency
(dollars) price of foreign currency. Exchange rates of the mark, French franc and lira are converted into euros using
the euro conversion rates at the time of origination of the euro in January 1999.  is the interest rate on a riskless one-
                                                             
period deposit or security in the home country (U.S.) and      is the analogous interest rate in the foreign country.  is
                                    
the inflation rate in the U.S. and  is the inflation rate in the foreign country. The two CI column reports the 95%
confidence intervals of the slope coefficients, with the bias-corrected standard errors derived by Amihud and Hurvich
(2004). The -value column reports the -value of the two-sided -test for the slope coefficient 0 : 1 = 0.




                                                                                                                     123
                                                       Table S.8
           Slope Coefficient Estimates from Equation (9), restricted, post-2007:01 sample
                                                  2007:01-2020:09
                        Currency         Time         # of Obs.     1         95% CI        p-value
                         CAD       2007/01-2020/07       163      0.486    (-0.193,1.165)    0.16
                          CHF      2007/01-2020/07       163      0.534    (-0.263,1.332)    0.19
                         DEM       2007/01-2020/07       163      1.063    (0.422,1.704)    < 0.01
                          FRF      2007/01-2020/07       163      0.929    (0.177,1.681)     0.02
                          GBP      2007/01-2020/07       163      0.565    (0.081,1.050)     0.02
                          ITL      2007/01-2020/07       163      0.651    (0.093,1.209)     0.02
                          JPY      2007/01-2020/07       163      -0.178   (-0.468,0.112)    0.23
                         NOK       2007/01-2020/07       163      0.159    (-0.176,0.494)    0.35
                          SEK      2007/01-2020/07       163      0.624    (0.016,1.232)     0.05


                                                                                                                   )
Notes: This table reports the slope coefficient estimates 1 from equation (9), +1 -  - ( -                           =  +
           )              
1 (( -  - ( -  )) + +1, based on the 2007:01-2020:09 period for each currency, including Canadian dollar
(CAD), Swiss franc (CHF), German mark (DEM), French franc (FRF), British pound (GBP), Italian lira (ITL),
Japanese yen (JPY), Norwegian krone (NOK), and Swedish krona (SEK). The exchange rates are against US dollar,
and  is the log of the exchange rate expressed as the home currency (dollars) price of foreign currency. Exchange
rates of the mark, French franc and lira are converted into euros using the euro conversion rates at the time of
origination of the euro in January 1999, so during this time period, DEM, FRF, and ITL have the exactly same results.
                                                                                                         
 is the interest rate on a riskless one-period deposit or security in the home country (U.S.) and          is the analogous
                                                                             
interest rate in the foreign country.  is the inflation rate in the U.S. and  is the inflation rate in the foreign country.
The two CI column reports the 95% confidence intervals of the slope coefficients, with the bias-corrected standard
errors derived by Amihud and Hurvich (2004). The -value column reports the -value of the two-sided -test for the
slope coefficient 0 : 1 = 0.




                                                                                                                      124
                                        Table S.9
     Slope Coefficient from Long-Run Regression (12), Full Sample for Each Currency,
                                   nonstationary case
                             Transitory Component       UIP measure         Difference
Currency     Time/Obs.           b/95%CI/p-val      b_IP/95%CI/p-val       b/95%CI/p-val
 CAD       1979/06-2020/09            5.925                 -14.949           20.874
                 477             (3.334, 8.516)         (-15.56, -14.34)   (17.68, 24.06)
                                      <0.01                  <0.01             <0.01
  CHF      1979/06-2020/09           14.404                 -19.762           34.166
                 477             (8.853, 19.96)          (-22.53, -17)     (25.85, 42.48)
                                      <0.01                  <0.01             <0.01
 DEM       1979/06-2020/09           26.119                 -38.779           64.898
                 477             (22.23, 30.01)         (-39.72, -37.83)   (60.10, 69.69)
                                      <0.01                  <0.01             <0.01
  FRF      1979/06-2020/09           -16.272                -24.221            7.949
                 477             (-21.33, -11.21)       (-29.12, -19.32)   (7.474, 8.425)
                                      <0.01                  <0.01             <0.01
  GBP      1979/06-2020/09           19.307                 -15.646           34.953
                 477             (18.27, 20.34)         (-16.02, -15.27)   (33.75, 36.16)
                                      <0.01                  <0.01             <0.01
  ITL      1979/06-2020/09           -63.467                -71.952            8.485
                 477             (-73.19, -53.75)       (-83.74, -60.16)   (6.265, 10.71)
                                      <0.01                  <0.01             <0.01
  JPY      1979/06-2020/09           44.431                 -27.279            71.71
                 477             (43.41, 45.45)         (-28.54, -26.01)   (69.46, 73.97)
                                      <0.01                  <0.01             <0.01
 NOK       1986/01-2020/09            9.248                 -53.593           62.841
                 410             (5.800, 12.70)         (-57.06, -50.12)   (56.13, 69.55)
                                      <0.01                  <0.01             <0.01
  SEK      1987/01-2020/09           -26.892                -41.168           14.277
                 398             (-30.94, -22.84)       (-50.73, -31.60)   (0.888, 27.67)
                                      <0.01                  <0.01            0.0373




                                                                                         125
                                                                                   (            
Notes: This table reports the slope coefficient estimates ( ) from      =      +      -  ) +  (Transitory component
                           (      )                                                                                 )    
column),  =  +   -  +  (UIP measure column), and equation (12),  -  =  +  ( -                                         + 
(Difference column), based on the full sample (the longest covers 1979:06-2020:09) for each currency, including
Canadian dollar (CAD), Swiss franc (CHF), German mark (DEM), French franc (FRF), British pound (GBP), Italian
                                                                                               
lira (ITL), Japanese yen (JPY), Norwegian krone (NOK) and Swedish krona (SEK).                   = - lim [ + -  -
                                                                                                       
  
(+1 - )] is the transitory component of the exchange rate from the Beveridge-Nelson decomposition, and                 
                                                                                                                         =
       
- =0(+ - + - (                  
                             -  )) is the value of exchange rate if UIP held. We use a vector autoregression (VAR) to
compute the two measures of exchange rate in the nonstationary case, and adopt the small-sample bias correction from
West (2016), with which we did not encounter the root greater than one problem. The exchange rates are against US
dollar, and  is the log of the exchange rate expressed as the home currency (dollars) price of foreign currency.
Exchange rates of the mark, French franc and lira are converted into euros using the euro conversion rates at the time
of origination of the euro in January 1999.  is the interest rate on a riskless one-period deposit or security in the home
                       
country (U.S.) and       is the analogous interest rate in the foreign country. Sample dates vary across currencies,
especially for NOK and SEK, as shown in the Time column, due to the data availability of interest rates. The CI
column reports the 95% confidence intervals of the slope coefficient. The -value column reports the -value of the
two-sided -test for the slope coefficient 0 :  = 0.




                                                                                                                     126
