                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             TIME AGGREGATION IN HEALTH INSURANCE DEDUCTIBLES

                                            Long Hong
                                         Corina Mommaerts

                                        Working Paper 28430
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w28430


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2021




We thank Naoki Aizawa, Yu Ding, Chenyuan Liu, Ross Milton, John Mullahy, Casey Rothschild,
Daniel Sacks, Justin Sydnor, Nicholas Tilipman, Yulya Truskinovsky, and seminar participants at
the 2019 AEA meetings, the University of Wisconsin - Madison, Wayne State University, and the
University of Arizona for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2021 by Long Hong and Corina Mommaerts. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Time Aggregation in Health Insurance Deductibles
Long Hong and Corina Mommaerts
NBER Working Paper No. 28430
February 2021
JEL No. D15,D81,G22,G52,I13

                                          ABSTRACT

Health insurance plans increasingly pay for expenses only beyond a large annual deductible. This
paper explores the implications of deductibles that reset over shorter timespans. We develop a
model of insurance demand between two actuarially equivalent deductible policies, in which one
deductible is larger and resets annually and the other deductible is smaller and resets biannually.
Our model incorporates borrowing constraints, moral hazard, mid-year contract switching, and
delayable care. Calibrations using claims data show that the liquidity benefits of resetting
deductibles can generate welfare gains of 6-10% of premium costs, particularly for individuals
with borrowing constraints.


Long Hong
University of Wisconsin-Madison
long.hong@wisc.edu

Corina Mommaerts
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin-Madison
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706
and NBER
cmommaerts@wisc.edu
1      Introduction

Health insurance contracts in the United States increasingly include sizable annual de-
ductibles as a form of cost-sharing against health expenditure risk. Unlike other common
forms of cost-sharing, annual deductibles introduce non-linearities in the structure and
timing of out-of-pocket expenditures. Unlike insurance against other risks such as au-
tomobile or homeowners insurance, in which separate deductibles apply to each loss,
deductibles in health insurance apply to cumulative losses over the year. This charac-
teristic of health insurance deductibles, coupled with the fact that most individuals have
many health care encounters over the course of a year, introduces a time aggregation di-
mension whose implications for individual welfare are not well understood.1 While we
know that health care spending is sensitive to non-linearities in health insurance contracts
(Brot-Goldberg et al., 2017; Dalton, Gowrisankaran and Town, 2019) and deductibles can
reduce the value of insurance under liquidity constraints (Ericson and Sydnor, 2018), it
is not obvious how these features interact under alternative time aggregations. This pa-
per provides the first analysis of the spending and welfare impacts of this overlooked
parameter of health insurance design.
     The question of how to design deductibles is particularly relevant as health insurers
increasingly offer high deductible plans. In 2010, only 10% of individuals with single
employer-based health insurance had a plan with a deductible over $2,000, while in 2020
26% of these individuals had such a plan and 24% were offered only high-deductible plans
(Kaiser Family Foundation, 2020). In the individual market, roughly 90% of enrollees had
high deductible plans in 2015 (Dolan, 2016). These deductibles are large and can pose a
significant financial burden on those exposed to health costs: for instance, the average
medical deductible in the 2017 federal marketplace was $3,276 for silver plans (Kaiser
Family Foundation, 2017a), and Rae, Claxton and Levitt (2017) show that only 47% of
single households have enough liquid assets to pay this deductible.2
     To study the effects of alternative time aggregations of deductibles in health insur-
    1 In
       our claims data, individuals have an average of three health care claims per month.
    2 Whilesome individuals qualify for cost-sharing reductions (CSRs), those making over 250% of the
federal poverty line are still subject to the full deductible.



                                                 2
ance policies on individual welfare, we build and calibrate a dynamic model of within-
year health care consumption, non-health care consumption, and insurance choice under
uncertainty. After choosing an insurance policy, risk-averse individuals realize health
shocks over the course of the year and make decisions over health care and non-health
consumption. Importantly, we introduce an alternative "resetting" deductible policy
whose deductible aggregates (and thus resets) over shorter frequencies than the standard
deductible that resets annually. To isolate the effect of time aggregation, we hold con-
stant all other features of the insurance contract (e.g., the premium and actuarial value),
and only vary the time over which the deductible aggregates and--to preserve actuarial
equivalence--the size of the deductible.
    We study two main mechanisms that highlight the trade-offs between a standard (an-
nual) deductible and a resetting deductible. First, resetting deductibles may provide relief
for liquidity constrained individuals, but at the cost of higher risk exposure. Deductibles,
by nature, front-load out-of-pocket spending toward the beginning of a deductible pe-
riod, which suggests that individuals who face high borrowing costs may have difficulty
smoothing consumption while financing this lumpy spending. Resetting deductibles, by
virtue of being smaller in size, provide built-in smoothing. On the other hand, they ex-
pose individuals to higher cumulative out-of-pocket exposure due to the fact that they
reset and thus might have to be paid more frequently over the course of a year.3 Which
deductible provides more welfare gain thus depends in part on the value of liquidity
versus risk protection.
    Second, the frequency over which deductibles reset could interact with moral haz-
ard. We investigate two types of moral hazard: ex-post moral hazard and timing moral
hazard (i.e., claim delay). If individuals "over-consume" medical care once their health
spending surpasses their deductible, all else equal a policy whose deductible resets more
frequently could significantly curb ex-post moral hazard. However, again by virtue of
being smaller in size, resetting deductibles are more likely to be surpassed than more
aggregated, larger deductibles; this could exacerbate moral hazard. Moreover, to the ex-
   3 As we will show, actuarially-equivalent biannual deductibles will typically be greater than half the size

of annual deductibles, resulting in higher annual out-of-pocket risk exposure.



                                                      3
tent that individuals are able to strategically delay care and shift medical costs to times
with low out-of-pocket exposure, resetting deductibles might exacerbate timing moral
hazard. The overall impact of resetting deductibles on moral hazard (and, as a conse-
quence, welfare) is therefore ambiguous, and ultimately an empirical question. In sum,
less-aggregated deductibles may provide welfare gains or losses, depending on the extent
of liquidity constraints, risk preferences, moral hazard, and incentives to shift spending
over time.
   To quantify these mechanisms and others,4 we use health care claims data from over
16 million individuals in the 2013 Truven Marketscan database and calibrate our model
using benchmark figures from the federal Affordable Care Act marketplace and other
standard parameters in the literature. We use the calibrated model to quantify an indi-
vidual's willingness to pay to switch from an annual insurance policy with a year-long
deductible to an actuarially equivalent annual policy with a deductible that resets at a
shorter frequency (e.g., after six months).
   Our calibration generates three main results. First, we find that borrowing costs have
a first-order effect on the value of a resetting deductible policy. At one extreme in which
individuals can costlessly save and borrow, individuals slightly prefer the standard (year-
long) deductible policy, as it provides better insurance against right-tail events in multiple
periods. At the other extreme in which individuals can neither borrow nor save, individu-
als strongly prefer the resetting policy: at the calibrated parameter values, they are willing
to pay an extra $270 annually, or 6.3% of their total premiums, for the resetting deductible
policy instead of the standard deductible policy.5 Second, we find that extra medical con-
sumption generated by ex-post moral hazard is similar under the two policies for our
empirical distribution. Despite this, the presence of moral hazard amplifies the liquidity
benefits of resetting deductibles because moral hazard drives up deductibles; given this,
liquidity constrained individuals would be willing to pay an extra $448 annually, or 10.4%
of their total premiums. Third, we find that mid-year contract switching and delayability
   4 We  additionally explore the role of exogenous mid-year insurance contract switches (e.g., due to job
changes).
   5 We also show that there are welfare gains to resetting deductibles for individuals who must rely on

credit card interest rates and payday loan rates, which may more closely resemble loans or payment plans
offered to pay medical expenses.


                                                    4
of care for health shocks have much smaller effects on the willingness to pay for a reset-
ting deductible. We also show that our main results are qualitatively similar under health
shock distributions with different levels of persistence, shorter period lengths, and poli-
cies that additionally have coinsurance arms. Overall, our results suggest that the value
of a resetting deductible policy depends in large part on the classic trade-off between risk
protection, liquidity, and moral hazard.
    This paper contributes to several distinct literatures. First, our modeling approach of
within-year health spending is motivated by a growing empirical literature on consumer
sensitivity to the non-linearity of health insurance contracts. Much of the recent literature
has found that individuals respond to "spot" prices more so than expected end-of-year
prices (Brot-Goldberg et al., 2017; Dalton, Gowrisankaran and Town, 2019; Abaluck, Gru-
ber and Swanson, 2018; Guo and Zhang, 2019), though not all have come to that conclu-
sion (Aron-Dine et al., 2015; Einav, Finkelstein and Schrimpf, 2015). At the same time,
other work shows evidence of intertemporal substitution for deferrable care (e.g., Cabral
(2017) for dental care and Lin and Sacks (2019) in the RAND Health Insurance Experi-
ment). While much of this literature has examined the effect of traditional cost-sharing
levers such as coinsurance rates or the size of deductibles, there has not been any work to
date on how the time aggregation of deductibles affects spending.
    Our paper also contributes to a literature on optimal health insurance contracts. Be-
ginning with the classic result of the optimality of a straight deductible policy in a model
of insurance demand without moral hazard (Arrow, 1963), much of the literature con-
siders the optimal level and mix of various cost-sharing vehicles, including co-insurance,
co-pays, deductibles, and out-of-pocket maxima, but hold fixed the basic structure of
these vehicles (e.g., Cutler and Zeckhauser, 2000; Ellis, Jiang and Manning, 2015). Closely
related to the liquidity results of our paper, Ericson and Sydnor (2018) show through
simulation that liquidity constraints can upend the optimality of a straight deductible
policy.6 Our paper further relaxes a particular aspect of deductibles--the timespan over
which they aggregate--and shows that this relaxation can provide further welfare gains,
    6 Liu (2020) shows theoretically and empirically that adverse selection can also upend the optimality of

a straight deductible policy. We abstract from adverse selection in this paper but view adverse selection in
the context of choice between standard and resetting deductibles to be an interesting topic for future work.


                                                     5
especially for liquidity constrained individuals.
    A separate optimal contracts literature examines the optimal contract length, holding
the length of a period to be annual and thus abstracting from within-year dynamics (Ghili
et al., 2020; Atal et al., 2020). This literature finds large welfare gains of longer-term health
insurance contracts primarily due to adverse selection and reclassification risk. In con-
trast, our paper holds fixed the contract length but explores within-contract aggregation
over time. Our results suggest that within-period dynamics of spending and consump-
tion arising from the time-aggregated nature of deductibles are also important for optimal
contract design.
    Finally, this paper contributes to a small literature on the aggregation of continuous
measures over time. Time aggregation underlies many policies and economic models, yet
there has been little work understanding the consequences of these aggregation decisions.
In a related paper within the context of automobile insurance, Cohen (2006) studies the
trade-off between aggregate and per-loss deductibles and shows that per-loss deductibles
require lower claim verification costs and induce lower ex-ante moral hazard.7 In crop
insurance in Kenya, Casaburi and Willis (2018) find that upfront lump-sum premium
payments can significantly lower the value of insurance compared to periodic premium
payments. In other contexts, Parsons and Van Wesep (2013) develop a model of optimal
paycheck timing, and Shapiro (2005) finds evidence that more frequent Food Stamp bene-
fit cycles produce welfare gains. Our paper suggests that the time aggregation embedded
in health insurance deductible policies can also have non-trivial impacts on welfare.
    While we believe this paper provides a useful starting point for studying time aggre-
gation in health insurance and beyond, it raises several interesting questions for further
research. One question is the effect of time aggregation on sorting and selection. Our
analysis focuses on liquidity and moral hazard issues, and our simplifications--such as
homogeneous individuals--assumes away issues related to sorting and adverse selection
that may arise when consumers can select from many plans (Marone and Sabety, 2019;
Liu, 2020). It would also be interesting to study other dimensions of time aggregation
   7 Per-loss deductibles are the limit of resetting deductibles, i.e., they reset after each loss event. We

abstract from ex-ante moral hazard and claim verification, and instead focus on ex-post moral hazard and
other mechanisms important to the health insurance context.


                                                     6
such as out-of-pocket maxima, which are equivalent to deductibles in our main analysis
(though different in our extended model), as well as other dimensions of smoothing, such
as Health Savings Accounts or payment plans, which we conceptualize as additional in-
come and alternative interest rates, respectively. Finally, a more fundamental question
is why deductibles at shorter frequencies are not offered. Whether this is due to histor-
ical precedent, administrative costs, or something else is not obvious, and would be an
interesting avenue for further research.
   Notwithstanding these caveats, our findings have policy implications for the design
and effectiveness of health insurance plan offerings. This may be particularly true for
plans offered through the Affordable Care Act marketplaces, where high deductible plans
are common and often cater to lower income populations who may be liquidity con-
strained.8 Given that deductibles are trending into the thousands of dollars, however,
these issues extend far beyond low-income populations:9 Rae, Claxton and Levitt (2017)
show that less than half of single-person households have enough liquid assets to pay
a $2,000 deductible. Meanwhile, policymakers continue to encourage the use of high
deductible health plans on the individual market. For example, the Centers for Medicare
and Medicaid Services in 2018 stated "We would like to encourage issuers to offer HDHPs
[high deductible health plans]... as a cost effective option for enrollees" (Department of
Health and Human Services, 2018). Designing and introducing alternative deductible
structures, such as resetting deductibles, could maintain the use of high deductible poli-
cies while alleviating some of the liquidity issues that concern their critics.
   The paper proceeds with a discussion of recent trends in health insurance deductibles
and the parallels with short-term health insurance policies in the United States in Section
2. Section 3 develops a two-period model of health insurance choice and investigates
in isolation different mechanisms that affect the value of different deductible timespans.
Section 4 describes the calibration and presents results. Finally, Section 5 extends the
model to alternative shock distributions, shorter time periods, and three-armed policies
   8 Our findings also have implications for short-term health insurance plans, which have similarly shorter

deductible spans by definition. We leave the analysis of short-term health insurance plans to future work
because this market operates in a very different policy and regulatory space, as we discuss in Section 2.
   9 Moreover, individuals with income less than 250% of the federal poverty line are eligible for cost-

sharing subsidies that alleviate some of the burden of these deductibles.


                                                     7
with co-insurance after the deductible, and Section 6 concludes.



2     Deductibles and short-term health insurance plans

Across a range of contexts, household insurance contracts feature deductibles. For ex-
ample, the median passenger automobile insurance policy includes a $500 deductible
(Barseghyan, Prince and Teitelbaum, 2011), the median homeowner's insurance policy
includes a $500 deductible (Sydnor, 2010), the median flood insurance policy includes a
$500 deductible (Michel-Kerjan and Kousky, 2010), and the median health insurance pol-
icy contains a $1,400 deductible, sometimes in addition to other cost-sharing mechanisms
(Kaiser Family Foundation, 2020). One major difference between the first three policies
and the health insurance policy is that the first three deductibles are per-event while health
insurance deductibles are per-period.10 This period is almost always one year, and usually
one calendar year. This section discusses trends in health insurance deductibles and the
recent advent of short-term health insurance plans that may be an empirical analogue for
understanding time aggregation in deductible design.


2.1    Trends in health insurance deductibles

Deductibles are an increasingly common form of cost-sharing in health insurance plans
in the United States. In the past decade, the share of individuals covered by an employer
plan with a deductible over $2,000 rose from 10% to 26% (Kaiser Family Foundation,
2020). There has also been a rapid expansion in the use of high-deductible health plans:11
the share of employers only offering high-deductible plans increased from 7% in 2012 to
24% in 2020 (Towers Watson, 2015; Kaiser Family Foundation, 2020). In plans available
  10 One theory for this difference is that an "event" in these other policies are relatively well-defined, while

in the context of health care an "event" can develop slowly over time and spill over into other "events",
making it difficult to distinguish between events. Relatedly, a prominent exception to this event vs. time
period distinction is Medicare hospital inpatient (Part A) deductibles, which are per-stay, where "stays" are
well-defined events. Health insurance policies often also include co-pays, which are "per-event" but are
typically orders of magnitude smaller than the deductibles we are concerned with in this paper.
  11 The Internal Revenue Service defines a high deductible health plan as one with a deductible of at least

$1,400 for an individual or $2,800 for a family in 2020.



                                                       8
through federal and state health insurance exchanges, the average deductible for an indi-
vidual plan is over $3,000 for silver plans (which account for 67% of plan selections), and
almost $6,000 for bronze plans (which make up 22% of plan selections). To help curb this
financial exposure, individuals under 250% of the federal poverty line (FPL) are eligible
for cost-sharing reductions that lower their effective deductible, but those over 250% of
the FPL do not receive any such subsidies.
   Alongside this growth in plans with large deductibles has been increased concern in
the affordability of these deductible policies. Health Savings Accounts (HSAs) provide
some relief for plans with high deductibles by allowing individuals with such plans to
place funds in a tax-preferred savings account to be used for medical spending or retire-
ment, up to a contribution limit (for example, in 2018 the contribution limit was $3,450 for
an individual plan). Since their introduction in 2004, the number of individuals enrolled
in an HSA has grown to 22 million in 2017 with total assets of over $45 billion (Devenir
Research Team, 2018), suggesting that individuals value these accounts. On the other
hand, much of this growth has been concentrated among high-income households, who
are less likely to need the liquidity afforded by these plans (Helmchen et al., 2015).


2.2   Short-term health insurance plans

While almost all health insurance contracts--and their corresponding deductibles--span
a calendar year, one exception is short-term health insurance plans that provide coverage
for a limited amount of time (i.e., less than 365 days). These plans, which were originally
designed for individuals who experience a temporary gap in health coverage, typically do
not comply with Affordable Care Act (ACA) standards and thus do not currently capture
a large market share. However, with the repeal of the ACA's individual mandate and a
recent ruling that expanded access to short-term health insurance plans (Keith, 2018), the
Urban Institute estimates that 4.3 million people will enroll in the short-term policies as
the plan offerings expand, while enrollment in the ACA individual market will fall by
2.2 million people in 2019 due to the availability of short-term coverage alone (Blumberg,
Buettgens and Wang, 2018).



                                             9
    In theory, these policies have parallels with the resetting deductible policies analyzed
in this paper, since the basic features of the policies ­ including the deductible ­ are de-
fined over shorter periods of time. In practice, these policies come with many features
that are beyond the scope of this paper, as they do not face as many regulatory constraints
as standard health insurance policies do. First, they are not guaranteed renewable, and
thus individuals who develop chronic illnesses may not be able to purchase future poli-
cies. Second, they provide fewer benefits: they can exclude coverage for pre-existing
conditions, they do not have to cover essential health benefits such as maternity care, pre-
scription drugs, mental health care, and preventive care, they can impose lifetime caps
on benefits, and can have a lower actuarial value than standard plans must have (Pollitz
et al., 2018). As a result, these policies are much cheaper than ACA-compliant policies
but likely suffer from reclassification risk and selection problems. According to eHealth
(eHealth, 2018), one of the largest online market exchange for short-term policies, the av-
erage short-term plan monthly premium was $110 in 2017, while the average individual
premium in ACA-compliant plans was $427; short-term plans included an average de-
ductible of $4,744 (covering a partial-year), while ACA-compliant plans included annual
deductibles averaging $4,400.
    For these reasons, we do not believe that the empirical demand for short-term health
insurance plans is a useful analogue to the resetting deductible policies proposed in this
paper. Instead, we next turn to a model of individual demand for health insurance to
understand the value of such policies.



3    Two period model of deductible timespans

To understand the mechanisms through which the time aggregation of a deductible can
affect individual welfare, we develop a two-period model of decision-making with uncer-
tainty over medical expenditures and insurance to protect against this uncertainty. Each
period, which is meant to capture a six month timespan, a risk-averse individual is subject
to health expenditure risk. Individuals are ex-ante homogeneous, thus abstracting from
adverse selection concerns. Prior to the realization of shocks in the first period, individu-


                                             10
als choose whether to purchase an annual insurance policy with a "standard" deductible
spanning both periods (the standard year-long deductible) or an annual policy with a
"resetting" deductible that spans one period (six months) before resetting. The model
incorporates four main mechanisms that may affect an individual's preference over the
two deductibles: (1) borrowing costs, (2) ex-post moral hazard, (3) mid-year exogenous
contract switching, and (4) strategic claim delay. We first provide a simple illustrative
model with binary health shocks, and then detail the full model, including the preference
structure, health risk and insurance contracts, budget constraint, and the full individual
problem. Section 5 provides further extensions to the model.


3.1    Illustrative model with binary shocks

To illustrate the concept of time aggregation in health insurance deductibles, we begin
with a simplified version of our model with a binary health shock and without moral
hazard, mid-year contract switching, or claim delay. Assume an independent large binary
health expenditure shock L that occurs with probability  > 0 in each period.12 To protect
against this risk, an individual purchases an insurance policy that spans two periods of
the form ( P, Di ) with per-period premiums P and a deductible Di < L where i = S is a
standard deductible policy in which the deductible DS spans two periods, while i = R is
a resetting deductible policy in which the deductible DR resets after each period.13 Figure
1 depicts the length of time over which a deductible spans: the deductible that does not
reset ( DS ) spans both periods (blue, top line), while the deductible that resets ( DR ) only
spans one period (red, middle lines).
    In order to isolate the effect of the resetting deductible policy on individual behavior
and welfare, we hold the premium P constant and assign the same actuarial value to each
policy ( P, DS ) and ( P, DR ). Thus, for a given standard deductible of size DS , the size of
the resetting deductible DR must adjust to maintain the same actuarial value. Because the
binary loss L is larger than both deductibles and independent over time, this means that
  12 While this binary shock process is a simplification (and we relax it later), it has also been used in many
other papers on similar topics, e.g., Ericson and Sydnor (2018) and Cohen and Einav (2007).
  13 We assume that D is constant across the two periods; an interesting extension would be to consider
                        R
increasing deductibles (see Li, Liu and Yeh (2007) for a related exercise in automobile insurance).


                                                      11
                              Figure 1: Deductible timespan schematic

                                                      DS

                                 DR                                       DR



                              Period 1                                 Period 2

Notes: Figure depicts the length of time over which a deductible applies and resets over the course of the
two periods. DR in red is the resetting deductible policy in which the deductible resets after each period,
while DS in blue is the standard deductible policy in which the deductible resets after two periods.


the expected insurance payouts over the two periods must be equivalent for both policies.
Assuming no moral hazard or other modifications to the shock and payout structures
(which we will incorporate in the next subsections), it must be the case that:


                        2 ( L - DR )               =  2 (2 L - DS ) + 2 (1 -  )( L - DS )
             Expected payout, reset policy             Expected payout, standard policy

Rearranging this equation gives a relationship between the two deductibles of:

                                                      2-
                                              DR =       DS                                                 (1)
                                                       2

There are two features of this equation of note. First, the resetting deductible is always
smaller than the standard deductible. As we will show quantitatively, if individuals are
liquidity constrained then they will value this smaller deductible despite its resetting na-
ture because it corresponds to smaller immediate out-of-pocket costs.14 Second, despite
the fact that the timespan of the resetting deductible is half that of the standard deductible,
the size of the resetting deductible is greater than half that of the standard deductible.15
  14 In fact, it can be shown analytically (through a Jensen's inequality argument) in this binary case that
individuals who cannot borrow or save will strictly prefer the resetting deductible policy.
  15 To see why, rewrite the expected insurer payout as:


                 2 (2 L - 2 DR ) + 2 (1 -  )( L - DR ) =  2 (2 L - DS ) + 2 (1 -  )( L - DS )

If DR = .5 DS then the insurer's losses in the 2 (1 -  ) states of the world would be too large in the resetting
deductible case. If DR = DS then the insurer's losses would be too small in the  2 states of the world in
the standard deductible case. This is analogous to the result in Cohen (2006) for aggregate versus per-loss
deductibles.


                                                      12
As Figure 2 shows, this implies that the worst-case scenario in which an individual re-
ceives a health shock in both periods (the bottom-right corner of each schematic) results
in higher total out-of-pocket costs for the resetting deductible policy (equal to DR + DR )
than the standard deductible policy (equal to DS ). If individuals heavily value insurance
against this worst-case scenario, then they may value the standard deductible more than
the resetting deductible. These two effects ­ liquidity versus insurance ­ are further ex-
plored in the full model below, along with additional mechanisms that affect the value of
different deductible timespans.

        Figure 2: Out-of-pocket expenses for resetting and standard deductible policies

                        A. Resetting deductible                            B. Standard deductible
                                           Period 2                                          Period 2
                                      healthy      sick                                 healthy      sick
                            healthy




                                                                              healthy
                                       (0, 0)      (0, DR )                              (0, 0)     (0, DS )
                       Period 1




                                                                         Period 1
                   sick




                                                                     sick




                                      ( DR , 0)   ( DR , DR )                           ( DS , 0)   ( DS , 0)



Notes: Figure depicts out-of-pocket expenses in the brackets for each cell under the resetting deductible
policy (red) and the standard deductible policy (blue) when there is a binary health shock ("healthy" vs.
"sick"). The first value in the brackets is the out-of-pocket expense in Period 1 and the second value is the
out-of-pocket expense in Period 2.




3.2      Full model

We now characterize the full model, which incorporates a continuous shock distribution
and allows for moral hazard, contract switching, and strategic delay.


3.2.1    Preferences

Individuals choose non-medical consumption c, medical consumption m, and savings a to
solve a dynamic problem that maximizes their expected utility over two (six month) pe-


                                                                13
riods. Specifically, we use the utility function in Einav et al. (2013) in which non-medical
consumption is the numeraire good and there are decreasing returns to medical consump-
tion above a medical loss L, so that per-period utility is:

                                                         1
                       U (c, m - L) = U c + m - L -        (m - L)2
                                                        2w

With this utility function, individuals will always choose m  L because at any m < L,
the marginal utility of an extra unit of m is greater than the marginal utility of an extra
unit of c. Thus we interpret L as necessary expenditures and any m > L as additional
medical care that arises through moral hazard. The severity of moral hazard is dictated
by the w  0 parameter, and nests the case of no moral hazard (w = 0) or positive
levels of moral hazard (w > 0). Additional medical consumption (m > L) arises when
individuals do not have to pay the full price of medical care at the time of purchase.
When individuals are fully insured such that an extra dollar of medical consumption m
does not impact c, then the first order conditions imply that optimal medical consumption
is m = L + w (including when L = 0). On the other hand, if individuals must fully pay for
medical consumption then they derive higher utility from spending the marginal dollar
beyond L on non-medical consumption c than m due to the decreasing return to medical
consumption beyond L. In that case, m = L. The interpretation of w, then, is the extra
medical consumption due to moral hazard.
   The implication of this form of moral hazard is that, ex-post, individuals value over-
consumption of medical goods due to insurance coverage, but since the cost of this extra
medical consumption feeds back into their cost of insurance (either through an increase in
premium, or, as we will assume below, through an increase in the size of deductibles), ex-
ante they do not value the over-consumption and thus prefer to minimize moral hazard.
Different time aggregations of deductibles may exacerbate or hinder moral hazard, as the
change in non-linearity of the contract affects if and when individuals pay full price for
health care.




                                             14
3.2.2   Health risk and the evolution of health spending

An individual is subject to health shocks L1 and L2 in the first and second period, respec-
tively, that evolve stochastically with joint distribution f ( L1 , L2 ). We assume all individ-
uals have the same underlying health shock distribution.
   We allow for two forces that make health spending endogenous insofar as it may be
greater than that necessitated by the health shock and it may not occur at the same mo-
ment as the health shock. The first force, introduced above, is (ex-post) moral hazard. This
type of moral hazard arises when individuals do not have to pay the full price of medi-
cal care at the time of the care. We assume that individuals only respond to spot prices,
not expected end-of-year prices, and thus only over-consume once they have surpassed
the deductible. While a fully rational individual would respond to expected end-of-year
prices, we shut down this channel for computational tractability when we calibrate the
model, and because other work shows that it is likely a more reasonable approximation
to reality (Brot-Goldberg et al., 2017).
   The second force, which we call "claim delay", allows individuals to delay the timing
of treatment (and therefore spending and claiming) of health shocks. One prominent
example of this distinction is in dental care, where procedures such as fillings can be
performed many months after the advent of the cavity "shock" (Cabral, 2017), but it also
applies to many other medical procedures (e.g., hip replacements). Since health insurance
policies largely operate on the timing of health care and not the health shock, individuals
may find it financially beneficial to delay care for certain shocks. To formalize this idea,
we allow a fraction qd of health shocks to be delayable by one period, to capture the notion
that some shocks must be cared for immediately (e.g., emergencies) while others can be
delayed without consequence to the next period.


3.2.3   Health insurance contracts and contract switching

We now characterize the two health insurance contracts under the full model, which in-
cludes moral hazard, strategic claim delay, and exogenous contract switching.
   At the beginning of the year, individuals choose between two potential insurance con-


                                              15
tracts that have the same per-period premium, the same actuarial value, and a deductible
that must be met before insurance pays for health care. The distinction between the two
policies is the time over which the deductible resets: the standard deductible policy con-
sists of a deductible that spans the full year (two periods), while a resetting deductible
policy consists of a deductible that resets each period and thus spans only one period
(i.e., six months) at a time. Because these two policies have the same actuarial value and
same premium, the timespan over which the deductible resets means that the size of the
deductible will also vary over the two policies.
    Health insurance deductibles not only span a year, but they almost always span a
calendar year as opposed to a year from the signing of the insurance contract.16 This
discrepancy may distort the value that individuals place on different insurance policies
if mid-year job changes or other life events that are orthogonal to health cause them to
abruptly change their health insurance mid-year. To formalize this idea, we assume a
fraction qm of individuals abruptly cancel their policy after the first period (i.e., mid-year)
and begin a new policy in the second period, with the same deductible structure and
same end-date. When this occurs, individuals must sign a new insurance contract with
the same deductible end-of-calendar-year end dates, and the same deductible sizes, but
without the stored health care spending from the first period that had previously gone
towards meeting the deductible. Effectively, this means that individuals who have large
losses in both periods would have to pay the (higher) deductible twice under the standard
deductible policy. This feature makes insurance contracts with more time-aggregated
deductibles less valuable as the risk of mid-year contract switching increases.
    The insurer takes into account the extra and time-varying medical consumption brought
about by moral hazard, delay, and contract switching and solves for the standard and re-
setting deductible sizes in order to break even. The resulting relationship between the
resetting and standard deductible sizes is complex, but two features are intuitive. First,
as qd increases, DR grows closer to DS , because the ability to delay and thus bunch care
in fewer periods means that the size of the resetting deductible must increase. Second, as
  16 Some annual health plans span a fiscal or academic year instead of a calendar year, but the discrepancy

between a year at contract signing and a pre-specified year remains.



                                                    16
qm increases, the size of the standard deductible decreases toward the size of the resetting
deductible, because the higher the probability that one must switch contracts mid-year,
the higher the probability a standard deductible "resets," which is the defining charac-
teristic of the resetting deductible.17 The moral hazard effect on deductible size is more
nuanced, and we return to it in our quantitative results in Section 4.


3.2.4     Budget constraint

An important feature of individual welfare in a dynamic setting with risk aversion is the
ability to smooth consumption over time. As we quantify in the next section, shorter time
aggregation of deductibles can help smooth consumption, but the primary smoothing
mechanism is through saving and borrowing. We allow for saving and borrowing to
satisfy the budget constraint:
                 
                  Rs ( a1 + Y - P - c1 - oop1 )
                 
                                                    if    a1 + Y - P - c1 - oop1  0
          a2 =
                  R ( a1 + Y - P - c1 - oop1 )
                 
                                                    if    a1 + Y - P - c1 - oop1 < 0
                   b

          subject to   a2  - [Y - P - max(oop2 )]


where Y and P are per-period income and premiums, c1 is consumption in the first pe-
riod, oopt is out-of-pocket medical expenditures in each period t, and at are assets in each
period. The budget constraint allows for borrowing up to the amount that they would be
able to pay back with certainty (i.e., income net of the premium and maximum possible
out-of-pocket expenditure) and allows for different interest rates for savings ( Rs ) and bor-
rowing ( Rb ). This formulation nests costless saving and borrowing ( Rb = Rs = 1) as well
as borrowing costs ( Rb > Rs ) and an extreme form of liquidity constraints in which indi-
viduals are "hand-to-mouth" in that they neither save nor borrow ( Rb =  and Rs = 0).
  17 In
      practice, it is not obvious that health insurers appropriately adjust their cost estimates for mid-year
contract switching, as Ericson, Geissler and Lubin (2018) points out for risk adjusters.




                                                     17
3.2.5   Individual problem

Given the above ingredients of the model, an individual solves the problem that proceeds
in three steps. At time zero (before the health shock is revealed in the first period), the
individual solves:


                              max           V0 ( a1 , Y ) = E f ( L1 , L2 ) V1 ( a1 , Y, L1 | Di )        (2)
                          Di { DR , D S }


where V1 is the solution to the following problem in the first period:


           max V1 ( a1 , Y, L1 | Di ) = u(c1 , m1 - L1 ) +  E f ( L2 | L1 ) V2 ( a2 , Y, L1 , L2 | Di )   (3)
          c1 ,m1 , a2


and V2 is the solution to the following problem in the second period:


                              max V2 ( a2 , Y, L1 , L2 | Di ) = U (c2 , m2 - L2 )                         (4)
                              c2 ,m2


and each of the maximization problems are subject to the budget constraint and the law of
motion of deductible spending. The state space consists of assets in each period, as well as
the health shocks and insurance contract in the first and second periods. The individual
first chooses an insurance contract, and then given the insurance contract, assets, and
health shock in a period, decides how much to consume and thus how much to save or
borrow.


3.2.6   Willingness to pay for insurance contracts

To measure the value to individuals of the standard versus resetting deductible policies,
we calculate certainty equivalence between the two policies, defined as the amount of
per-period income an individual would be willing to pay (in each period) for the resetting
deductible to be indifferent between the standard deductible and the resetting deductible.
Specifically, we calculate Z to solve:


                        E f ( L1 , L2 ) V0 ( a1 , Y | DS ) = E f ( L1 , L2 ) V0 ( a1 , Y - Z | DR )       (5)



                                                             18
A positive value of Z signifies that the individual prefers the resetting deductible over the
standard deductible, while a negative value of Z signifies that they prefer the standard
deductible.



4      Calibrating the willingness to pay for resetting deductibles

We next calibrate the model and report our willingness-to-pay results for a resetting
deductible under various scenarios. We use claims data from the Truven Marketscan
database to characterize the health shock distribution, and calibrate the remaining model
parameters using standard values from the literature. We then use the parameterized
model to characterize the role of liquidity, moral hazard, contract switching, and claim de-
lay in isolation before reporting overall estimates for a representative consumer for which
all four mechanisms are at play. Section 5 extends the model in several ways, including
alternative health shock distributions, shorter periods, and also extends the policy space
to "three-armed" policies with deductibles, coinsurance, and out-of-pocket maxima.


4.1      Marketscan health care claims data

An important input into the model is the joint distribution of health care claims over
time. We use claims data from the Truven Marketscan database, which contains individ-
ual health care claims from a host of large employers and private health insurers in the
United States. Our sample consists of over 16 million individuals aged 26-64 who are con-
tinuously enrolled in a health plan for the entirety of 2013 and not enrolled in a capitation
plan. We calculate their total health care spending in the first six months and second six
months of the year, corresponding to the first and second periods of the model, respec-
tively.18 Total health care spending is defined as the sum of inpatient services, outpatient
services, and outpatient pharmaceutical claims, and we use this spending as the health
shock distribution f ( L1 , L2 ) in the model.19
    18 The
         Marketscan database includes both service dates and paid dates; we use service dates to assign the
period of spending.
  19 This is somewhat coarse, as these expenditures may reflect not only health expenditure needs but also

moral hazard and/or timing manipulation of health expenditures.


                                                    19
         Table 1: Summary statistics of the distribution of health care expenditures

                                                                Health care spending ($)
                                                         First half of year   Second half of year
        Mean                                                   2,969                  3,313
        Standard deviation                                    12,372                 13,818
        Percent with zero expenditure                          0.210                  0.202
        25th percentile                                          75                     80
        Median                                                  550                    587
        75th percentile                                        1,992                  2,179
        90th percentile                                        5,963                  6,670
        Mean number of claims                                    20                     21
        Correlation of spending between periods                            0.413
        Biannual mean                                                      3,141
        Biannual standard deviation                                       11,016
        Number of enrollees                                             16,351,864
Notes: Table reports biannual (six month) total health care expenditures (unweighted, in 2017 dollars). Data
are 2013 health care claims from the Truven Marketplace database, restricted to individuals 26-64 who are
not in a capitated plan and do not switch plans over the course of 2013.


    Table 1 reports summary statistics of the distribution of per-period (i.e., six month)
health care expenses in our sample, inflated to 2017 dollars. Average health expenditures
over the first six months total $2,969, with standard deviation $12,372, though the distri-
bution is highly skewed as shown by the median of $550. The average number of health
care claims within the first six months is 20, though a significant fraction of individuals
(around 20%) have zero expenditures in a given period. There is also persistence in ex-
penditures over time: the correlation over the two periods of health care expenditures is
0.41. We incorporate this data into our model by constructing an empirical joint distribu-
tion of health expenditures over the two periods by discretizing health expenditures into
30 bins of equal probability.


4.2    Calibrated parameters

Table 2 reports our calibrated parameter values and their source. We set the interest rate
for savings to 0% (or Rs = 1.0) and the discount factor to 1.0 (or  = 1) to isolate our
main mechanisms of interest. Following much of the health literature, we use CARA
preferences where U ( x) = 1 - exp(- x). We set the premium for health insurance to the

                                                    20
average benchmark silver plan in the ACA exchanges in 2017, which was $359 monthly,
or $2,154 biannually (Kaiser Family Foundation, 2017b). We set initial assets to $0 and
annual income to $30,150 (250% of the Federal Poverty Level in 2017), which was the cut-
off for cost-sharing reductions (CSRs) in the health insurance marketplace (though with
CARA utility, there are no income effects). We thus view our calibration as pertaining to
individuals who are lower income but do not qualify for CSRs.

                                    Table 2: Calibrated parameters

   Symbol    Parameter definition            Value        Source
      t      Length of a period               6 mo.
             CARA coefficient                0.0004       Handel (2013)
             Discount factor                   1.0
     Rs      Interest rate, saving             1.0
     Rb      Interest rate, borrowing      {1.0; 1.015;   Credit card 20% APR; Payday loan rates
                                          1.095; 2.236}   (Ericson and Sydnor, 2018)
      w      Moral hazard parameter           $896        30% of average biannual health shock
                                                          (Einav et al., 2013)
     qm      Prob. mid-year job change        0.08        Bjelland et al. (2011)
     qd      Prob. shock is delayable         0.40        Cabral (2017)
      P      Premium                         $2,154       Average second lowest-cost silver plan
                                                          premium (Kaiser Family Foundation, 2017b)
      Y      Income                         $15,075       250% Federal Poverty Level in 2017
      a1     Initial assets                   $0
Notes: Biannual (six month) rates shown. The four values of Rb correspond to different specifications in
Figure 4.


   We supplement these parameters with parameters that dictate the additional forces
described in Section 3. To capture the fact that borrowing can be expensive, we set differ-
ent interest rates for borrowing to approximate low borrowing costs (3% annual interest
rate), borrowing from a credit card at 20% APR, and payday loan rates of 400% APR
(Ericson and Sydnor, 2018), and convert these annual rate to biannual rates. To capture
overconsumption of medical care that arises with insurance, we convert the moral hazard
parameter estimated in Einav et al. (2013) of 30% of annual health shocks into a biannual
value of $896. To capture the fact that some workers switch jobs ­ and therefore health
plans ­ in the middle of the year, we use the estimate of 4% quarterly employment-to-
employment job flows from Bjelland et al. (2011), converted to a biannual probability of
8%. Finally, we allow a fraction of shocks to be delayable, and set the probability of de-
layability to 40% from Cabral (2017).

                                                   21
4.3    Willingness to pay: the role of liquidity

We now use the calibrated parameters in Table 2 to estimate the willingness to pay for the
resetting deductible over the standard deductible, as defined in Section 3.2. We begin by
analyzing the role of liquidity. To do this, we shut down moral hazard (w = 0), contract
switching (qm = 0), and care delay (qd = 0), and vary Rb . The sizes of the deductibles
in this case are given in the leftmost blue and red bars in Figure 3, and correspond to a
standard deductible of $3,252 (which is very similar to the average deductible in a silver
plan in the 2017 federal marketplace) and a resetting deductible that is 60% the size of the
standard deductible.
              Figure 3: Size of deductible policies under different environments
                                    5,000




                                                                                                   Standard deductible
                                                                                                   Resetting deductible
                                               4,000
                     Size of the deductible ($)
                        2,000      3,000
                                    1,000
                                    0




                                                       Baseline   Moral hazard   Switching   Claim delay   All together


Notes: Figure presents the size of the standard (annual) deductible DS in blue and the size of the resetting
(biannual) deductible DR in red, under four scenarios: from left to right, (1) the baseline scenario with no
moral hazard (w = 0), no contract switching (qm = 0), and no claim delay (qd ), (2) the scenario with only
moral hazard, (3) the scenario with only contract switching, (3) the scenario with only claim delay, and (4)
the scenario with all three of moral hazard, switching, and delay.


    Using this relationship, we examine the willingness to pay for the resetting deductible
under different liquidity environments. We start with the case in which individuals can-
not save or borrow, which corresponds to R S = 0 and R B = . In this case, the per-period
willingness to pay for the resetting deductible is Z = $135, or 6.3% of the premium, as
the right-most bar in Figure 4 shows.
    At the other extreme is the ability to save and borrow with no interest ( R S = R B =

                                                                                 22
Figure 4: Welfare gain of a resetting deductible policy under different liquidity assump-
tions




                                       150
                    Willingness to pay for reset policy ($)
                             50        0       100




                                                              Rb=1   Rb=1.015   Rb=1.095   Rb=2.236   No bor/sav


Notes: Figure presents Z, the per-period willingness-to-pay for a reset policy, under five liquidity cases:
from left to right, (1) benchmark saving and borrowing ( Rb = Rs = 1.0), (2) low borrowing costs ( Rb =
1.015), (3) credit card borrowing costs ( Rb = 1.095), (4) payday loan borrowing costs ( Rb = 2.236), which
in practice is equivalent to saving but no borrowing, and (5) no borrowing or savings ( Rs = 0 and Rb = )
using the other calibrated parameters in Table 2.


1.0). In this case, the opposite result emerges: individuals who can easily smooth slightly
prefer the standard deductible. The left-most bar of Figure 4 shows that they value the
resetting deductible at only -$5 over the standard deductible.
    The reason that borrowing constrained individuals prefer the resetting deductible
while unconstrained individuals prefer the standard policy relates directly to the trade-
off between insurance and liquidity. The standard deductible provides better insurance
against the worst-case state of the world (e.g., large shocks in both periods, where DS <
2 DR ). On the other hand, the resetting deductible provides an alternative form of liq-
uidity to individuals by, in essence, breaking up the deductibles into smaller but poten-
tially more frequent payments. Unconstrained individuals can transfer resources between
states of the world on their own, and thus value the better insurance of the standard
deductible, while constrained individuals rely on the insurance policy to smooth across
states of the world, and thus value the less "lumpy" resetting deductible at the cost of
slightly worse insurance. This is reminiscent to the result in Ericson and Sydnor (2018)


                                                                                23
that liquidity constrained individuals prefer seemingly dominated plans with lower de-
ductibles and higher (and more frequent) premium payments.
   To further understand this feature that resetting deductibles provide alternative liq-
uidity, take the extreme case of 100% probability of a very large shock in both periods
that surpasses both deductibles (note that this implies DR = DS /2). While unconstrained
individuals are indifferent between the two policies (because they are actuarially equiv-
alent and it is costless to save and borrow), constrained individuals strongly prefer the
reset policy (beyond any insurance it provides, since in this case there is no uncertainty)
because it provides smoothing of health costs across time periods.
   We next consider the case of individuals who can save and borrow, but at higher bor-
rowing costs. Specifically, we now allow individuals to save at rate Rs = 1.0 and borrow
at rate 1.0 < Rb < , where Rb > Rs captures that it is more costly to borrow than it
is beneficial to save. The middle three specifications in Figure 4 report willingness-to-
pay estimates for low borrowing costs ( Rb = 1.015, equivalent to a 3% annual interest
rate), higher borrowing costs ( Rb = 1.095), which correspond to average credit card bor-
rowing rates at 20% APR (Ericson and Sydnor, 2018), and very high borrowing costs
( Rb = 2.236), which correspond to payday loan rates at 400% APR. As it becomes more
expensive to borrow, the willingness to pay for a resetting deductible policy increases and
becomes positive. At credit card rates, the per-period willingness to pay for the resetting
deductible policy is $13 and at payday loan rates is $115.
   In sum, this baseline model shows that preferences over the deductible timespan de-
pends on the extent of liquidity constraints. For individuals who are not constrained,
standard (more time-aggregated) deductible timespans provides better insurance, while
resetting (less time-aggregated) deductibles are valuable to liquidity constrained individ-
uals because they are smaller in size and thus provide implicit smoothing. In Section 5
we show that these results also hold for alternative shock distributions, for shorter time
periods, and under three-armed policies. We next turn to the role of moral hazard and the
differential ability of standard and resetting deductible policies to combat moral hazard
problems.



                                            24
4.4   Willingness to pay: the role of moral hazard

We next explore the willingness to pay for the resetting deductible policy in an environ-
ment with moral hazard, as well as the differential effect of the two deductible policies
in curbing moral hazard. As described in Section 3, moral hazard arises when individ-
uals value medical consumption beyond the health shock L, but to a lesser degree than
non-medical consumption, and thus only over-consume medical care if they are not pay-
ing the full price of medical consumption. However, the cost of this over-consumption
feeds back into their ex-ante insurance costs in the form of higher premiums or higher
deductibles (we model the latter in this paper). Because individuals do not value this
over-consumption ex-ante, moral hazard is welfare decreasing.
   Moral hazard manifests differently in the standard and resetting deductible policies.
Figure 5 shows the region of the joint distribution of health shocks in which overcon-
sumption occurs under the resetting and standard deductible policies. Panel (a) shows
overconsumption in the first period and Panel (b) shows overconsumption in the sec-
ond period. In each panel, the x-axis is the first period health shock and the y-axis is
the second period health shock, both over a normalized health shock distribution from
0 to 1. DR and DS denote example resetting and standard deductible sizes, respectively,
and red shading indicates areas in which overconsumption occurs under the resetting de-
ductible policy and blue shading indicates areas in which overconsumption occurs under
the standard deductible policy. These figures show that in the first period, there is more
extra medical consumption under the resetting deductible, because both shocks that are
above DS induce overconsumption but also shocks between DR and DS induce overcon-
sumption. In the second period, the same amount of overconsumption occurs under the
resetting deductible policy, while overconsumption under the standard deductible policy
covers a much wider area of the joint distribution. In total, which policy generates more
overconsumption depends on the empirical joint distribution of health shocks.
   Our empirical joint distribution of health shocks suggests that overconsumption is al-
most exactly the same size under the two policies: individuals consume $351 more under
the standard deductible policy and $358 more under the resetting deductible policy (see



                                           25
                            Figure 5: Overconsumption due to moral hazard, stylized example
           1




                                                                                              1
           .8




                                                                                              .8
      .4 DR .6 DS




                                                                                         .4 DR .6 DS
  Second period shock




                                                                                     Second period shock
           .2




                                                                                              .2
           0




                                                                                              0




                        0      .2        .4 DR .6 DS          .8            1                               0      .2        .4 DR .6 DS          .8            1
                                       First period shock                                                                  First period shock

                                Resetting ded.              Standard ded.                                           Resetting ded.              Standard ded.


                        (a) First period overconsumption                                                   (b) Second period overconsumption

Notes: Figure depicts regions of the first period (x-axis) by second period (y-axis) health shock space in
which extra medical consumption occurs due to moral hazard for a stylized health distribution and de-
ductible contracts. DR and DS are hypothetical deductible sizes. Red shading indicates areas in which
overconsumption occurs under the resetting deductible policy and blue shading indicates areas in which
overconsumption occurs under the standard deductible policy. Panel (a) graphs the region in which over-
consumption occurs in the first period and panel (b) graphs the region in which overconsumption occurs
in the second period.




                                                                                26
Appendix Figure 1). While this is the case for our empirical distribution, Section 5 shows
that the persistence of the health shock distribution can play an important role for the rel-
ative overconsumption of the two policies. In particular, lower persistence increases extra
consumption under the standard deductible policy, and vice versa for higher persistence.
   Consumers ultimately must pay for this additional medical consumption, and because
we assume a constant premium P across all specifications, the deductible sizes adjust in
response. The second set of bars in Figure 3 shows that the standard deductible rises from
$3,252 without moral hazard to $4,467 with moral hazard, and the resetting deductible
increases from $1,943 without moral hazard to $2,748 with moral hazard (both around a
40% increase).
   Figure 6 reports the willingness to pay estimates for the baseline case with no moral
hazard in the first set of bars (with no borrowing costs vs no borrowing or saving) on the
left and with moral hazard in the second set of bars (again with no borrowing costs vs
no borrowing or saving). With no borrowing costs, the addition of moral hazard changes
the per-period willingness-to-pay for the resetting deductible policy from -$5 to -$3, and
adding in the inability transfer funds across time increases it further to $224. This cor-
responds to a willingness to pay of an additional 10.4% in premiums. Thus, resetting
deductible policies can be even more valuable as a tool to relieve borrowing constraints
under moral hazard environments.


4.5   Willingness to pay: the role of contract switching

The next environment we consider is one in which individuals change health insurance
plans mid-way through the year due to events orthogonal to their health, such as job
changes. As discussed in Section 3, we model this as an exogenous probability of the
same contract restarting at the end of the first period. This mechanically has no effect
on the resetting deductible policy, but for the standard deductible policy this effectively
induces a chance that the deductible resets after the first period, but at the size of the
standard deductible. The third set of bars in Figure 3 shows the sizes of the deductibles
when there is an 8% chance of mid-year plan switching (as estimated in Bjelland et al.



                                             27
             Figure 6: Welfare gain of a resetting deductible policy, by environment




                                           300
                                                                                                               No borrowing costs
                                                                                                               No borrowing/saving




                                                             250
                        Willingness to pay for reset policy ($)
                       0      50     100     150
                                           -50       200




                                                                   Baseline   Moral hazard   Switching   Claim delay   All together


Notes: Figure presents Z, the willingness to pay for the resetting deductible policy, under five environments
and within each environment, costless borrowing (light green) and no borrowing or saving (dark green).
From left to right, the sets of bars are (1) baseline (i.e., no moral hazard, contract switching, or claim delay),
(2) moral hazard only, (3) contract switching only, (4) claim delay only, and (5) all mechanisms in (2)-(4).
Other calibrated parameters are in Table 2.


(2011)), and confirms that the resetting deductible is the same size as in the baseline case.
The standard deductible is slightly smaller than the baseline standard deductible ($3,119
instead of $3,252) because contract switches makes some individuals pay the standard
deductible twice, and to remain actuarially equivalent, the size must adjust downward.20
    The third set of bars in Figure 6 shows that when borrowing is costless, the willingness
to pay for the resetting deductible policy becomes positive. This is because the standard
deductible policy is now more similar in nature to the resetting deductible policy since it
can unexpectedly reset. In the case of no borrowing or saving, the willingness to pay for
the resetting deductible policy is slightly less positive than the baseline case because the
standard deductible is slightly smaller in size, which reduces the liquidity value of the
resetting deductible.
    There are two caveats to these results. First, our calibrated probability of contract
switching is quite low at 8% biannually. If there was a 50% probability of switching
contracts, individuals with no borrowing costs would more strongly prefer the resetting
  20 At   the limit of 100% switching, DS = DR .


                                                                                             28
deductible at a willingness-to-pay of $32 per period. Second, it is unclear whether in-
surance companies account for the fact that some individuals switch plans mid-year into
their pricing (Ericson, Geissler and Lubin, 2018). If insurers do not price in switching, the
willingness to pay for the resetting deductible policy (with 8% switching) would increase
to $45 for individuals with no borrowing costs and $166 for those who cannot borrow or
save.


4.6     Willingness to pay: the role of strategic claim delay

The final environment we consider is one in which some health shocks do not necessarily
require immediate medical care (e.g., dental care or some orthopedic surgeries). Since
health insurance policies ­ and therefore deductible spending ­ depend on the timing of
health care, not the health shock, individuals may find it financially beneficial to delay care
for such shocks. For instance, in the resetting deductible case, it would be financially ad-
vantageous to bunch care into one period and only pay the deductible once. As discussed
in Section 3, we model this phenomenon as a probability qd of a shock being delayable,
and we assume that individuals always delay shocks when presented with the option. In
our two period model, this probability only applies to the first period, while all shocks
must receive care in the second period.21
    Because delay does not affect insurer payouts in the standard deductible policy rela-
tive to the baseline model, the standard deductible is equivalent to that of the baseline
case. The resetting deductible, on the other hand, is slightly larger than that of the base-
line case ($2,379 vs $1,943 in Figure 3) because the ability to shift expenditures to a later
period raises the probability of only paying the resetting deductible once. To maintain
actuarial equivalence, the size of the resetting deductible must therefore increase.
    The willingness to pay for the resetting deductible policy for those with borrowing
costs decreases in this environment compared to the baseline case, because as the size of
  21 Thismay not always be the optimal decision for individuals in more complex environments (e.g., with
moral hazard) or for households that are not allowed to borrow or save, but we chose this assumption
because (a) relaxing this assumption requires numerically solving for an equilibrium, which is computa-
tionally more taxing, (b) it is consistent with the simple nature of decision-making that we allow for with
moral hazard issues, and (c) we believe the approximation is not far from reality.



                                                    29
the resetting deductible grows in response to delayability of care, the more the reset policy
resembles the standard policy. Indeed, if all shocks are delayable then DR = DS and
the policies are almost equivalent. Thus, resetting deductibles do not curb this "timing"
moral hazard, and in fact by increasing the size of the resetting deductible, the possibility
of claim delay counteracts the beneficial liquidity effects of resetting deductibles.


4.7   Willingness to pay: putting it all together

The final set of main results in Figures 3 and 6 report the deductible sizes and willingness
to pay for the resetting deductible policy in an environment in which all mechanisms
(moral hazard, mid-year contract switching, and claim delay) are present. In this case,
both deductibles are larger than the baseline case (predominantly due to moral hazard)
but the standard deductible is slightly smaller than in the moral hazard case because
mid-year contract switching exerts downward pressure it. On the other hand, the reset-
ting deductible is slightly larger than in the moral hazard case because claim delay exerts
upward pressure on it. Overall, the willingness to pay for the resetting deductible policy
is similar to the baseline case under both costless borrowing and no borrowing or sav-
ing environments ($-2 and $160, respectively), in large part because the liquidity effect
swamps other effects.
    In sum, our results suggest that while resetting deductibles may have small or even
negative welfare benefits under some environments (e.g., when individuals can strategi-
cally delay medical care), they may have relatively large welfare gains under other envi-
ronments, such as for individuals with borrowing constraints.



5     Extensions

In this section, we explore extensions to the results in Section 4 along three main dimen-
sions: first, allowing for different persistence in our health shock distribution; second,
allowing for shorter periods for utility and health shocks; and third, allowing for a "three-
armed" policy that incorporates a deductible as well as coinsurance and an out-of-pocket



                                             30
maximum. In all of these extensions we find similar qualitative results that liquidity con-
strained individuals would experience welfare gains from a resetting deductible policy.


5.1     Persistence of the health shock distribution

The willingness to pay for a resetting deductible policy may be particularly sensitive to
the persistence of health shocks across the two periods. For example, it may impact the
liquidity effects if persistence changes the relative sizes of the deductibles. It may also
impact extra medical consumption from moral hazard if medical consumption is primar-
ily concentrated among individuals who always incur large health shocks. To test how
persistence affects the results, we modify our empirical health shock distribution in three
ways: first, we make the empirical marginal distributions in the two periods indepen-
dent; second, we make the distribution slightly less persistent but not quite independent
by moving some of the mass away from the diagonals of our discretized empirical joint
distribution and distribute the mass equally among all other parts of the joint distribution;
third, we make the distribution slightly more persistent by adding mass to the diagonals
in a similar but opposite fashion.22
    Figure 7 shows the deductible sizes and willingness to pay for the resetting deductible
policy for the case of independent health shocks. Panel (a) shows that the resetting de-
ductible is unchanged compared to the empirical distribution, as expected, while the stan-
dard deductible is smaller in size across the specifications. This is because an indepen-
dent distribution is less likely to generate large health shocks in both periods, which are
more costly to the insurer because the deductible is only paid once. This lowers the de-
ductible size in the independent distribution, and as a result the willingness to pay for
the resetting deductible policy decreases across all of the environments (panel (b)). More
generally, however, the same pattern exists: those with borrowing constraints prefer the
resetting deductible policy, while those without borrowing costs slightly prefer the stan-
dard deductible policy.
    Table 3 provides more details on the role of persistence in the case of moral hazard.
  22 Specifically,
                we redistribute 5% of the mass away from the diagonal in our less persistent specification
and we redistribute 13% of the mass to the diagonal in our more persistent specification.


                                                   31
               Figure 7: Deductibles and willingness to pay under independent shock distribution
                5,000




                                                                                                                               300
                                                                               Standard deductible                                                                                                 No borrowing costs
                                                                               Resetting deductible                                                                                                No borrowing/saving




                                                                                                                                                 250
                                                                                                            Willingness to pay for reset policy ($)
                           4,000




                                                                                                                                         200
 Size of the deductible ($)
               3,000




                                                                                                                         100     150
    2,000




                                                                                                                  50
                1,000




                                                                                                           0                   -50
                0




                                   Baseline   Moral hazard   Switching   Claim delay   All together                                                    Baseline   Moral hazard   Switching   Claim delay   All together


                                              (a) Deductible sizes                                     (b) Willingness to pay for resetting ded. policy

Notes: Left figure presents the size of the standard (annual) deductible DS in blue and the size of the reset-
ting (biannual) deductible DR in red, under four scenarios: from left to right, (1) the baseline scenario with
no moral hazard (w = 0), no contract switching (qm = 0), and no claim delay (qb ), (2) the scenario with only
moral hazard, (3) the scenario with only contract switching, (3) the scenario with only claim delay, and (4)
the scenario with all three of moral hazard, switching, and delay. Right figure presents the willingness to
pay for the resetting deductible policy for individuals who can costlessly borrow in light green and who
cannot borrow in dark green for the same scenarios as in Panel (a).


Each row, which corresponds to the different levels of persistence as described above, re-
ports the deductible sizes, extra medical consumption under the standard and resetting
deductible policies, and the willingness to pay for the resetting deductible policy under
the two main borrowing conditions. The standard deductible size increases with per-
sistence, as the logic from above suggests. Overconsumption of medical care under the
standard deductible policy decreases as the persistence of the health shock distribution
increases. This stems from two mechanisms. First, a lower deductible is (mechanically)
reached more frequently, triggering overconsumption. Second, more overconsumption
will occur in the second period under an independent shock distribution than a persis-
tent shock distribution because there are more instances in which an individual is under
the deductible in the first period (and thus not overconsuming) and over the deductible
in the second period.
                       The willingness to pay for the resetting deductible policy in an environment with
moral hazard has little effect for individuals without borrowing constraints, but increases
as the persistence of the health shock distribution increases for individuals with borrow-

                                                                                                      32
       Table 3: Sensitivity of results to health shock persistence under moral hazard

                          Deductible size      Overconsumption             Willingness to pay
   Model description       DS       DR       Standard     Resetting    No bor. costs   No bor/sav
   Independent            3769      2748        406          358              3             167
   Less persistence       4385      2748        356          358             -2             217
   Empirical              4467      2748        351          358             -3             224
   More persistence       4673      2748        340          358             -5             244
Notes: Table presents deductible sizes, overconsumption due to moral hazard, and willingness to pay for
the resetting deductible policy based on an environment with moral hazard and under different levels of
persistence of the health shock distribution.


ing constraints. While overconsumption decreases in the standard deductible policy rela-
tive to the resetting deductible policy when shocks are persistent, individuals are willing
to pay even more for the resetting policy because the standard deductible grows much
larger in size and thus the standard deductible exhibits even worse liquidity features.


5.2    Extension to shorter periods

We next extend the model to shorter periods: instead of two six-month periods, we model
period lengths of three months and two months.23 Similar to the baseline model, utility
is defined over the period and shocks occur at periodic frequencies, but the resetting de-
ductible still spans six months and resets after six months and the standard deductible
still spans 12 months (see Appendix Figure 2 for the modified schematic in the case of
monthly periods). This extension may be important if health shocks are more accurately
represented by shorter arrival rates or if the dynamics of utility or consumption are more
appropriately captured at shorter frequencies rather than biannual frequencies (as in our
baseline model) or annual frequencies (as in much of the health insurance literature and
beyond).24 We convert the premium and income level into equally divided periodic lev-
els, and disaggregate the empirical health expenditure distribution to shorter periods.
Table 4 reports willingness to pay (scaled to biannual amounts to be comparable to our
  23 Increasing the number of periods exponentially increases computational burden and hence we refrain
from monthly periods. Additionally, we use a discretized grid of 10 health shocks; since our main results
are very robust to this smaller health shock grid, we do not expect that this affects our results here.
   24 See Cronin (2019), who models monthly health and consumption dynamics, for an example of the

exception to this.


                                                   33
main results) under our two main liquidity environments and without moral hazard,
contract switching, or claim delay, and shows that the willingness to pay for the resetting
deductible is very similar across period lengths.

   Table 4: Willingness to pay for resetting deductible (biannualized), shorter periods

                      Model description                No bor. costs      No bor/sav
                      Two six-month periods                   -5              140
                      Four three-month periods                -1               95
                      Six two-month periods                   0               107
Notes: Table presents willingness to pay for the resetting deductible policy under no borrowing costs (first
column) and no borrowing or saving (second column) for different period lengths. Premium and income
are equally divided between periods to be the same annual amount as in the baseline case, and health
shocks are disaggregated to the period length. The first row is slightly different from the baseline case
because the health shock distribution is discretized to 10 points instead of 30 throughout the rest of the
paper.




5.3    Three-armed policy

The final extension we consider is a policy that includes three cost-sharing "arms": a
deductible arm, a coinsurance arm after the deductible in which the individual pays a
percentage of the health care costs above the deductible, and a full insurance arm once an
out-of-pocket maximum is reached, at which point the individual pays nothing.25 In the
"two-armed" policies we have considered thus far (a deductible arm and a full insurance
arm), the deductible is equivalent to the out-of-pocket maximum. To investigate how the
addition of a coinsurance arm affects our results, we return to the baseline two-period
model and now characterize the policies as ( P, Di , c, M) with per-period premium P, de-
ductible Di where i = S and i = R are the standard deductible and resetting deductible,
respectively, c is the coinsurance rate after the deductible, and M is the out-of-pocket max-
imum that spans the two periods.26 We set P = $2, 154 as in the baseline model, c = 0.2,
  25 See   Appendix Figure 3 for a schematic of the three-armed policy.
  26 In principle we could assume an out-of-pocket maximum for the standard policy that spans two periods

and an out-of-pocket maximum for the resetting policy that spans one period to mimic the differences
between the standard and resetting deductible. We chose to use a single out-of-pocket maximum for two
reasons: first, distinct out-of-pocket maxima for each deductible adds an additional free parameter and it is
not obvious how to pin it down, and second, using a single out-of-pocket maximum keeps the focus strictly
on the time aggregation of deductibles.


                                                      34
and vary M. Table 5 shows the deductible sizes for the standard and resetting deductible
in columns 1 and 2, respectively, and the willingness-to-pay estimates under no borrow-
ing costs in column 3 and no borrowing or saving in column 4. Because of the additional
coinsurance arm, the deductible sizes are much smaller than in this exercise, which leads
to smaller willingness to pay estimates. Nevertheless, the pattern remains the same: indi-
viduals without the ability to borrow prefer shorter deductible spans, while those without
borrowing costs prefer the standard deductible.

          Table 5: Willingness to pay for resetting deductible, three-armed policy

                                                             Willingness to pay
                  Model description      DS      DR     No bor costs    No bor/sav
                  M = 5, 000            2,482   1,516         -3             70
                  M = 6, 000            2,211   1,312         -7             45
                  M = 7, 000            2,002   1,177         -7             26
Notes: Table shows willingness to pay for a three-armed policy with a resetting deductible compared to a
three-armed policy with a standard deductible, both with an annual out-of-pocket maximum as denoted in
each row and a coinsurance rate of 20% after the deductible is reached.




6    Discussion and conclusions

This paper analyses the extent to which an unexplored feature of health insurance plans--
the time aggregation of deductibles--affects the financial well-being of individuals. Specif-
ically, we build and calibrate a dynamic model of within-year health care and consump-
tion choice under uncertainty, and use it to calculate the willingness to pay for alternative
deductible time aggregation policies. We show that, in lieu of an annual deductible, an
actuarially-equivalent deductible that is smaller in size but resets after six months can
generate welfare gains for liquidity constrained populations. On the other hand, reset-
ting deductibles are inherently worse insurance for worst-case health shock scenarios.
Thus, whether an individual prefers a resetting deductible policy depends in large part
on the trade-off between risk-protection, liquidity, and to a smaller extent, moral hazard,
mid-year contract switching, and the delayability of care.
    Our model explores the effect of changing the timespan over which a deductible re-

                                                  35
sets, but holds the timespan of the insurance contract itself fixed. A parallel literature
finds large welfare gains of long-term health insurance contracts, which accrue by solving
selection and reclassification risk issues (Ghili et al., 2020). While analyzing the selection
issues raised by resetting deductibles would be an interesting extension, we abstract from
these issues and instead focus on the higher-frequency issues of liquidity and moral haz-
ard. Additionally, given the empirical reality of "policy churn" (Diamond et al., 2018),
more work on the design of short-term health insurance would help inform policy. This
study takes a first step by studying the disaggregation of a particular--and increasingly
prominent--component of health insurance contracts.
   Beyond health insurance, it is natural to ask how time aggregation may affect the
value of other products or policies. For example, many government programs measure
household income to determine eligibility, participation, benefits, and payments. Since
income is often lumpy, one key component of this determination is the time span over
which income is aggregated. Medicaid and SNAP programs typically assess eligibility by
aggregating income over the previous month (Swartz et al., 2015), Social Security calcu-
lates retirement benefits by averaging the highest 35 years of income, and income taxes
are calculated based on income over the calendar year. However, little is known about
the consequences of adjusting these time windows. A fruitful next step is to investigate
other contexts in which the aggregation of measures over time may matter for policy and
welfare, including tax policy and income eligibility thresholds for social safety net pro-
grams.




                                             36
References
Abaluck, Jason, Jonathan Gruber, and Ashley Swanson. 2018. "Prescription drug use
 under Medicare Part D: A linear model of nonlinear budget sets." Journal of Public Eco-
 nomics, 164: 106­138.

Aron-Dine, Aviva, Liran Einav, Amy Finkelstein, and Mark Cullen. 2015. "Moral haz-
  ard in health insurance: Do dynamic incentives matter?" Review of Economics and Statis-
  tics, 97(4): 725­741.

Arrow, Kenneth J. 1963. "Uncertainty and the Welfare Economics of Medical Care." Amer-
  ican Economic Review, 53(5): 941­973.

Atal, JP, H Fang, M Karlsson, and N Ziebarth. 2020. "Long-term Health Insurance: The-
  ory Meets Evidence." working paper.

Barseghyan, Levon, Jeffrey Prince, and Joshua C Teitelbaum. 2011. "Are risk prefer-
  ences stable across contexts? Evidence from insurance data." American Economic Review,
  101(2): 591­631.

Bjelland, Melissa, Bruce Fallick, John Haltiwanger, and Erika McEntarfer. 2011.
  "Employer-to-employer flows in the United States: Estimates using linked employer-
  employee data." Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 29(4): 493­505.

Blumberg, LJ, M Buettgens, and R Wang. 2018. "Updated Estimates of the Potential
  Impact of Short-Term, Limited Duration Policies. Washington: Urban Institute; August
  2018."

Brot-Goldberg, Zarek C, Amitabh Chandra, Benjamin R Handel, and Jonathan T
  Kolstad. 2017. "What does a deductible do? The impact of cost-sharing on health
  care prices, quantities, and spending dynamics." The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  132(3): 1261­1318.

Cabral, Marika. 2017. "Claim timing and ex post adverse selection." The Review of Eco-
  nomic Studies, 84(1): 1­44.

Casaburi, Lorenzo, and Jack Willis. 2018. "Time versus State in Insurance: Experimental
  Evidence from Contract Farming in Kenya." American Economic Review, 108(12): 3778­
  3813.

Cohen, Alma. 2006. "The disadvantages of aggregate deductibles." Topics in Economic
 Analysis & Policy, 6(1).

Cohen, Alma, and Liran Einav. 2007. "Estimating risk preferences from deductible
 choice." American Economic Review, 97(3): 745­788.

Cronin, Christopher J. 2019. "Insurance-Induced Moral Hazard: A Dynamic Model of
  Within-Year Medical Care Decision Making Under Uncertainty." International Economic
  Review, 60(1): 187­218.

                                           37
Cutler, David M, and Richard J Zeckhauser. 2000. "The anatomy of health insurance."
 In Handbook of health economics. Vol. 1, 563­643. Elsevier.
Dalton, Christina M, Gautam Gowrisankaran, and Robert J Town. 2019. "Salience, My-
 opia, and Complex Dynamic Incentives: Evidence from Medicare Part D." The Review
 of Economic Studies.
Department of Health and Human Services. 2018. "Patient Protection and Affordable
 Care Act; HHS Notice of Benefit and Payment Parameters for 2019." Federal Register,
 83(74): 16930­17071.
Devenir Research Team. 2018. "2017 Year-End HSA Market Statistics & Trends Exective
 Summary." Devenir Group.
Diamond, Rebecca, Michael J Dickstein, Timothy McQuade, and Petra Persson. 2018.
 "Take-up, drop-out, and spending in ACA marketplaces." National Bureau of Eco-
 nomic Research.
Dolan, Rachel. 2016. "High-Deductible Health Plans." Health Affairs Health Policy Brief.
eHealth. 2018. "Affordable Coverage: Short-Term Health Insurance and the ACA."
  eHealth, Inc.
Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein, and Paul Schrimpf. 2015. "The response of drug expen-
  diture to nonlinear contract design: Evidence from Medicare Part D." The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 130(2): 841­899.
Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein, Stephen P Ryan, Paul Schrimpf, and Mark R Cullen.
  2013. "Selection on moral hazard in health insurance." American Economic Review,
  103(1): 178­219.
Ellis, Randall P, Shenyi Jiang, and Willard G Manning. 2015. "Optimal health insurance
  for multiple goods and time periods." Journal of Health Economics, 41: 89­106.
Ericson, Keith Marzilli, and Justin R Sydnor. 2018. "Liquidity Constraints and the Value
  of Insurance." National Bureau of Economic Research.
Ericson, Keith M. Marzilli, Kimberley H. Geissler, and Benjamin Lubin. 2018. "The Im-
  pact of Partial-Year Enrollment on the Accuracy of Risk-Adjustment Systems: A Frame-
  work and Evidence." American Journal of Health Economics, 4(4): 454­478.
Ghili, Soheil, Benjamin R Handel, Igal Hendel, and Michael D Whinston. 2020. "Opti-
 mal Long-Term Health Insurance Contracts: Characterization, Computation, and Wel-
 fare Effects." working paper.
Guo, Audrey, and Jonathan Zhang. 2019. "What to expect when you are expecting: Are
 health care consumers forward-looking?" Journal of Health Economics, 67: 102216.
Handel, Benjamin R. 2013. "Adverse selection and inertia in health insurance markets:
 When nudging hurts." American Economic Review, 103(7): 2643­82.

                                           38
Helmchen, Lorens A, David W Brown, Ithai Z Lurie, and Anthony T Lo Sasso. 2015.
 "Health savings accounts: growth concentrated among high-income households and
 large employers." Health Affairs, 34(9): 1594­1598.

Kaiser Family Foundation. 2017a. "Cost-Sharing for Plans Offered in the Federal Market-
 place for 2017."

Kaiser Family Foundation. 2017b. "State Health Facts."

Kaiser Family Foundation. 2020. "Employer Health Benefits: 2020 Annual Survey."
 Henry Kaiser Family Foundation.

Keith, Katie. 2018. "The short-term, limited-duration coverage final rule: the back-
 ground, the content, and what could come next." Health Affairs Blog. https://www.
 healthaffairs. org/do/10.1377/hblog20180801.

Li, Chu-Shiu, Chwen-Chi Liu, and Jia-Hsing Yeh. 2007. "The Incentive Effects of In-
  creasing Per-Claim Deductible Contracts in Automobile Insurance." Journal of Risk and
  Insurance, 74(2): 441­459.

Lin, Haizhen, and Daniel W Sacks. 2019. "Intertemporal substitution in health care de-
  mand: Evidence from the RAND Health Insurance Experiment." Journal of Public Eco-
  nomics, 175: 29­43.

Liu, Chenyuan. 2020. "Sorting on Plan Design: Theory and Evidence from the ACA."
  working paper.

Marone, Victoria R, and Adrienne Sabety. 2019. "Should There be Vertical Choice in
 Health Insurance Markets?" Working paper.

Michel-Kerjan, Erwann O, and Carolyn Kousky. 2010. "Come rain or shine: Evidence
 on flood insurance purchases in Florida." Journal of Risk and Insurance, 77(2): 369­397.

Parsons, Christopher A, and Edward D Van Wesep. 2013. "The timing of pay." Journal of
  Financial Economics, 109(2): 373­397.

Pollitz, Karen, M Long, A Semanskee, and R Kamal. 2018. "Understanding short-term
  limited duration health insurance." Kaiser Family Foundation Health Reform.

Rae, Matthew, Gary Claxton, and Larry Levitt. 2017. "Do Health Plan Enrollees Have
  Enough Money to Pay Cost Sharing?" Kaiser Family Foundation Issue Brief.

Shapiro, Jesse M. 2005. "Is there a daily discount rate? Evidence from the food stamp
  nutrition cycle." Journal of Public Economics, 89(2): 303 ­ 325.

Swartz, Katherine, Pamela Farley Short, Deborah R Graefe, and Namrata Uberoi. 2015.
 "Evaluating state options for reducing medicaid churning." Health affairs (Project Hope),
 34(7): 1180.



                                           39
Sydnor, Justin. 2010. "(Over) insuring modest risks." American Economic Journal: Applied
  Economics, 2(4): 177­99.

Towers Watson. 2015. "High-Performance Insights: Best Practices in Health Care." 20th
  Annual Towers Watson/National Business Group on Health Employer Survey on Purchasing
  Value in Health Care.




                                          40
Appendix figures

       Appendix Figure 1: Overconsumption due to moral hazard, by environment



                                 500
                                                                                                Standard deductible
                                                                                                Resetting deductible
                                             400
                    Expected MH consumption ($)
                          200      300
                                 100
                                 0




                                                           Moral hazard                     All together


Notes: Figure presents the total extra medical consumption over the two periods due to moral hazard.
The blue bars denote extra consumption under the standard deductible policy and red bars denote extra
consumption under the resetting deductible policy. The bars on the left correspond to the environment with
moral hazard only and the bars on the right correspond to the environment with moral hazard, contract
switching, and claim delay.




           Appendix Figure 2: Deductible timespan schematic, monthly periods

                                                                              D
                                                             DR                            DR


                                                   1   2    3     4   5   6        7   8   9 10 11 12

Notes: Figure depicts the length of time over which a deductible applies and resets. The black lines and
numbers denote periods. DR in red is the reset policy in which the deductible resets after six periods, while
DS in blue is the standard policy in which the deductible resets after twelve periods.


                                                                              41
    Appendix Figure 3: Three-armed policy schematic




Notes: Figure depicts the three-armed policy as described in Section 5.




                                  42
