                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        THE UNHOLY TRINITY:
       REGULATORY FORBEARANCE, STRESSED BANKS AND ZOMBIE FIRMS

                                      Anusha Chari
                                       Lakshita Jain
                                    Nirupama Kulkarni

                                    Working Paper 28435
                            http://www.nber.org/papers/w28435


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   February 2021




We thank workshop participants at Columbia University, UNC-Chapel Hill, the Reserve Bank of
India, the IIM Calcutta-NYU Stern India Conference, Norges Bank, and the FDIC for helpful
comments and suggestions. We thank Viral Acharya, Arvind Panagariya, Jagdish Bhagwati,
Pravin Krishna, Suresh Sundaresan, Manju Puri, the late Subir Gokarn, Yasser Boualam, Rakesh
Mohan, and Krishnamurthy Subrahmanian for helpful discussions. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Anusha Chari, Lakshita Jain, and Nirupama Kulkarni. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Unholy Trinity: Regulatory Forbearance, Stressed Banks and Zombie Firms
Anusha Chari, Lakshita Jain, and Nirupama Kulkarni
NBER Working Paper No. 28435
February 2021
JEL No. E58,G21,G28

                                           ABSTRACT

During the global financial crisis, the Reserve Bank of India enacted forbearance measures that
lowered capital provisioning rates for loans under temporary liquidity stress. Matched bank-firm
data reveal that troubled banks took advantage of the policy to also shield firms facing serious
solvency issues. Perversely, in industries and bank portfolios with high proportions of failing
firms, credit to healthy firms declined and was reallocated to the weakest firms. By incentivizing
banks to hide true asset quality, the forbearance policy provided a license for regulatory arbitrage.
The build-up of stressed assets in India's predominantly state-owned banking system is consistent
with accounting subterfuge.

Anusha Chari                                        Nirupama Kulkarni
Department of Economics, CB #3305                   Research Director
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill         CAFRAL, Research Department
Chapel Hill, NC 27599                               Reserve Bank of India Main Building,
and NBER                                            Mezzanine Floor,
achari@unc.edu                                      Shahid Bhagat Singh Road,
                                                    Fort, Mumbai 400 001
Lakshita Jain                                       nirupama.kulkarni@gmail.com
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
laksh21@email.unc.edu
1       Introduction

Regulatory forbearance can create dueling incentives.1 On the one hand, forbearance pro-
vides a risk management tool for the temporarily problematic loans of viable firms. It allows
otherwise solvent firms facing temporary liquidity shortages to remain in operation. On
the other hand, forbearance can lead to a misallocation of credit enabling banks to keep
non-performing assets on their balance sheets and zombie firms afloat (Caballero, Hoshi,
and Kashyap, 2008, Peek and Rosengren, 2005, Acharya et al., 2019, Blattner, Farinha, and
Rebelo, 2019). Forbearance as a means to shield non-performing assets can therfore reduce
bank incentives to appropriately provision for and manage credit risk in loan portfolios.
    This paper investigates the role of regulatory forbearance in propagating the misallo-
cation of credit in India, the world's fifth-largest economy. The paper examines whether
the forbearance measures enacted by the Reserve Bank of India (RBI)2 during the global
financial crisis effectively handed over a license for banks to engage in regulatory arbitrage.
We investigate whether the measures provided banks with an incentive to hide true asset
quality, and therefore the build-up of stressed assets in the banking system is a by-product of
accounting subterfuge. Using both bank and firm-level data, our primary goal is to examine
the externalities and costs generated by asset quality forbearance.
    To provide some context, the share of non-performing and restructured assets in India's
banking system rose significantly between 2008 and 2018.3 Before the global financial crisis
India had the lowest non-performing asset (NPA) ratios amongst G-20 nations--by 2018,
it had the highest NPA ratio. India's NPA ratio is also higher than its emerging market
counterparts.4 The data show falling profitability and capital provisioning ratios accompa-
nied by a collapse in credit, especially for state-owned banks (Figure 1 and Figure IA.1). A

    1
      Forbearance refers to the loan concessions or temporary repayment relief granted by creditors or lenders
to alleviate short-term financial difficulties facing borrowers. The temporary difficulties typically arise from
special economic or legal circumstances facing borrowers or adverse external shocks such as financial crises.
    2
      The Reserve Bank of India functions as the central bank of India and also the regulator. In many other
countries, separate agencies perform central banking and regulatory functions.
    3
      https://www.epw.in/journal/2018/34/perspectives/non-performing-assets-commercial-banks.html
    4
      https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/business/india-business/only-4-major-nations-have-higher-bad-
loans-than-india/articleshow/62275553.cms

                                                       1
contemporaneous development is the declining credit quality of Indian firms--the aggregate
interest coverage ratio declined significantly while leverage remained unchanged suggesting
that the debt service capacity of the Indian corporate sector declined measurably over this
period.5
    The rationale for the asset quality forbearance was to provide temporary relief for capital
provisioning requirements associated with loans given to firms facing liquidity problems dur-
ing the crisis. Specifically, subject to some conditions, the forbearance measures permitted
loan accounts of firms to retain their `standard' or good standing classification post restruc-
turing due to missed payments (Master Circular - Prudential Norms on Income Recognition,
Asset Classification and Provisioning Pertaining to Advances, 2009).6 In the absence of
forbearance, these assets would be immediately classified as non-performing and subject to
higher capital provisioning requirements.7 In this paper we investigate whether regulatory
forbearance was used by banks to assist low-liquidity firms, the intended beneficiaries, or
whether the policies also allowed banks to shield firms facing solvency issues, the unintended
beneficiaries.
    Along with rising shares of non-performing assets, we see zombie firms emerging on a
large scale in the Indian corporate sector. Thus, the system suffers from a twin balance sheet
problem where both the banking sector and the corporate sector are under financial stress.
In Europe, Acharya et al. (2019) show that while zombie lending is initially successful at
keeping troubled borrowers alive, many zombie firms likely fail when forbearance is ultimately
withdrawn. In 2016, for approximately 40% of the our sample of non-financial firms the




   5
      In a study, Ansari, Khandelwal, and Prabhala (2016) find that over the sample time period, the aggregate
interest coverage ratio for the corporate sector as a whole changes from a peak of 6.92 in 2007 to nearly half
at 3.38 by 2015.
    6
      See Part B in https://rbi.org.in/scripts/NotificationUser.aspx?Id=5090&Mode=0
    7
      Prior to 2008, commercial bank loan portfolios under the RBI's asset classification norms were broadly
classified as "standard" (assets in good standing) or non-performing assets (NPAs). Additional sub-
classifications of NPAs depending on over-due principal and/or interest, further categorized bank assets
as sub-standard, doubtful and loss assets. Standard advances restructured for delays or non-payment were
immediately re-classified as sub-standard and NPAs re-classified to further lower categories such as from
sub-standard to doubtful and so on.

                                                      2
interest coverage ratio was less than two.8 We hypothesize that the RBI's forbearance policy
between 2008-2015 was associated with lending to zombie firms potentially crowding out
more productive lending to healthy firms.
    We begin by constructing a timeline of the RBI's forbearance stance by carefully pars-
ing policy statements in a series of official circulars posted on the RBI website.9 Banking
secrecy laws in India disallow banks from revealing information about their borrowers.10
Fortuitously, firms can voluntarily choose to disclose information about their lenders. We
take advantage of this asymmetry in information revelation and use a forensic approach to
compile a matched firm-bank dataset with corresponding firm and bank fundamentals. Using
information about banks listed on firm financial statements in the CMIE's Prowess database
we build a bridge that connects banks and firms and allows us to construct bank-lending
portfolios.
    Prowess provides detailed financial statements from a wide universe of public and private
Indian firms that we use to construct firm-level measures such as liquidity, solvency, firm size
and so on. We construct bank-level measures of distress from the Basic Statistical Returns
of Scheduled Commercial Banks published annually on by the RBI.11 In the matched dataset
of firms and their lead banks, our sample has approximately 8,000 firms over the 2006-2016
period. We also use hand-collected information on restructured loans from the Ministry of
Corporate Affairs in supplemental analysis. We use these data to examine the relationship
between the timeline of the regulatory forbearance policy of the Reserve Bank of India, bank
health status, and the liquidity/solvency status of borrower firms.12
    Our main findings are as follows. First, we document a strong positive correlation be-

   8
      Additionally, for 21% of the firms earnings were lower than interest payments with an interest cov-
erage ratio less than one. The interest coverage ratio is defined as Earnings before Interest and Taxes
(EBIT)/Interest Expense.
    9
      The circulars are posted on https://rbi.org.in/Scripts/BS_CircularIndexDisplay.aspx dated August
2008 to February 2018, the relevant time-frame for the forbearance related measures in India.
   10
      The Public Financial Institutions Obligation as to Fidelity and Secrecy) ACT, 1983.
http://legislative.gov.in/sites/default/files/A1983-48.pdf
   11
      Data are available on the RBI's online portal, Database on Indian Economy (DBIE)
   12
      We classify banks into stressed and healthy banks based on the proportions of non-performing loans in
the total gross advances lent out by the bank in 2007, i.e., before the introduction of forbearance policy by
RBI.

                                                     3
tween firm- and bank-distress over the period 2006-2016. Simple univariate regressions show
a statistically significant correlation between the proportion of low-liquidity and low-solvency
firms in bank portfolios and the proportion of distressed assets on individual bank balance
sheets, suggesting a strong co-incidence between bank- and firm-distress. Second, using a
triple interaction specification in a pooled regression setting, we show that indirect recapital-
ization schemes like forbearance in the classification of stressed loans may have encouraged
banks to channel debt not only to firms with low-liquidity but also to low-solvency borrow-
ers. Stressed banks also significantly increase lending to zombie borrowers. The pattern of
lending appears inconsistent with the intent of the forbearance policy. It is also surprising
that we do not find a change in lending patterns following forbearance withdrawal suggesting
that prolonged periods of asset-quality forbearance may have persistent effects.
    Note that the triple difference estimates are plausibly causal given that the implicit par-
allel trends assumption is not violated. While zombie and non-zombie firms may have been
on different time-trends prior to the introduction of the forbearance schemes, the relative
difference between zombie and non-zombie firms were on similar time-trends at stressed and
non-stressed banks, which is the variation we exploit in the triple difference specification.
    Third, we examine the match between zombie firms and stressed banks which may ad-
versely affect the ability of healthy firms to borrow from these banks, especially if the stressed
banks also dominate lending to particular industries. McGowan, Andrews, and Millot (2018)
suggest that there may be a policy dimension, including bank forbearance policies, to the
problem of zombie lending prevalent in many countries. We document a statistically signifi-
cant increase in zombie lending by stressed banks during the forbearance period.13
    Collectively, our findings suggest that the lending norms relaxed during the forbearance
period promoted loans from stressed banks to their existing low-quality borrowers. These
loans likely enabled zombie firms to continue servicing their old loans, i.e., forbearance facili-
tated the ever-greening of previous loans exacerbating the `extend and pretend' phenomenon.

  13
     A firm is classified as a zombie if the firm received subsidized credit, i.e., the firm is able to borrow
loans at an average interest rate that is lower than the Prime Lending Rate (PLR) of State Bank of India
and has a debt-to-assets ratio greater than 0.15.

                                                      4
Also, stressed bank lending to zombie firms remains relatively stable subsequent to forbear-
ance withdrawal suggesting sticky matches between stressed banks and low-quality borrowers
that strengthened during times of forbearance. While prior literature shows that insuffi-
cient recapitalization can perversely increase zombie lending (Acharya et al., 2019; Blattner,
Farinha, and Rebelo, 2019), our results highlight that the perverse matching between the
unhealthy banks and zombie firms may also render future recapitalization ineffective.
    Our evidence is consistent with a misallocation of credit by marginal banks, i.e., banks
close to their minimum capital requirement may avoid loan loss recognition either due to sunk
costs or soft budget constraints (Peek and Rosengren, 2005, Dewatripont and Maskin, 1995)
and face perverse incentives to provide additional credit to severely impaired borrowers.14 .
Marginal banks continue to evergreen loans, essentially gambling for resurrection (Freixas,
Rochet, and Parigi, 2010, Acharya et al., 2011, Baldursson and Portes, 2013, Koudstaal
and Van Wijnbergen, 2012).15 Ben-David, Palvia, and Stulz (2019) provide a nice survey of
the broad literature on gambling for resurrection. Our paper shows that compared to their
healthy counterparts, stressed banks had higher proportions of low-solvency and zombie firms
in their loan portfolios and after the introduction of forbearance were more likely to increase
lending to these firm-types. Using supplemental loan-level data on restructured loans, we
exploit within-firm variation and show that stressed banks had higher loan restructuring
rates compared with healthier banks. Thus, even accounting for demand-side factors we see
a greater increase in zombie lending by stressed banks.
    Spillover effects from zombie lending can crowd out healthy firms by reducing their access
to bank credit (Caballero, Hoshi, and Kashyap, 2008). To test this congestion hypothesis
in bank lending, we examine the spillovers to the leverage ratios of higher quality borrowers
in industries that have high proportions of zombie firms and also on the lending patterns

  14
      For example, with sunk costs and ex-ante asymmetric information, theoretically motivate how banks
may continue lending to inefficient borrowers even after the borrower type is revealed. Peek and Rosengren
(2005) suggest soft budget constraints as an explanation for lending inefficiencies in Japan.
   15
      The papers cited here document evidence of gambling or risk-shifting by banks as a distress response in
the aftermath of recent crises. However, there is also literature suggesting that regulatory and governance
measures could serve to limit risk-taking behaviors (Laeven and Levine, 2009; Benston and Kaufman, 1997;
Akhigbe and Whyte, 2001).

                                                     5
of banks with high proportions of zombie firms in their portfolios. We find that in indus-
tries with high proportions of zombie firms lending to healthy firms declines significantly
during the forbearance period. Similarly, lending to healthy firms declines significantly as
the proportion of zombies in bank lending portfolios increase. Consistent with the literature
documenting that zombie-lending can distort competition by subsidizing credit to inefficient
firms (Storz et al., 2017, Andrews and Petroulakis, 2019, and McGowan, Andrews, and
Millot, 2018), we find that zombie lending crowds out healthy firms via both industry and
bank congestion channels. We also provide evidence that the healthier firms migrate away
from government-owned banks to form new banking relationships with private sector banks,
creating a separating equilibrium of sticky matches between stressed banks and weak firms
that persists after forbearance withdrawal.
   We follow Banerjee and Hofmann (2018) and Caballero, Hoshi, and Kashyap (2008)
and examine the real effects of the forbearance policy by looking at real investment and
employment. Capital expenditures by low-solvency firms borrowing from stressed banks de-
cline significantly during the forbearance phase. However, the wage bill for these firms is
positively and statistically significantly correlated with the implementation of forbearance
suggesting that, in addition to repaying existing loans, low-quality borrowers may have used
the new loans for wage payments. We do not discern a statistically significant pattern in the
capital or wage expenditures for low-liquidity firms in the forbearance or withdrawal periods.
The overall pattern of results suggests that forbearance may have had the unintended con-
sequence of propping up low solvency firms and not temporarily liquidity constrained firms
as originally intended.
   We conclude with a discussion of several robustness checks and also provide evidence
that forbearance implementation is consistent with implicit sovereign backing especially for
state-owned banks. Our main set of results focus on lending to otherwise insolvent borrowers
by stressed banks. We hypothesize that relaxing provisioning norms during the forbearance
period may facilitate the ever-greening of loans to zombie firms. While the reduced provision-
ing requirements can allow banks to engage in regulatory arbitrage, they may also allow the


                                              6
sovereign to postpone recapitalization --particularly the state-owned banks of which they
are the majority owner --kicking the can down the road. We show that indeed, the bulk of
the zombie lending during the forbearance period was concentrated in the state-owned banks.
The finding is consistent with the conjecture that the sovereign may favor budget-neutral
forbearance schemes in lieu of costly bank recapitalization. Indeed Acharya (2020) argues
that forbearance is a manifestation of fiscal dominance, deferring the risk-weights attached
to problematic loans (Patel, 2020).
   To address the endogeneity concern that greater forbearance is more likely for firms
and by extension to banks that are expected to recover quickly, we turn to an alternative
identification strategy using proximity to the regulator, the RBI. Consistent with Gropp
et al. (2020), we use proximity to the regulator as a proxy for the influence that the banks
can exert on the regulator. Further, since forbearance schemes are implicitly backed by the
government, pressures to forbear may be further concentrated in state-owned banks. Using
the proximity measure, we find that state-owned banks with greater forbearance increased
debt to zombie firms by 25 percent during the forbearance period and there were no sta-
tistically discernible changes in the withdrawal phase. Further, we do not uncover similar
patterns of zombie firms lending by private sector banks assuaging concerns that results are
driven by proximity to Mumbai, the financial capital of India.
   The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the related literature. Section 3
provides background details of the RBI's forbearance policy in the aftermath of the global
financial crisis. Section 4 describes our data sources and presents summary statistics. Section
5 presents our findings on (i) the lending patterns to low-solvency and low-liquidity borrowers
following the implementation and withdrawal of forbearance; (ii) lending to zombie firms;
(iii) the spillovers to healthy firms, and (iv) the real effects of forbearance. Section 6 presents
robustness checks and alternative tests. Section 7 provides a discussion of our results and
concludes.




                                                7
2        Related Literature

Our paper makes contributions to several strands of the literature. Seminal papers in the
literature on weakly capitalized banks, zombie firms and the misallocation of credit focused
on Japanese banks (Caballero, Hoshi, and Kashyap, 2008, Peek and Rosengren, 2005). More
recently, the emphasis has shifted to European banks (Acharya et al., 2019, Blattner, Farinha,
and Rebelo, 2019, and Gopinath et al., 2017).
     Our nearest neighbor in the literature is Acharya et al. (2019), which examines the
impact of unconventional monetary policy on credit misallocation in Europe. New lending
at advantageous conditions provided impaired borrowers with the liquidity necessary to meet
payments on their outstanding loans and allowed banks to defer loan loss recognition. Our
paper shows that asset quality forbearance allowed banks to not only lend to low-liquidity
borrowers, but that the unintended beneficiaries of the policy were low-solvency or impaired
borrowers.16
     Our paper corroborates the growing concern that zombie firms may be holding back
growth in a number of countries, including Japan (Caballero, Hoshi, and Kashyap, 2008), and
Europe (Acharya et al., 2019; Gopinath et al., 2017). Blattner, Farinha, and Rebelo (2019)
examine the relationship between weak banks and low productivity growth following the
European sovereign debt crisis while Gropp et al. (2020) focus on the productivity impact of
distressed bank recapitalization through TARP during the global financial crisis.17 Banerjee
and Hofmann (2018) and Caballero, Hoshi, and Kashyap (2008) show that zombie-firm
presence lowers investment and employment in more productive firms.18 In addition to the
industry and bank congestion effects, our paper suggests that impaired borrowers may have

    16
      Indirect means of forbearance include beneficial restructuring, maturity extension or conversion of the
payment structure ranging from regular installments to a lump-sum payment at maturity, and may be more
prevalent in developing countries like India.
   17
      Consistent with the cleansing recessions hypothesis, Gropp et al. (2020) show that regions with higher
regulatory forbearance during the crisis experienced slower productivity growth with depressed job creation,
employment, and wage growth.
   18
      Further, Banerjee and Hofmann (2018) emphasize that there may be a policy dimension to this problem
including structural policy weaknesses, e.g., inadequate insolvency regimes, bank forbearance, loose monetary
policy and impaired banking systems, and the persistence of crisis-induced support to small and medium
enterprises.

                                                     8
used the new loans to repay existing loans, as well as their wage bill at the expense of capital
expenditures. We find that regulatory forbearance is associated with depressed wage growth
and capital expenditures for healthy firms.
   Importantly, we show that the effects of forbearance are persistent and do not revert once
forbearance measures are retracted. This is consistent with models where frictions in the
creative destruction processes also predict weak recovery (Caballero, 2007; Caballero, Hoshi,
and Kashyap, 2008). We show that forbearance measures may fundamentally change bank-
firm relationships within industries by altering the composition of credit to zombie versus
healthy firms. We also contribute to the novel literature on tackling zombie firms in the
economy through increased bank supervision (Bonfim et al., 2020) and improved insolvency
regimes (Andrews and Petroulakis, 2019).
   Our paper is related to recent papers focusing on the ongoing banking crisis in India.
We show that the perverse effects of forbearance were concentrated in state-owned banks.
Since the forbearance schemes based on provisioning requirements apply to all banks and not
just state-owned banks, the compromised standards can also lead to deterioration in balance
sheets of private sector banks. In a contemporaneous paper, Flanagan and Purnanandam
(2020) show that private sector banks with more distant and passive investors have a higher
propensity to hide bad loans. The analysis in Flanagan and Purnanandam (2020) overlaps
with the withdrawal phase studied in this paper and focuses on the clean-up phase which
forced banks to recognize bad loans.19 .
   Finally, our paper is related to the literature that analyzes the impact of bailouts on
bank lending. For example, Cong et al. (2019) show that implicit government guarantees for
state-connected firms become more prominent during recessions, while Laeven and Valencia
(2018) provide evidence that banking crises last longer in the presence of bank guarantees.
Our paper examines the implicit guarantees embodied in regulatory forbearance measures
especially for government-owned banks.


  19
     Chopra, Subrahmanian, and Tantri (2020) focuses on the clean-up phase as well emphasizing the impact
of under-capitalization on lending patterns.

                                                   9
3        Regulatory Forbearance and The GFC

This section describes the asset quality forbearance policy implemented by the Reserve Bank
of India (RBI). We begin by describing the forbearance policies that were put in place in the
midst of the Global Financial Crisis. Broadly, we divide the forbearance policies into two
sub-periods: a period of increasing forbearance between August 2008 and May 2013 and a
period with declining forbearance between May 2013 and February 2018 when forbearance
measures introduced in the previous years were significantly withdrawn. The online appendix
also briefly describes the evolution of the legal framework that banks can access to resolve
non-performing or stressed loans.


3.1      The GFC, Regulatory Forbearance and Regulatory Arbitrage

Before 2008, loans in good standing were classified as standard assets and subject to a cap-
ital requirement of 0.25%-1% (Table A). The provisioning requirements for standard assets
depends on the industry sector of the loan and hence there is a range of provisioning rates
across industries. Loans that missed principal and/or interest payments were immediately
classified as a sub-standard asset and subjected to a higher capital provisioning rate of 10%
up to a one year period. If an asset continued in the sub-standard category beyond one
year, it was downgraded further into the doubtful and then loss categories with progressive
increases in provisioning rates to account for the steady deterioration in asset quality. Table
A shows the different provisioning rates based on the alternative categories of loans in 2008.20




    20
     These provisioning rates have been gradually increased since 2008. The most recent rates (as
of July 1st, 2015) are 15% for sub-standard category, 25% for doubtful assets upto one year & 40%
for assets in doubtful category from one to three years. The latest notice pertaining to provisioning
norms can be found in Master Circular - Prudential Norms on Income Recognition, Asset Classifica-
tion and Provisioning Pertaining to Advances (2015). https://rbidocs.rbi.org.in/rdocs/notification/PDFs/
101MC16B68A0EDCA9434CBC239741F5267329.PDF

                                                  10
               Table A: Provisioning Requirements by Loan Category in 2008

                   Asset Category     NPA Duration       Provisioning Rate
                   Standard                                   0.25%-1%
                   Sub-Standard       <12 months                 10%
                   Doubtful           12 to 24 months            20%
                                      24 to 48 months            30%
                                      > 48 months               100%
                   Loss                                         100%
  Notes: Provisioning requirements by loan categories as defined by the Reserve Bank of India.


   As a precautionary measure, and potentially to address the emerging crisis in the in-
frastructure sector, the Reserve Bank of India announced a "Special Regulatory Treatment"
for the restructuring of debt in 2008. Asset quality forbearance was designed to provide
temporary liquidity relief to otherwise solvent firms due to GFC-related adverse shocks to
the cash flows of firms. Under the terms of this new regulation, lending institutions were no
longer required to automatically downgrade the asset quality of a loan to the sub-standard
category due to missed payments of principal or interest or both. If banks could claim that
a firm had missed payments because it was facing temporary liquidity difficulties during
the crisis, they could classify the loan assets into the new `restructured' category that was
not subject to the higher provisioning rates. Under normal circumstances, the loan would
be downgraded to the sub-standard category and capital provisioning requirements would
increase proportionately.
   Not surprisingly, banks took full advantage of the `restructured' classification to avoid
the higher provisioning requirements. Forbearance steadily provided banks with a route to
postpone or all together avoid the recognition of troubled assets (Vishwanathan, 2018).The
restructured classification was used to engage in regulatory arbitrage, a phenomenon some-
times referred to as `extend and pretend', deviating sharply from the original intent of the
forbearance policy, namely, to provide temporary relief for otherwise viable firms who were


                                               11
encountering liquidity issues during a crisis.
   By 2013, restructured assets constituted nearly 70% (50%) of stressed assets for public
(private) commercial banks, respectively (Figure 1a). The non-performing to gross asset
ratio in Figure 1b mirrors the pattern. As restructured or hidden assets rose with the
announcement of forbearance, the non-performing asset ratio declines. Similarly, the ratio
of distressed assets (defined as the sum of non-performing and restructured assets) was
relatively flat during the forbearance period and increases sharply after the withdrawal is
announced--distressed assets had, however, started increasing for public banks by 2011
(Figure 1c). Taken together the patterns in the three panels of Figure 1 suggest that the
evolution of the hidden asset ratio masked the true extent of deterioration of bank loan
portfolios. We see that once the withdrawal of forbearance was announced in 2013, the
restructured to distressed assets ratio begins to decline while the ratio of non-performing
and distressed assets increases sharply. We discuss the construction of these measures in
greater detail in Section 3.1.2.
   A Financial Stability Report from the RBI notes that while regulatory forbearance may
be justified during major crisis periods, forbearance for extended periods of time potentially
lead to moral hazard problems (Financial Stability Report (Including Trend and Progress of
Banking in India 2013-14), 2014). It also noted that as India moved towards implementing
Basel II norms, accounting discretion such as restructuring would subsequently have no
impact on capital requirements. In May 2013, the RBI announced that forbearance on asset
classification would be withdrawn effective April 1, 2015.


3.2    Regulatory Forbearance: The Withdrawal Phase

Between 2013 and 2017, the RBI together with the government began tightening the pru-
dential norms for asset classification and income recognition. However, some windows of
restructuring remained open. Raghuram Rajan, Governor of the RBI initiated an `Asset
Quality Review' (AQR) that led banks to the recognize the non-performing nature of several
loans, previously considered as restructured assets under the forbearance regime. During

                                                 12
this time we see a significant increase in the proportion of non-performing assets in the gross
loans of banks. Noticeably, its only after 2015, the AQR implementation year, that the
proportion of restructured assets in gross loans finally starts declining. Figure 1 provides
visual confirmation of the use of forbearance regulations to hide the stressed loans under the
guise of `restructured' assets.21
     Forbearance measures can therefore be broadly classified into two phases, a phase start-
ing August 2008 and ending May 2013 where forbearance increased and a second phase
beginning May 2013 and ending February 2018 when forbearance was completely removed.
Table A1 summarizes the major policy events and the direction of increases and decreases
in forbearance over our sample period. Our analysis ends in the first quarter of 2016 to
avoid the confounding effects of the the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code introduced in May
2016, which significantly altered the bad loan resolution process and importantly to avoid
contaminating our results with the demonetization episode that began in November 2016.



4        Data

We use firm-level data from the Prowess database and bank-level data from the DBIE
database of Reserve Bank of India. Prowess covers both publicly listed and unlisted firms
from a wide cross-section of manufacturing, services, utilities, and financial industries from
1989-2019. About one-third of the firms in Prowess are publicly listed firms. The companies
covered account for more than 70% of industrial output, 75% of corporate taxes, and more
than 95% of excise taxes collected by the Government of India (CMIE).
     The advantage of detailed balance sheet and income statement data at the firm level
is the information it provides on a number of variables, such as sales, profitability, and
assets. Prowess also provides information on the identity of banks from whom firms borrow.
However, coverage of balance sheet items for these banks tends to be sparse in Prowess, so
    21
     Other measures implemented include the creation of a data warehouse of large loans called as Central
Repository of Information on Large Credits (CRILC) that covers all loans in India over Rs. 5 crore (ap-
proximately US$ 0.7 million). The database is accessible to all the banks and provides a transparent way
for banks gain information about whether a borrower has defaulted with another bank.

                                                   13
we hand-match the bank-identities to detailed information on bank balance sheets from the
RBI's DBIE database.22
    Our forensic approach matching firms to banks has a major advantage. Financial secrecy
laws prohibit banks in India from revealing the identity of their borrowers.23 However, there
is no such restriction on firms voluntarily revealing their bankers. To conduct our empirical
analysis, we take advantage of this asymmetry in information sharing to build a bridge from
the firm- to bank-level data.
    The data from Prowess combined with the DBIE data are particularly well-suited for
understanding how banks and firms adjust over time and how their responses may be related
to policy changes such as the forbearance policy. Prowess provides the names of banks for
about 19,600 firms. After applying the mentioned filters, our sample has 8,331 unique firms.
36% of the firm-year observations have a single banking relationship and rest have multiple
banks. The average number of bankers among multiple banking firms is 4.86 over the sample
period.
    Prowess covers firms in the organized sector, which refers to registered companies that
submit financial statements. According to the government, "the organized sector comprises
enterprises for which the statistics are available from the budget documents or reports,
etc. On the other hand the unorganized sector refers to those enterprises whose activities
or collection of data is not regulated under any legal provision or do not maintain any
regular accounts".24 The 1956 Companies Act requires Indian firms to disclose information
on capacities, production, and sales in their annual reports. All listed companies are included
in the database regardless of whether financials are available.
    The Indian NIC system (2008)25 system classifies firms in the Prowess dataset by in-
dustry. The data include firms from a wide range of industries, including mining, basic

  22
      When a firm borrows from more than one bank in year, the bank names are recorded in Prowess in the
order in which they appear in the firm's financial statements. In the case of multiple banking relationships,
we retain the first bank as it likely corresponds to the firm's lead bank.
   23
      THE PUBLIC FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS (OBLIGATION AS TO FIDELITY AND SECRECY)
ACT, 1983. http://legislative.gov.in/sites/default/files/A1983-48.pdf
   24
      For more details, refer to: Ministry of Labour and Employment (2000)
   25
      See http://mospi.nic.in/classification/national-industrial-classification for further details.

                                                     14
manufacturing, financial and real estate services, and energy distribution.
   Another advantage of the bank- and firm-level data is that detailed balance sheet in-
formation allows us to analyze how the forbearance policy affects banks according to their
loan portfolios of firms distinguished by solvency and liquidity status. The data allow us to
compile a sample of non-financial Indian firms matched with their bankers so that the na-
ture of matching can be explored using the borrower and bank level characteristics. Prowess
also provides data on stock market returns and financial performance variables like current
assets, current liabilities, debt, cash flows, interest expenses, and so on. We use the financial
variables to construct firm-level measures of quality i.e. liquidity and solvency. We also use
information on real variables like the change in gross fixed assets and the wage bill of a firm
to examine the real effects of the forbearance policy changes.
   We supplement the main analysis with loan-level data on loan charges from the Ministry
of Corporate Affairs (MCA). These data are self-declared by firms and may or may not be
validated by a formal audit. The data contain information about the loan amount and the
financial institution name. We use the "date of modification" to construct whether a loan is
restructured and the loan amount restructured. We match the loan-level data to the main
Prowess data using the Company Identification Number (CIN). We hand match the data on
scheduled commercial banks. The final dataset comprises matched firm-bank information
on collateralized loans. Since the data is filed manually by companies and banks, there are
numerous instances where, due to human error, there are duplicate observations in the data.
We deal with these inaccuracies in the following way. Each charge has a unique charge
identification number. We drop observations with duplicate charge identification numbers,
or if the charge identification number is different, but loan amounts, bank names, and dates
are the same. We take a conservative approach and drop observations where the date of loan
initiation, loan amount, and the CIN appears more than once. We then aggregate up to the
bank-firm-year level and form a balanced panel to get 1,298,440 observations.
   We use a sample period from 2006-2016. We end the sample period in March 2016 to
avoid confounding the results with the introduction of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code


                                               15
in May 2016 and the demonetization episode of November 2016. Throughout the sample we
distinguish between the phase after introduction of forbearance in 2008 and the phase after
withdrawal was announced in 2013.
    Turning to the bank-level data, The firm-level data is matched with the bank-level in-
formation obtained from annual Bank Statistical Returns (BSR) available from the Reserve
                             26
Bank of India's website.          The publicly available version has bank-level balance sheet data
and common variables such as industry classification, credit, deposits, NPAs, restructured
advances, and so on.
    Our baseline analysis includes public and private scheduled commercial banks. We extend
the analysis to foreign banks for a placebo test in the robustness section. In 2016, there were
27 public sector banks, 21 private sector banks and 49 foreign banks in the Indian banking
system.27 Public sector banks account for almost 70% of the total market share, private
sector banks for approximately 23%, and foreign banks for the remaining 7%. Figure 2
shows that asset quality has declined significantly post-2013 and more so for public sector
banks. With this motivation, we restrict our sample of lenders to public and private sector
banks. We construct bank-level measures of performance using the DBIE's BSR dataset.
    The fiscal year for a vast majority of Indian firms ends in March. A subset of firms
release data on a quarterly basis as well. The bank-level data is released at the end of March
every year. To ensure that we use the latest available information about each firm we use
the latest date in a financial year for firms' financial variables. We exclude observations with
missing values for total assets, a central variable required for computing several variables
used in our main analysis. Table A2 provides a detailed summary of variable definitions.
Table A3 reports the steps we follow to construct our sample for the period 2006-2016. The
final sample is at the firm-lead-bank-year level comprising 38,016 observations, 8331 unique
firms and 39 unique lead banks.
    To identify zombie firms, we require a minimum benchmark lending rate for prime bor-
  26
     Following is the link to DBIE portal of RBI https://dbie.rbi.org.in/DBIE/dbie.rbi?site=publications#!4
  27
     In addition there were 56 regional rural banks, 1,562 urban cooperative banks and 94,384 rural cooper-
ative banks, and cooperative credit institutions­these banks are excluded from our analysis as they do not
lend to the firms in our sample.

                                                    16
rowers. We use the Prime Lending Rate (PLR) charged by State Bank of India as the
benchmark minimum interest rate. The prime lending rate is the rate at which banks are
willing to lend to highly-rated borrowers. We use the minimum prime lending rate as a
conservative estimate of the interest rates at which only the most creditworthy borrowers
can borrow. In the robustness tests, we consider a narrower definition of zombie-firms that
adds a low interest coverage ratio (ICR < 2) filter to the subsidized credit filter. This def-
inition demonstrates that the borrowers we classify as zombies are able to obtain credit at
subsidized rates even when their debt servicing capability is not strong.


4.1     Constructing Borrower and Bank-Level Measures

In the formal analysis, we examine both bank and borrower-level responses to the forbearance
policy to assess whether bank lending to low-quality firms changed and whether banks used
the asset classification benefits to their advantage. In other words, did the forbearance
provide an opportunity for regulatory arbitrage? Consistent lending increases to low-solvency
and zombie firms following the announcement of forbearance could indicate that the firms
were distressed due to fundamental economic problems and not due to temporary liquidity
constraints. Next, we describe the construction of our borrower-level measures from the
firm-level data and the bank-level measures.


4.1.1   Borrower-Level Measures

We begin with measures of borrower-level liquidity and solvency indicators. Liquidity ratios
are based on the portions of the company's current assets and current liabilities taken from
firm balance sheet and indicate the ability to repay short term obligations. We consider the
Quick Ratio (Current Assets-Inventory/Current Liabilities) and the Cash Ratio (Cash to
Current Liabilities) as measures of liquidity. The higher the value of these ratios, the more
comfortable the firm is with respect to short term survival and cash availability.
   The solvency measures indicate the long term survival potential of firms. To measure
solvency, we use Debt-to-Equity Ratio, Debt to Assets ratio and Altman Scores using Emerg-

                                               17
ing Market weights. The Debt to Equity ratio signals the extent of leverage and measures
the ability to repay long term obligations. The lower the ratio, the more comfortable is the
leverage position of the firm. The measures are winsorized at 0.5% level on both ends of the
tail for every year to avoid major outliers from biasing the averages.


4.1.2    Bank-Level Measures

At the bank level, we require a measure that can capture the effect of regulatory forbearance
on the bank's portfolio of assets. We begin by constructing bank-level portfolios by first
collapsing the matched bank-firm dataset at the bank level to compute the total number of
borrowers attached to each bank. Next, we map the bank-level information from the RBI,
namely, Gross Advances (GA), Restructured Advances (RA) and Non-Performing Advances
(NPA) to our collapsed dataset by bank and year to compute the measures as follows.
    We construct the `Hidden Assets Ratio', or the proportion of restructured assets in the
total pool of distressed assets of a bank. It is computed as the restructured assets as a
                                                                                 RA
proportion of restructured and non-performing assets on a bank's balance sheet ( DA ). Given
that more granular level data is not available for tracking the overtime evolution of loans
across the different loan classification categories like standard and non-standard,28 we use
this measure with the caveat that this is an overestimate of the potential hiding of bad loans
by banks in India. For the purpose of our analysis, we define Distressed Assets as the sum
total of non-performing loans (NPAs) and restructured loans (RA) in any given year. This
is the proportion of potentially bad loans hidden as RAs and declared bad loans as NPAs by
banks. We compute the measure as the fraction of restructured assets and non-performing
assets as a proportion of gross advances by the bank ( DA
                                                       GA
                                                          ). Similarly, we compute the NPA
ratio as the ratio of non-performing assets to gross advances ( N PA
                                                                 GA
                                                                     ).




  28
     On an annual basis, the RBI publishes the aggregate volume of loans in the standard and NPA categories
for each bank but does not disclose how an individual loan transitions over years from one category to another.
We also do not know at the firm level that if that firm's loan has been classified as NPA.

                                                      18
4.2    The Data at First Glance

Table 1 shows the summary statistics for the selected firm level and bank level ratios used
in our analysis. We present the statistics for high and low quality borrowers by: solvency,
liquidity and zombie status. We also test for the significance of the difference in means
between the high and low quality groups. Panel A shows the summary statistics by solvency
and liquidity status. We observe that firms classified as low-solvency have significantly lower
liquidity measures and significantly higher debt compared to solvent firms. Similarly, low-
liquidity firms also have significantly lower-solvency measures and lower aggregate debt levels
compared to the liquid firms.
   Panel B splits the sample via zombie status. We use three alternative definitions of
zombie firms. First, we capture the firms that are recipients of subsidized credit (Zombie
Status #1). Second, we impose an additional condition of an interest coverage ratio below
two (Zombie Status #2). Third, we also examine a subset of firms classified as `speculative
credit' defined by the IMF (Zombie Status #3). More detailed explanations follow in Section
5. Zombie firms have significantly higher aggregate debt levels and leverage ratios along with
lower interest coverage ratios and liquidity ratios compared to the creditworthy firms in the
sample. An interesting observation is that the Zombie Status #1 and #3 definitions of
low-quality firms do not depend on average interest rate paid by a firm. Perversely, these
definitions indicate a significantly lower cost of borrowing for low-quality firms compared
to healthy firms. We infer that low-quality firms had cheaper access to credit during our
sample period despite their low-solvency and liquidity status.
   In the formal empirical specifications, low-solvency firms have above-median debt-to-
equity ratios and low-liquidity firms have below-median cash ratios. Zombie firms are defined
as borrowers who receive subsidized credit; i.e. they pay an average interest rate below that
paid by most creditworthy borrowers in the economy.
   Table 1, Panel C shows descriptive statistics for the bank-level data by bank health
status. Stressed banks are on average smaller and have higher proportions of restructured
and non-performing loans compared to healthy banks. As also mentioned in Section 3,

                                              19
Figure 2 plots the evolution of bank-level distressed and restructured asset ratios between
2006-2016, further split by ownership, into public and private banks. Panel A shows the
                            RA
restructured assets ratio ( DA ) steeply rising post 2008 until 2013 indicating that banks used
the forbearance policy heavily, reflected in the rising levels of restructured loans. Panel B
plots the distressed assets ratio ( DA
                                    GA
                                       ) increasing significantly post-2008 and continuing to do
so in the post-2013 period indicating the rapidly rising levels of distressed loans. Panel C
displays the non-performing assets ratio ( N PA
                                            DA
                                                ), the proportion of loans recognized as bad
loans. The ratio hovered at relatively low levels till 2013 following which it spikes up pretty
quickly indicating a transfer of restructured assets to the non-performing category (i.e., from
Panel A to Panel C). By 2016, NPAs were almost 10% of total loans in the Indian banking
sector-significantly higher than other emerging markets. Also note that the non-performing
loans are significantly higher for public sector banks compared to private sector banks.
   Using simple uni-variate regressions, Table 2 displays the correlation between the propor-
tion of low-liquidity and low-solvency firms in bank's portfolio and the distressed asset ratio
                                                                             DA RA          NP A
of the bank in between 2006-2016. We present regression coefficients for       ,
                                                                             GA DA
                                                                                      and   GA

against different measures of low-solvency and low-liquidity. Solvency measures are based
on debt-to-equity ratios and liquidity measures on the cash ratio.
   The first two rows measure the proportion of firms in a bank's portfolio with above
median leverage ratios and in the top quartile. The third row, focuses on a leverage ratio
above 2, an accepted definition of leverage that is `too high'. The last three rows focus on
low-liquidity firms and measure the proportion of firms in a bank's portfolio with a cash
ratios in the bottom quartile, below median, and below unity respectively.
   The data suggest that there is a consistent pattern of statistically significant and positive
correlations between the bank-health measured by the ratio of stressed assets and low-quality
borrowers measured by low-liquidity and low-solvency. The evidence in Table 2 provides
preliminary evidence for the hypothesis that there is a time-invariant sticky match between
stressed banks and low-quality borrowers.
   Further, Table 3 displays confusion matrices based on the three firm characteristics of


                                              20
liquidity, solvency and zombie-status, and by bank-health status. The matrices uncover some
interesting lending pattern differences across stressed and healthy banks. Stressed-banks
tend to lend more heavily to to low-solvency, low-liquidity and zombie credit firms compared
with their healthy counterparts. The proportion of high solvency/low-liquidity firms and low-
solvency/low-liquidity firms is significant. While low-liquidity firms constitute the `intended'
beneficiaries of the policy, low-solvency firms constitute the `unintended' beneficiaries. We
also see that the loan portfolios of stressed banks comprise a higher proportion of low-quality
firms signaling a mis-allocation of credit.
   Figure 2 presents a graphical description of the time-series patterns in lending by stressed
and healthy banks. Panel A shows a rapid expansion in the aggregate credit extended by
stressed compared to healthy banks. However, if the increase in lending by stressed banks was
comprised of creditworthy borrowers, then the credit expansion may be less of a concern. A
visual inspection of the data reveals how aggregate credit was apportioned between borrowers
by quality status based on alternative criteria such as zombie-status (Panel B), solvency-
status (Panel C) and liquidity-status (Panel D).
   We see that the credit extended to zombie firms shows a steep and sustained increase
after 2008. While lending to creditworthy firms declines sharply following the forbearance
withdrawal announcements by the RBI, no such reversal appears in lending to zombie firms
following forbearance retraction. Similarly, lending to low-solvency firms consistently in-
creases relative to 2008-levels along with a very apparent decline in credit extended to sol-
vent firms. Credit increases to low-solvency firms appear to moderate around the forbearance
withdrawal announcement alongside increases in credit allocations to solvent firms.
   Finally, we fail to observe a striking difference in the credit allocated to firms by liquidity
status, although there is somewhat of a decline in credit extended to liquid firms following
forbearance withdrawal. Overall, the patterns of credit allocation by firm-health status
are puzzling especially given that the original forbearance policy allowances were intended
specifically to address the needs of firms experiencing temporary liquidity stress. In the next
section, we formally investigate the empirical validity of the patterns observed in Table 3


                                               21
and Figure 2.



5        Benchmark Specification and Results

A visual inspection of the data suggest that following the implementation of forbearance
measures lending increased to the `intended' beneficiaries low-liquidity but solvent firms.
However, lending also increased to the `unintended' beneficiaries, the low-liquidity and low-
solvency firms. Further, there appears to be a time-invariant sticky match between stressed
banks and low-quality firms including those in zombie status. In this section, we formally in-
vestigate the relationship between bank-lending and firm-health status to investigate whether
asset quality forbearance impacted the efficiency of credit allocation.


5.1      Firm-level Borrowing

To formally examine the significance of the patterns observed in Figure 2, we first test
whether lending to low-solvency borrowers increased following the implementation of for-
bearance measures. Specifically, we explore whether there is any evidence for a sticky match
between stressed banks and low solvency borrowers. Following Acharya et al. (2019), we
use triple-interaction specifications for our variables of interest. We estimate the following
pooled specification:




    Log (Debtj,t+1 ) = t + j + 1  Stressed Bankb  Low Solvencyj,t
          2                                             2
     +         k  Stressed Bankb  F orbearancek
                                              t +            k  Low Solvencyj,t  F orbearancek
                                                                                             t
         k=1                                           k=1
                            2
                       +         k  Stressed Bankb  Low Solvencyj,t  F orbearancek
                                                                                 t +    j,t+1    (1)
                           k=1




                                                  22
Observations are at the firm-level and each firm is linked to a lead bank.29 We classify a
bank as stressed, Stressed Bankb , if the proportion of non-performing loans in the total gross
advances lent by a bank is in top two terciles in 2007, i.e., prior to forbearance provision
by the RBI. It is noteworthy that there is substantial overlap between the subset of banks
classified as stressed, based on their 2007 NPA ratio, and the set of banks placed under the
RBI's Prompt Corrective Action framework between February 2014 and January 2018. The
Reserve Bank specified certain regulatory trigger points based on the capital to risk-weighted
assets ratio (CRAR), the net non-performing assets (NPA) and Return on Assets (RoA),
to initiate certain structured and discretionary actions when banks crossed these thresholds
(Annex 4: Prompt Corrective Action (PCA) Framework, 2014).
   A firm is classified as Low Solvencyj,t in the year t if the debt-to-equity measure of the
firm in time period t is above median. A firm is classified as Low Liquidityj,t in the year t if
the cash ratio measure of the firm in time period t is below median. The indicator variable
F orbearancek = 1 takes a value of 1 in the years following 2008, i.e., after the introduction
of forbearance and F orbearancek = 2 takes a value of 1 post 2013, i.e., after the forbearance
withdrawal announcement by the RBI. All specifications control for time-invariant borrower
characteristics and time-varying firm size using log sales.
   The pooled estimation strategy allows us to test the effects of the introduction and
withdrawal of forbearance in the same regression specification. Our primary interest lies
in the interaction coefficients, 1 and 2 . The triple interaction coefficient 1 represents the
correlation between the the outcome variable, the level of debt, Log (Debtj,t+1 ), and stressed
bank lending to low-solvency firms over the entire post-forbearance, 2009­2016. Note also
that 1 estimates the baseline effect during the forbearance phase as it represents the marginal
change in lending to low solvency firm j by a stressed bank b following the introduction of
forbearance. 2 measures the incremental effect during the withdrawal phase. In all the
regression specifications, we control for the main and pairwise and interaction terms if they
are not absorbed by the fixed effects. For brevity we omit these interaction terms in the
  29
     The Prowess data do not provide information on lending by each bank-firm pair and hence we link firms
to a lead bank.

                                                   23
table displays.
   Columns 1 and 2 of Table 4 summarize the results. On average, we observe a positive
and statistically significant coefficient of 0.384 in lending to low-solvency firms by stressed
banks during the phase of increasing forbearance. To gain a more granular understanding of
the significance of lending to low-solvency versus creditworthy firms, we compute marginal
effects. We compare the difference in margins when the solvency status changes from 0 to 1
at (Stressed bank=1, Post Forbearance=1) and at (Stressed bank=0, Post Forbearance=1).
The difference in margins indicates that lending to low-solvency firms by stressed banks is 7%
higher than to creditworthy firms. The coefficient 2 , that measures lending to low-solvency
firm j by stressed bank b in the withdrawal phase (2014-2016) is insignificant. Our prior
was that the retraction of forbearance would curb lending to low-solvency firms. However,
the insignificant coefficient 2 signals a sticky match between stressed banks and low-quality
borrowers after forbearance withdrawal, indicating the potentially persistent effects of having
provided forbearance to begin with.
   Next, we examine the impact of forbearance on liquidity-constrained firms. We estimate
the following pooled specification:




  Log (Debtj,t+1 ) = t + j + 1  Stressed Bankb  Low Liquidityj,t
        2                                              2
   +         k  Stressed Bankb  F orbearancek
                                            t +             k  Low Liquidityj,t  F orbearancek
                                                                                             t
       k=1                                            k=1
                          2
                     +         k  Stressed Bankb  Low Liquidityj,t  F orbearancek
                                                                                t +     j,t+1    (2)
                         k=1


   Once again, the triple interaction coefficients 1 and 2 are of interest. 1 measures the
marginal change in lending to the average liquidity-constrained firm, j , by stressed bank, b, in
the forbearance phase. Columns 3­4 of Table 4 summarize the results. We observe a positive
and significant coefficient of 0.306. The finding is robust to controls for time-invariant bank
and borrower characteristics as well as year effects. A margins computation of the difference


                                                 24
in lending by stressed banks to low-liquidity firms is approximately 4% higher. 2 , withdrawal
phase lending by stressed banks to liquidity-constrained firms is statistically insignificant,
similar to the finding about solvency. The statistical insignificance of 2 is consistent the
hypothesis of persistence in lending patterns following forbearance retraction.
   Given the considerable overlap between the low-liquidity and low-solvency firms, Ta-
ble IA.4 partitions the firms in our sample into four categories based on their liquidity and
solvency status. The forbearance policy was designed to sustain solvent borrowers facing
temporary liquidity stress. The patterns in Columns 1 and 2 however do not indicate a sig-
nificant change in the loans extended to illiquid firms that are otherwise solvent, in theory,
the intended beneficiaries of forbearance policy. Perversely, the data suggest that credit was
allocated away from these firms. Further, leverage grows by 25% for borrowers in the low-
solvency and low-liquidity category (Column 4). This finding further illustrates a pattern
of credit misallocation by stressed banks consistent with risk-shifting and a gambling for
resurrection narrative.


5.2    Zombie Lending

Andrews and Petroulakis (2019) explore the connection between `zombie' firms, firms that
would typically exit in a competitive market, and bank health. Indirect means of forbear-
ance can include beneficial restructuring, maturity extension or conversion of the payment
structure from regular installments to a lump-sum payment at maturity, and may be more
prevalent in emerging countries like India. McGowan, Andrews, and Millot (2018) argue
that, perversely, it became easier for weak firms that do not adopt the latest technologies
to remain in the market, while more productive firms are less likely to expand. Further,
their study emphasizes the policy dimensions to the observed patterns, including structural
policy weaknesses (e.g., inadequate insolvency regimes), bank forbearance, loose monetary
policy and impaired banking systems, alongside persistent crisis-induced support to small
and medium enterprises. In addition, there is a growing concern that zombie firms may be
holding back potential growth in a number of countries, including Japan (Caballero, Hoshi,

                                             25
and Kashyap, 2008), the United Kingdom (Acharya et al., 2019), and Southern Europe
(Gopinath et al., 2017).
   Much of the literature attributes the rise of zombie credit to weakening banks capital
ratios (Acharya et al., 2019). A popular measure of bank capital is the Tier-I Capital to the
Risk Weighted Assets Ratio (CRAR-T1). CRAR-T1 consists of the first line of defense for
a bank in wake of any losses. We plot the proportion of zombie borrowers against the Tier
1 capital ratio of the average bank in our sample. Figure IA.2 shows an inverse relationship
between bank capital adequacy and the proportion of zombie borrowers. An interpretation
of the observed pattern is that if banks' balance sheets were under stress in the midst and
aftermath of the great financial crisis, banks may have faced a perverse incentive to lend to
zombie borrowers by evergreening loans­a phenomenon referred to as `extend and pretend.'
   In the case of India, the regulator enabled such lending by allowing regulatory forbearance
which happened against a backdrop of increasing capital requirements. Bearing in mind the
worsening interest coverage ratio of low-quality borrowers in our sample, coincident with
declining bank health and forbearance provision, we test for the prevalence of zombie lending
in our data. We focus on whether a match exists between zombie firms and stressed banks.
Further we explore whether zombie lending adversely affecting healthy firms in their ability
to borrow, especially if stressed banks also dominate lending in particular industries. If so,
healthy firms may be crowded out and the spillover effects of zombie lending could reduce
healthy firm access to to bank credit.
   Identification of zombies: Before turning to formal hypothesis testing, we briefly dis-
cuss alternative methods to identify zombie firms from the literature. The seminal approach
in Caballero, Hoshi, and Kashyap (2008) defines zombie firms as those potentially receiving
subsidized bank credit. More specifically, comparing actual interest payments made by firms
with an estimated benchmark interest rate based on the firm's debt structure and market
interest rates allows for the classification of zombie firms.
   McGowan, Andrews, and Millot (2018) base their classification of zombies on the interest
coverage ratio. A choice that is based on the fact that interest coverage ratios encompass


                                               26
channels other than subsidized credit through which zombie firms may be kept alive such as
non-performing loans (NPLs), government guarantees to small and medium enterprises, and
weak insolvency regimes. Acharya et al. (2019) classify firms as zombies if the following cri-
teria are met: (i) subsidized credit access in year t, (ii) credit ratings derived from three year
median are BB or lower, and (iii) the syndicate composition has either remained constant,
or banks that left the syndicate were not replaced by new participants.
    In the baseline specification, we follow the Caballero, Hoshi, and Kashyap (2008) defini-
tion of zombies. Specifically, we classify a firm as a Zombie if the firm received subsidized
credit in time period T i.e. the firm is able to borrow loans at an average interest rate that
is lower than the Prime Lending Rate (PLR) of State Bank of India and has a debt-to-assets
ratio > 0.15.
    Table IA.1 displays zombie-firm characteristics. Column 6 suggests that zombie firms are
more likely to be in the manufacturing or infrastructure industry. This is consistent with
the argument that the forbearance measures may have been directed towards helping failed
infrastructure projects from the preceding lending boom period of 2002­2006.30 Zombie
firms are also older, publicly-listed, and large. We are reassured that our zombie definition
is not capturing small firms with high growth potential, that may not currently be able to
service debt.
    In addition to confirm that our results are robust to the zombie-firm definition, we use
a set of alternative measures for classifying firms as recipients of `zombie credit'. These
include, (i) in addition to subsidized credit the borrower has an interest coverage ratio below
two (ICR < 2), (ii) following Banerjee and Hofmann (2018) the borrower has ICR < 1
consecutively for at least three years and below median Tobin's q in any given year in the
industry to which it belongs. Tobin's q is a market-based measure and hence this sample is

  30
     The origins of the trouble in the banking sector can be traced back to the credit boom between 2004 to
2009. Commercial credit nearly doubled and was accompanied by significant foreign capital inflows, especially
in infrastructure and related sectors such as Telecom, Power, Roads, Aviation, and Steel (Chakrabarty,
2013a). By 2008, poor credit quality (Chakrabarty, 2013b) coupled with problems gaining access to land
and environmental clearances, led to an increase in distressed assets, especially in the infrastructure sector
(Chavan and Gambacorta, 2019; Chakrabarty, 2013a). Against this backdrop, the global financial crisis
(GFC) occurred.

                                                     27
restricted to listed borrowers, and (iii) the IMF's speculative credit definition i.e. firms with
an interest coverage ratio, ICR < 4.1 and a net debt-to-assets ratio greater than 0.25.


   The Impact of Forbearance on Zombie Lending and Spillovers: In line with
the triple-interaction pooled regressions, we estimate the following specification to analyze
borrowing by zombie firms in our sample:


  Log (Debtj,t+1 ) = t + j + 1  Stressed Bankb  Zombiej,t
            2                                                2
       +         k  Stressed Bankb      F orbearancek
                                                    t   +         k  Zombiej,t  F orbearancek
                                                                                            t
           k=1                                              k=1
                                2
                           +         k  Stressed Bankb  Zombiej,t  F orbearancek
                                                                               t +        j,t+1   (3)
                               k=1


where k = 1 post the introduction of forbearance and k = 2 for withdrawal of forbearance.
   Columns 1 and 2 of Table 5 summarize the results. We see a positive and significant
coefficient (0.31) on the triple interaction term, 1 , on zombie lending by stressed banks in
the forbearance period (Column 1). The positive and significant 1 rises slightly to 0.32 in
the more robust specification with bank and year fixed effects (Column 2). The marginal
effects computation shows that lending by stressed banks to zombie firms is 2% higher than
zombie lending by healthy banks. The pattern of findings suggests that lending norms
that were relaxed during the forbearance period stimulated lending by stressed banks to
their existing low-quality borrowers and these new loans in all likelihood enabled zombie
firms to service their older loans, i.e., forbearance facilitated the ever-greening of previous
loans. Interestingly, zombie-firm borrowing from stressed banks does not fall significantly in
the forbearance retraction period, 2 is not statistically significant. That the pattern does
not appear to reverse following forbearance withdrawal indicates yet again the potentially
persistent effects of policies that relax lending norms.
   Next, we examine the dynamic effects of the forbearance policies on zombie lending using
event study graphs by simply replacing the indicators for F orbearancek
                                                                      t in Equation 3 with




                                                 28
an indicator for each time period. Figure 3 plots the coefficients for the triple interaction
term. Consistent with the findings in Table 5, we see an increase in zombie lending in
the forbearance phase but no evidence of a reversal during the withdrawal phase. The
figure also suggests that the triple difference specification does not violate the parallel trends
assumption. Figure 2 shows that the zombie and healthy borrowers may have been on
different trends prior to the reform. However, our main specification compares the relative
impact of lending to zombie and healthy borrowers by stressed banks against the same
relative difference by healthy banks. While it is difficult to argue that stressed and healthy
banks--or analogously zombie and healthy firms--were on similar trends prior to the crisis,
it is plausible that the relative difference between zombie and healthy firms was similar at
stressed and healthy banks. Indeed, Figure 3 suggests that the parallel trends assumption is
not violated. Arguably, our estimates represent the causal impact of the forbearance policies
on the zombie lending.
   We also check the validity of our inferences using alternative refinements of the zombie-
firm classification criteria. We present results in the Appendix Table IA.6 and Table IA.7.
First, we add ICR < 2 condition to the subsidized credit definition to ensure that the firms
classified as zombies are indeed getting close to the point where they cannot service the
interest costs on their borrowing (Table IA.6). Second, we employ the IMF's speculative
credit definition in Table IA.7 which includes debt of all firms in the data set with an ICR
of less than 4.1 and a net debt-to-assets ratio greater than 0.25, where net debt is gross debt
less cash.31 The thresholds are empirically established based on constituents of the global
investment-grade and speculative-grade bond indices. Similar to our baseline measure, we
see a statistically significant increase in zombie lending relative to non-zombie firms of 15%
and 20% respectively using the alternative definitions. We find qualitatively similar results
following Banerjee and Hofmann (2018)'s zombie-firm measure, however, while the coefficient
estimates are qualitatively similar in sign, they are not statistically significant. Recall that
this alternative definition requires information about Tobin's q that can only be calculated

  31
       See the Global Financial Stability Report, October 2019: Lower for Longer, IMF

                                                    29
for listed firms, while the subsidized credit definition maximizes coverage in our sample.
    To discern whether the observed increase in zombie lending comes from bank supply-side
or firm demand-side effects, we supplement the main analysis with data on restructured
loans. We create a balanced panel at the firm-bank group-year level where bank group refers
to stressed and healthy banks. Following Khwaja and Mian (2005), Table IA.8 disentangles
the demand and supply-side channels by comparing the total amount of restructured loans
made by stressed banks against those made by healthy banks for the same firm. Using the
more stringent zombie definition that accounts for firm distress (ICR < 2) in addition to
the baseline definition of subsidized credit, we see that the amount of restructured loans
from stressed banks increased by 56 percent compared to healthy banks in the same firm-
year (Columns 3 and 4). Similarly, there were more restructured loans to zombie firms from
stressed banks relative to healthy banks. The coefficients in Columns 1-2 and 5-6 using
the baseline subsidized credit and IMF's speculative credit zombie definitions, also show an
increase in restructured loans, although the coefficients are imprecisely estimated.32 Our
results point to bank-supply side effects leading to an increase in zombie lending during the
forbearance period.
    We also see that there is a reversal in loan restructuring in the withdrawal phase. Zom-
bie lending can occur in two ways. Banks can restructure loans, as was evident during the
forbearance phase due to loan provisioning incentives. Banks can also evergreen loans by
making new loans at subsidized rates to borrowers to pay off the old loans. Our zombie mea-
sure accounts for these differing incentives during the forbearance and withdrawal phases.
Therefore, we focus on total zombie lending for the main analysis. While Table IA.8 docu-
ments that banks had lower loan restructurings in the withdrawal phase, Table 5 shows that
zombie lending overall did not decline. Since loan provisioning incentives for restructured
loans were removed in the withdrawal phase, it appears that banks simply shifted away from
restructuring loans as a form of evergreening, but did not reduce overall zombie lending.
  32
      A report published by the RBI (Report of the High Level Task Force on Public Credit Registry for India,
2008) notes that inaccuracies exist in the MCA data due to filing errors. The data need not be audited and
is self-reported by firms. Firms can also delay the date of filing. All these factors can lead to measurement
errors, biasing our estimates towards zero.

                                                     30
   Spillovers: Our findings thus far raise an important question. Does zombie-lending
crowd out healthy firm access to credit? Credit access spillovers can occur in two ways.
First, a direct channel through the bank-credit reallocation, banks can direct credit to zombie
firms crowding out allocations to healthier firms, or the bank congestion channel. Second,
an indirect channel that interferes with the creative destruction process (Caballero, Hoshi,
and Kashyap (2008)), decreasing the demand for credit by healthy firms in the economy, the
industry congestion channel.
   To investigate the first channel, we test the bank-credit allocation hypothesis. That
is, what happens to lending to healthy firms by stressed banks with higher proportions of
zombies in their loan portfolios? To do so, we collapse the data to the bank level, and
calculate the proportion of zombies in a bank's portfolio in a given year. We map this
proportion back to the firm-level dataset and estimate the following baseline specification:


  Log (Debtj,t+1 ) = t + j + 1  Bank F rac Zombieb,t  Healthyj,t
        2                                                 2
   +         k  Bank F rac Zombieb,t  F orbearancek
                                                  t +          k  Healthyj,t  F orbearancek
                                                                                          t
       k=1                                               k=1
                          2
                     +         k  Bank F rac Zombieb,t  Healthyj,t  F orbearancek
                                                                                t +   j,t+1   (4)
                         k=1


where k = 1 for Introduction of forbearance and k = 2 for withdrawal of forbearance.
   Columns 3 and 4 of Table 5 summarize the results. The coefficient on the triple interaction
term, 1 is negative and significant (-1.062 and -1.086) in the baseline specification with
and without bank-year fixed effects. The results suggest that as the proportion of zombie
firm in the portfolios of stressed banks increases by 10%, lending to healthy firms declines
significantly, and is 10.6% lower than lending to zombie firms.
   Using our baseline zombie definition of subsidized credit, in Table 5 we evaluate the
indirect effects or spillovers from zombie lending to healthy firms via the bank-congestion
channel. Using the full sample of banks, our first observation is that the proportion of firms
classified as zombies in bank-loan portfolios is significant. The proportion of zombie firms


                                                 31
in loan portfolios even at the 25th percentile of zombie lending is approximately 42%. This
fraction is 47% for the sub-sample where the lead bank is stressed and 34% for the sub-
sample where the lead bank is healthy. The high proportions of zombie firms in healthy
bank portfolios is also noteworthy.
    Next, we evaluate lending to healthy firms at the two points of reference, i.e., 25th and
75th percentile values of the bank congestion measure for the full sample, and the sub-
samples evaluated at the full-sample coefficient (-1.062). For the full sample, we find that
as the zombie proportion in bank portfolios rises from the 25th percentile value (42%) to 75th
percentile value(58%), the congestion effect intensifies from a 44% decline to a 61% decline in
lending to healthy firms. The difference of a 17% (61%-44%) marginal contraction in lending
to healthy firms provides confirmatory evidence of the congestion in bank-lending due to
zombie firms. Similar calculations for the sub-samples of stressed and healthy lead banks
suggest marginal contractions amounting to an additional 13% and 14% as the proportion
of zombie firms in loan portfolios rises from the 25th to the 75th percentile.33
    To investigate the indirect channel, we examine the lending spillovers to higher quality
borrowers in industries with higher proportions of zombie firms. First, to identify the granu-
lar industry classification we use the two-digit NIC codes in the Prowess data. We calculate
the proportion of zombies in industry h in year t and classify the subset of firms that are
not zombies, as healthy firms j . With this classification, we estimate the following baseline




   33
     Using the two alternative definitions of zombie firms we find qualitatively similar coefficients for the bank
congestion channel albeit statistically insignificant. An interesting observation using the alternative zombie
definitions is that the coefficients that capture spillovers from bank congestion are statistically significant
and negative in the withdrawal phase. This is suggestive of significant bank congestion, crowding out credit
to healthy firms in the withdrawal phase as well, and no significant decline in the leverage of low-quality
borrowers in the withdrawal period.

                                                       32
specification:


  Log (Debtj,t+1 ) = t + j + 1  Industry F rac Zombieh,t  Healthyj,t
      2                                                         2
 +         k  Industry F rac Zombieh,t     F orbearancek
                                                       t   +         k  Healthyj,t  F orbearancek
                                                                                                t
     k=1                                                       k=1
                      2
                 +         k  Industry F rac Zombieh,t  Healthyj,t  F orbearancek
                                                                                t +       j,t+1   (5)
                     k=1


where k = 1 post the introduction of forbearance and k = 2 for withdrawal of forbearance.
   Columns 5 and 6 of Table 5 present the results. The coefficient on the triple interaction
term, k which examines the debt levels of healthy firms, as the proportion of zombie firms in
an industry increases during the forbearance period, is negative and statistically significant in
the baseline specification with and without industry-year fixed effects (-0.896 and -0.693).
   Using our baseline zombie definition of subsidized credit, we now evaluate the indirect
effects or spillovers from zombie lending to healthy firms via the industry-congestion channel.
Similar to the summary statistics for the bank-congestion measure, for industries at the 25th
percentile of industry-zombie-concentration, the proportion of firms classified as zombies is
quite high at about 33% for the full sample. This fraction is 37% for the sub-sample where
the lead bank is stressed and 32% for the sub-sample where the lead bank is healthy.
   Next, we evaluate the lending to healthy firms at the two points of reference i.e. 25th
and 75th percentile values of the industry congestion measure for the full sample, and the
sub-samples evaluated at the full-sample coefficient (-0.896). For the full sample, we find
that as the industry-zombie proportion rises from the 25th percentile value (33%) to 75th
percentile value(63%), the congestion effect intensifies from a 29% to a 56% decline in lending
to healthy firms. Thus, the difference is an additional 27% (56%-29%) contraction in lending
to healthy firms is further evidence that an industry congestion channel is in operation.
Similar calculations for the sub-samples of stressed and healthy lead banks suggest lending
contractions of 23% and 25%, respectively.
   Using the refined definition of zombie firms that adds the ICR < 2 criterion, we find


                                                33
that the triple interaction coefficient remains statistically significant. The decline in lending
to healthy firms intensifies from 10% to 20% as the industry-level zombie fraction rises from
the 25th to the 75th percentile. The corresponding decline is along similar lines for the
stressed bank sub-sample (10.5% to 20.1%) as well as for the healthy bank sub-sample (9.9%
to 18.9%). We also employ the IMF's definition of speculative credit and replace the zombie-
firm dummy with a dummy that takes the value of one if the firm has an ICR < 4.1 and net
debt-to-assets ratio greater than 0.25. Again, the triple interaction coefficient is statistically
significant, albeit at the 10% level. The decline in lending to healthy firms intensifies from
11% to 24% as the industry fraction of zombie rises from the 25th to the 75th percentile.
The corresponding decline is along similar lines for the stressed bank sub-sample (12% to
25%) and for the healthy bank sub-sample (11% to 23%).
   The pattern of lending is of particular concern as we might expect healthy firms to
regain access to credit once forbearance is withdrawn. To reiterate, we do not observe
significant reversals in the patterns of lending to either low or high-quality borrowers when
the withdrawal of forbearance is announced. Results from alternative definitions of zombie
firms for the bank-congestion effect are qualitatively similar and the industry-congestion
effects are robust across all three definitions.
   The findings from the zombie-lending and spillovers estimations highlight the crowding-
out effects of artificially propping up low-quality firms at the expense of their more creditwor-
thy counterparts. If market forces of creative destruction were allowed to operate unfettered,
inefficient and loss-making firms would exit allowing the fittest to survive. A perverse pat-
tern appears to prevail instead--the evergreening of loans by stressed banks to zombie firms,
and a reduction in the access to credit for healthy firms.
   A potential concern is that the matching of large banks and large firms may be driving
our findings. To address this concern, we divide the firms and banks matched into four
categories based on the asset-size of banks and firms: big bank, small bank, big firm and
small firm. We re-estimate our specifications for these four sub-samples but do not find a




                                               34
statistically significant matching relationship based on firm and bank size.34
   Before turning to the real effects, Table IA.5 explores the ability of firms to substitute for
bank credit by accessing corporate bond markets instead. Columns 1 and 2 show that zombie
firms that can access the bond markets are not simply substituting away from corporate
bonds. We find that even healthy firms with bond market access are unable to makeup the
shortfall in bank lending by substituting into corporate bonds. The reallocation of credit
from healthy to zombie firms can potentially impact real outcomes. In the next subsection
we explore the real effects of forbearance on firm investment and employment patterns.


5.3       The Real Effects of Forbearance

To uncover evidence about the real effects of the forbearance policy, as a first pass, we
examine firm investment and employment patterns. We compute real investment as the
                           Capexj,t+1
capex ratio =          T otal Assetsj,t+1
                                            where Capexj,t+1 is the change in gross fixed assets between
year t and t + 1. We measure employment expenses using the proportion of wages in the
                                           W agesj,t+1
total expenses of firm i.e.           T otal Expensesj,t+1
                                                           .
   We estimate the following specification for low-solvency borrowers:


  yj,t+1 = t + j + 1  Stressed Bankb  Xj,t
                  2                                                     2
             +         k  Stressed Bankb  F orbearancek
                                                      t +                    k  Xj,t  F orbearancek
                                                                                                  t
                 k=1                                                   k=1
                                                  2
                                             +         k  Stressed Bankb  Xj,t  F orbearancek
                                                                                            t +       j,t+1   (6)
                                                 k=1


where y  (Capex Ratio, W age ratio) and X  (Low Solvency, Low Liquidity ); k = 1 and
k = 2 are the introduction and withdrawal of forbearance, respectively.
   Panel A of Table 6 summarizes the results for low-solvency borrowers. Columns 1 and 2
show that following forbearance provision, low-quality borrowers do not appear to increase
their capital expenditures. In fact, capital expenditures by low-solvency firms that borrow

  34
       Results are available on request.

                                                               35
from stressed banks declines significantly during the forbearance phase. The findings in
Columns 3 and 4 suggest that in addition to repaying existing loans, these low-quality
borrowers may have used the new loans for wage payments. Noteworthy is the fact that
once forbearance withdrawal is announced, wage expenditures decline.
   Panel B of Table 6 summarizes the results for low-liquidity borrowers. We are unable to
discern any statistically significant patterns in the capital expenditures or wage expenditures
for low-liquidity firms in the forbearance or withdrawal periods. The overall pattern of results
suggests that forbearance may have had the unintended consequence of supporting low-
solvency firms instead of firms facing temporary liquidity constraints as originally intended.
   To examine the performance of zombie and healthy companies during the forbearance
period, we replace the dependent variable with firm productivity in our benchmark speci-
fication. We use the Olley-Pakes method to estimate firm-level productivity using balance
sheet variables. We find that the productivity of zombie-firms is, on average, 8% lower than
healthy firms. This 8% difference in productivity represents 10% of the mean productivity
in the sample. Turning to the spillovers channel, in industries with average fractions of
zombie firms, the average productivity of a healthy firms is about 40% higher. We do not
find significant differences in productivity between zombie versus healthy firms through the
bank congestion channel.35




  35
       Results are available on request.

                                              36
6     Robustness Checks and Alternative Tests

In this section we explore alternative measures and motivations for forbearance and their
impact on the credit allocation.

An Alternative Measure of Forbearance: Provisioning Rates. First, we establish
that the provisioning requirements directly influenced bank incentives to engage in zombie
lending. Table IA.10 examines the impact of provisioning requirements of restructured loans
on zombie lending. Since restructured loans require lower provisioning compared to non-
performing loans, banks have an incentive to classify loans as restructured to ameliorate
bank capital requirements.
    Lowered provisioning rates on restructured loans may increase the attractiveness of zom-
bie lending, while high provisioning rates imply lower gains from restructuring bad loans.
The evidence in Table IA.10 suggests that there is a correlation between lower provisioning
rates and an increase in credit to zombie firms. A 1% lower provisioning rate on restruc-
tured loans corresponds to a 3% increase in zombie credit (Column 2). Columns 3 and 4
also indicate that a 1% lower provisioning rate on restructured loans leads to a 9% decrease
in credit to healthy firms via the industry congestion channel and 9% decline in credit via
the bank congestion channel.
    By replacing the forbearance and withdrawal phase binary dummies with a continuous
measure of provisioning rates on restructured loans and directly capturing the regulatory
arbitrage incentives, we confirm the baseline impact on zombie lending using an alternate
measure of forbearance. The exercise also addresses the concern that given that forbearance
and post-forbearance periods in the baseline specification coincide with the crisis and post-
crisis years, we may simply be capturing effects on credit through firms' business cycle.

An Alternative Definition of Bank Health: The Capital-To-Risk Weighted Asset
Ratio. Provisioning requirements ought to bind more for weakly-capitalized banks since
restructuring instead of recognizing bad loans, allows banks to avoid recognizing capital
erosion. The baseline analysis uses the variation in bank health defined by the stressed


                                             37
asset ratio (NPAs). We repeat the baseline analysis using the capital-to-risk weighted assets
ratio (CRAR) ratio. Table IA.9 replaces the time-invariant stressed bank dummy with a
continuous time-varying measure of bank health captured by the CRAR ratio. Higher levels
of CRAR indicate bank health and vice-versa. If banks with lower levels of CRAR engage
in zombie lending we would expect to see a negative coefficient on the CRAR measure.
Consistent with our baseline results, banks with 1% lower CRAR increase lending to low
solvency and low liquidity firms (Columns 1­4) by 9%. Column 6 indicates that banks with
1% lower CRAR increase lending to zombie firms by 7% during the forbearance period. As
previously shown, these effects do not reverse post-forbearance.

Capital Inadequacy and State-Owned Banks Lax provisioning requirements may also
allow the government to avoid costly recapitalization, especially of the state-owned banks
of which they are the majority owners. Indeed, Figure 4 shows that post-forbearance the
stressed assets share of state-owned banks relative to their total market share increased.
In contrast, the ratio decline for private sector banks. Table IA.2 shows that the public
sector banks engaged in greater zombie lending relative to their private sector counterparts
(Columns 1 and 2). It appears the regulatory forbearance policy allowed state-owned banks
to mask their capital inadequacy problems.

A Placebo Test: Foreign Banks. The baseline specifications exclude foreign banks under
the assumption that their capital requirements are not sensitive to local forbearance measures
in India. After 2014, foreign banks had the option to become wholly owned subsidiaries,
however, prior to that they operated as branches. The hypothesis is that foreign banks are
less sensitive to changes in local provisioning requirements because they are externally funded
by their parent company or bank. We conduct a placebo test using the subset of foreign
banks. Table IA.11 shows no impact on lending patterns in this sub-sample consistent with
our priors. Foreign banks account for only 7% of the total market share of loans and hence
the number of observations is reduced.

Alternative Lenders. We also examine whether the forbearance schemes necessitated
firms to seek alternate lenders. Our previous results emphasize the possibility of a sticky

                                              38
match between low-quality borrowers and stressed banks and the consequent ever-greening
of non-performing loans. Table IA.3 shows the results from a regression specification where
the dependent variable is a binary indicator that classifies firms when they form a new
relationship with a bank in period T and did not have a relationship in the previous year.
   Across the specifications, we find that healthy firms are 4% (Column 3) more likely to
commence borrowing from private sector banks and 11% more likely to start borrowing from
foreign banks. Plausibly, the forbearance schemes further worsen the perverse matching of
stressed banks with unhealthy firms. The omitted group is public sector banks. In Column
1, healthy firms were 4.4% more likely to form a new banking relationship with private
sector banks in the forbearance period. This effect declines during the withdrawal phase
although the net effect of the forbearance and withdrawal phases is negative. Overall there
is an increase in the switching behavior of healthy firms that perhaps explains the persistent
patterns in lending to healthy firms that we document earlier in the paper.


6.1    An Alternative Identification Strategy: Distance to Regulator

We conclude by providing evidence using an alternate identification strategy based on prox-
imity to the regulator (RBI). Thus far we conjecture that bank-level differences in responses
to forbearance predict zombie-firm lending. The evidence also suggests that state-owned
banks significantly drive zombie lending. The regulator's decision to provide forbearance to
firms, and by extension to banks, is not exogenous to its expectations of output growth.
Indeed, Agarwal et al. (2014) find that the higher the growth expectations, the more lax
the supervisor. Forbearance can thus simply reflect the regulator's calculus that particular
industries that receive forbearance have greater expected future returns, even if temporarily
stressed.
   A question also arises whether regulatory forbearance constitutes an implicit subsidy by
the government and this may be more germane for state-owned banks. Forbearance policies
were explicitly stipulated for illiquid firms and not intended to provide an opportunity for
the evergreening of loans. However by relaxing the provisioning requirement for standard

                                             39
restructured assets, the government may have been able to provide an implicit subsidy
thereby avoiding or delaying a more costly recapitalization needed to more comprehensively
clean up state-owned bank balance sheets. It is also plausible that the regulator tolerated
evergreening under pressure from the government to provide forbearance, especially with
respect to state-owned banks.
   To address potential endogeneity issues surrounding forbearance provision, we turn to an
alternate identification strategy. Gropp et al. (2020) examine the impact of forbearance in
the US in the aftermath of the GFC using the distance to the regulator, the Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation (FDIC), in Washington as an instrument for forbearance. We follow
their strategy of and instrument for forbearance using the `distance to the RBI.'
   To examine the effect of the proximity to the regulator on lending, we replace the Stressed
Bankb indicator with a measure of proximity to the regulator (RBI) in our baseline specifica-
tions (equations 1 -3). Proximity to the regulator is equal to one if the distance of the bank
headquarters is below the median value and zero otherwise. Table 7 presents the results for
the subset of firms whose lead bank is a state-owned bank.
   Using the proximity to the regulator as a proxy for forbearance, we find that lending
to low-solvency firms increased by 33% (Column 2). Similarly, lending to low-liquidity
firms increases by 26% (Column 4). Further, lending to zombie firms increases by 25%.
Note, that the provisioning requirements ensured that forbearance was available to all firms.
State-owned banks can influence the regulator by lobbying for both the level of provisioning
and for the industries brought under the provisioning requirements. Initially, provisioning
requirements were relaxed for infrastructure projects, but soon after covered all firms. We
argue that the laxity of the regulator is evident from whether forbearance was provided to
liquid in contrast to insolvent firms, and in also to zombie firms. While evergreening is not
officially condoned, the regulator can of course turn a blind eye.
   Table IA.12 presents results for a subset of firms that borrow from private sector banks.
We find no effect of proximity to the regulator for the private sector banks. This finding
can also be viewed as a placebo test, confirming that the results in Table 7 are not driven


                                             40
by other features arising from the geographic location or proximity to Mumbai, the financial
capital of India where the regulator is also located. Overall, the results in this section show
that our results are robust to using an identification strategy based on proximity to the
regulator as a measure of the degree of forbearance.



7     Discussion and Concluding Remarks

This paper provides evidence that the regulatory forbearance measures enacted by the Re-
serve Bank of India during the global financial crisis effectively handed over a license for
banks to engage in regulatory arbitrage. We find that the forbearance measures provided
banks with an incentive to hide true asset quality, and therefore the build-up of stressed as-
sets in the system is a by-product of accounting subterfuge. Using both bank and firm-level
data, we examine the externalities and costs generated by regulatory forbearance.
    We show that indirect recapitalization schemes like forbearance in classification of stressed
loans may have encouraged banks to channel debt to not only firms with low-liquidity but also
to low-solvency borrowers. The significant increase in zombie firm lending has led to a sig-
nificant misallocation of credit. Lending to healthy firms falls significantly in industries with
higher proportions of zombies and by banks with higher proportions of zombie-borrowers.
The results also signal the possibly persistent negative effects of prolonged phases of forbear-
ance, hindering the process of creative destruction as impaired firms continue to survive at
the expense of healthy ones.
    Our findings imply that regulatory forbearance can function as an implicit subsidy from
the government that postpones costly bank recapitalization. Asset quality forbearance in
particular can allow banks to effectively "extend and pretend" distressed loans masking the
underlying bank capital erosion. Loan-loss recognition would undoubtedly weaken bank
balance sheets and warrant recapitalization.
    The implicit subsidy has further significance in India's predominantly state-owned bank-
ing system. Given that state-owned banks comprise a nearly 70% share, recapitalization costs


                                               41
are unquestionably consequential compared to budget-neutral forbearance schemes. Acharya
(2020) highlights forbearance as a form of fiscal dominance focused on postponing further
stress on the sovereign's balance sheet entailed by costly bank recapitalization, especially
when fiscal space is limited. We show in this paper that while bank balance sheets can look
deceptively healthy, under-capitalized banks and zombie lending can impair the provision of
credit to healthy firms in the economy further compromising the financial system.
   In fact, subsequent efforts to correct for the zombie lending such as the bankruptcy law
in 2016 had limited success in exacting banks to recognize non-performing loans (Kulkarni
et al., 2020) and regulatory intervention efforts were, at best, partially effective. This paper
shows that the sticky match between stressed banks and impaired firms persists even after
forbearance is withdrawn.
   The findings take on particular significance in the context of the ongoing COVID-19
crisis. In the wake of the pandemic, countries across the world have announced forbearance
measures to help distressed firms tide over temporary liquidity shocks (Baudino, 2020).
This paper provides a cautionary tale that, if not designed properly, temporary forbearance
measures may be difficult to unwind and can have persistent effects on industry structure.
As economies recover and forbearance policies are withdrawn, active regulatory intervention
may be needed to correct for the prevalence of zombie lending (Kulkarni et al., 2020; Bonfim
et al., 2020). While insufficient recapitalization can perversely increase zombie lending, a
perverse match between stressed banks and zombie firms may impact the effectiveness of
future policy interventions.




                                              42
References
Acharya, Viral. 2020. Quest for Restoring Financial Stability in India. Sage Publications
    Pvt. Limited.

Acharya, Viral V, Tim Eisert, Christian Eufinger, and Christian Hirsch. 2019. ``Whatever it
    Takes: The Real Effects of Unconventional Monetary Policy." The Review of Financial
    Studies 32 (9), 3366­3411.

Acharya, Viral V, Irvind Gujral, Nirupama Kulkarni, and Hyun Song Shin. 2011. ``Dividends
    and Bank Capital in the Financial Crisis of 2007-2009." Working Paper, New York
    University.

Agarwal, Sumit, David Lucca, Amit Seru, and Francesco Trebbi. 2014. ``Inconsistent reg-
    ulators: Evidence from banking". The Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 (2): 889­
    938.

Akhigbe, Aigbe, and Ann Marie Whyte. 2001. ``The Impact of FDICIA on Bank Returns
    and Risk: Evidence from the Capital Markets". Journal of Banking and Finance 25 (2):
    393­417.

Andrews, Dan, and Filippos Petroulakis. 2019. ``Breaking the Shackles: Zombie Firms, Weak
   Banks and Depressed Restructuring in Europe." ECB Working Paper No.2240.

Ansari, Jugnu, Khushboo Khandelwal, and Nagpurnanand Prabhala. 2016. ``Financial Stress
    in Indian Corporates." Robert H. Smith School Research Paper No. RHS 2773398.

Baldursson, Fridrik M, and Richard Portes. 2013. ``Gambling for Resurrection in Iceland:
    The Rise and Fall of the Banks." Working Paper, London Business School.

Banerjee, Ryan, and Boris Hofmann. 2018. ``The Rise of Zombie Firms: Causes and Conse-
    quences." BIS Quarterly Review September.

Baudino, Patrizia. 2020. ``Public Guarantees for Bank Lending in Response to the Covid-19
   Pandemic", Bank for International Settlements Working Paper.

Ben-David, Itzhak, Ajay A Palvia, and René M Stulz. 2019. ``Do Distressed Banks Really
    Gamble for Resurrection?", NBER Working Paper No. 25794.

Benston, George J., and George G. Kaufman. 1997. ``FDICIA after Five Years". Journal of
    Economic Perspectives 11, No. 3 (September): 139­158.




                                            43
Blattner, Laura, Luisa Farinha, and Francisca Rebelo. 2019. ``When Losses Turn into Loans:
    The Cost of Undercapitalized Banks." ECB Working Paper No. 2228.

Bonfim, Diana, Geraldo Cerqueiro, Hans Degryse, and Steven Ongena. 2020. ``On-Site In-
   specting Zombie Lending." Swiss Finance Institute Research Paper No. 20-16.

Caballero, Ricardo J. 2007. Specificity and the Macroeconomics of Restructuring. Cambridge:
   The MIT Press.

Caballero, Ricardo J, Takeo Hoshi, and Anil K Kashyap. 2008. ``Zombie Lending and De-
   pressed Restructuring in Japan." American Economic Review, 98(5), 1943­77.

Chakrabarty, KC. 2013a. Infrastructure Financing by Banks in India­Myths and Realities,
   Keynote address at the Annual Infrastructure Finance Conclave organised by SBI Cap-
   ital Markets Limited, Agra, 9.

     . 2013b. Two Decades of Credit Management in Banks: Looking Back and Moving
    Ahead, RBI Bull, 67:17­40.

Chavan, Pallavi, and Leonardo Gambacorta. 2019. ``Bank Lending and Loan Quality: An
    Emerging Economy Perspective". Empirical Economics 57 (1): 1­29.

Chopra, Yakshuo, Krishnamurthi Subrahmanian, and Prassana Tantri. 2020. ``Bank Cleanups,
   Capitalization, and Lending: Evidence from India." Review of Financial Studies Forth-
   coming.

Cong, Lin William, Haoyu Gao, Jacopo Ponticelli, and Xiaoguang Yang. 2019. ``Credit Allo-
   cation Under Economic Stimulus: Evidence From China." Review of Financial Studies
   32 (9), 3412­3460.

Dewatripont, M., and E. Maskin. 1995. ``Credit and Efficiency in Centralized and Decentral-
   ized Economies." The Review of Economic Studies 62 (4), 541­555.

Financial Stability Report (Including Trend and Progress of Banking in India 2013-14). 2014,
    Issue No. 10, Reserve Bank of India.

Flanagan, Thomas, and Amiyatosh Purnanandam. 2020. ``Why Do Banks Hide Losses?",
    University of Michigan Working Paper.

Freixas, Xavier, Jean-Charles Rochet, and Bruno M. Parigi. 2010. ``The Lender of Last Re-
     sort: A Twenty-First Century Approach." Journal of the European Economic Association
     2 (6): 1085­1115.



                                            44
Gopinath, Gita, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, Loukas Karabarbounis, and Carolina Villegas-Sanchez.
    2017. ``Capital Allocation and Productivity in South Europe." The Quarterly Journal
    of Economics 132, no. 4 (June): 1915­1967.

Gropp, Reint, Steven R. G. Ongena, Joerg Rocholl, and Vahid Saadi. 2020. ``The Cleansing
    Effect of Banking Crises." CEPR Discussion Paper No. DP15025.

The Indian Express. 2018. Raghuram Rajan Explains: Understanding Bad Loans.

Khwaja, Asim Ijaz, and Atif Mian. 2005. ``Do Lenders Favor Politically Connected Firms?
   Rent Provision in an Emerging Financial Market". The Quarterly Journal of Economics
   120 (4): 1371­1411.

Koudstaal, Martin, and Sweder Van Wijnbergen. 2012. ``On Risk, Leverage and Banks: Do
   Highly Leveraged Banks Take on Excessive Risk?" Working Paper, Tinbergen Institute.

Kulkarni, N., S. K. Ritadhi, S. Vij, and K. Waldock. 2020. ``Unearthing Zombies", CAFRAL
    Working Paper.

Laeven, Luc, and Ross Levine. 2009. ``Bank Governance, Regulation and Risk-Taking". Jour-
    nal of Financial Economics 93 (2): 259­275.

Laeven, Luc, and Fabian Valencia. 2018. ``Systemic Banking Crises Revisited." International
    Monetary Fund Working Paper No. 18/206.

McGowan, Adalet, Dan Andrews, and Valentine Millot. 2018. ``The Walking Dead? Zombie
   Firms and Productivity Performance in OECD Countries." Economic Policy 33 (96),
   685­736.

Ministry of Labour and Employment. 2000. ``Informal Sector in India: Approaches for Social
    Security". New Delhi: Government of India, Statement on Industrial Policy.

Faculty of Law, University of Oxford. 2016. Promoter Exits in India: A Real Leash Reined
    by the Market Watchdog?

Patel, Urjit. 2020. Overdraft: Saving the Indian Saver. Harper India.

Peek, J., and E. Rosengren. 2005. ``Unnatural Selection: Perverse Incentives and the Misal-
    location of Credit in Japan." American Economic Review 95(4), 1144­1166.

Master Circular - Prudential Norms on Income Recognition, Asset Classification and Provi-
   sioning Pertaining to Advances. 2009, Reserve Bank of India.




                                            45
Master Circular - Prudential Norms on Income Recognition, Asset Classification and Provi-
   sioning Pertaining to Advances. 2015, Reserve Bank of India.

Annex 4: Prompt Corrective Action (PCA) Framework. 2014, Reserve Bank of India.

Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code and Bank Recapitalisation. 2017, Reserve Bank of India.

Report of the High Level Task Force on Public Credit Registry for India. 2008, Reserve Bank
   of India.

Storz, Manuela, Michael Koetter, Ralph Setzer, and Andreas Westphal. 2017. ``Do We Want
    These Two to Tango? On Zombie Firms and Stressed Banks in Europe." IWH Discussion
    Papers 13/2017, Halle Institute for Economic Research (IWH).

Vishwanathan, NS. 2018. It is not Business as Usual for Lenders and Borrowers. Deputy
    Governor, Reserve Bank of India, Speech Delivered at National Institute of Bank Man-
    agement, Pune on Fourteenth Convocation.




                                            46
A       Data Appendix

                  Table A1: Major Regulatory Announcements since 2008

 Date        Content of Announcement                                                    Direction of RF
 27-Aug-08   Special Regulatory Treatment Announced allowing forbearance                Increase
 30-May-13   Announcement of withdrawal of Forbearance beginning April 1, 2015          Decrease
             Framework for Revitalising Distressed Assets in the Economy-Guidelines
 26-Feb-14                                                                              Increase
             on Joint Lenders Forum (JLF) and Corrective Action Plan (CAP)
             Flexible Structuring of Long Term Project Loans
 15-Jul-14                                                                              Increase
             to Infrastructure and Core Industries
 1-Apr-15    Asset Quality Review Started                                               Decrease
 8-Jun-15    Strategic Debt Restructuring Scheme for conversion of debt to equity       Increase
 13-Jun-16   Scheme for Sustainable Structuring of Stressed Assets                      Increase
 12-Feb-18   Resolution of stressed assets: Revised Framework                           Decrease

Notes: This table lists in a chronological order the major policy announcements by RBI pertaining
to the increase or decrease in Regulatory Forbearance (RF) allowed on classification norms of
stressed assets held by banks. The dates were collected by a detailed survey of all master RBI
circulars released between August 27, 2008 and February 12, 2018.




                                               47
                                                     Table A2: Variables Description and Source
                                                                  Firm-level variables:
     Log Debtj,t               Log of total borrowings of a firm in a year (million INR)                                                       CMIE
                               Total investment of a firm in a year measured as year-on-year change
     Capexj,t                                                                                                                                  CMIE
                               in gross fixed capital formation as a fraction of lagged assets (million INR)
     Wages Ratioj,t            Total salaries paid in year as a fraction of total expenses (million INR)                                       CMIE
     New Relationshipj,t       Dummy variable that equals one if firm forms a new banking/non-banking relationship                             CMIE
                               Dummy variable that equals one if firm has a above median debt to equity ratio in the
     Low Solvencyj,t                                                                                                                           CMIE
                               cross-section of a year
                               Dummy variable that equals one if firm has a below median cash to current liabilities ratio
     Low Liquidityj,t                                                                                                                          CMIE
                               in the cross-section of a year
                               Dummy variable that equals one if a firm's average interest expenses (interest expenses scaled by debt)
     Zombiej,t (status 1)                                                                                                                      CMIE
                               are below the prime lending rate of State Bank of India & debt to asset ratio greater than 0.15
                               Dummy variable that equals one if a firm is classified zombie as measured by the subsidised credit definition
     Zombiej,t (status 2)                                                                                                                      CMIE
                               and also has an interest coverage ratio below 2
                               Dummy variable that equals one if a firm satisfies the IMF's condition of speculative credit i.e.
     Zombiej,t (status 3)                                                                                                                      CMIE
                               net debt to assets ratio greater than 0.25 & interest coverage ratio below 4.1
48




                               Dummy variable that equals one if a firm is not classified a zombie in a year measured by the above
     NonZombiet                                                                                                                                CMIE
                               zombie definitions
     Log Salesj,t              Log of total sales of a firm in a year (million INR)                                                            CMIE
     Bondj,t                   Dummy variable that equals one if a firm accessed bond market in a year                                         CMIE
     Industry Frac Zombieh,t   The fraction of total firms classified as a zombie in an industry in a year                                     CMIE
                                                                   Bank-level variables
                               Dummy variable that equals one if a bank belonged to top two terciles of non-performing loans ratio in
     Stressed Bankb                                                                                                                            DBIE
                               the cross-section of year 2007 i.e. before announcement of forbearance policy
     Public Bankb              Dummy variable that equals one if a bank has a majority ownership by government of India                        DBIE
     CRAR Bankb,t              Bank's capital to risk weighted assets ratio (in %)                                                             DBIE
                               Dummy variable that equals one if the distance of the bank headquarters is below median
     Regulator Proximityb                                                                                                                      CMIE
                               value in the cross-section of banks
     Bank Frac Zombieh,t       The fraction of total firms classified as a zombie in a bank's portfolio of total number of firms in a year     CMIE
                                                                   Year-level variables:
                     2008      Dummy variable that equals one if year is after August 2008 i.e. when the special regulatory treatment/
     ForbearancePost
                t                                                                                                                               RBI
                               forbearance was introduced in aftermath of the GFC
                     2013
     ForbearancePost
                t              Dummy variable that equals one if the year is after May 2013 i.e. after forbearance withdrawal was announced     RBI
     Prov ratet                The provisioning rate required by Reserve Bank of India on restructured loans in a year                          RBI
                                                                        Table A3: Sample Construction

                                A. CMIE-DBIE Matched Sample Construction and Coverage Summary: 2006-2016
      Variables                                                                                   # Observations                                                 # Unique Firms
      Number of       non-financial firm-year observations in CMIE sample with non-missing assets    206,999                                                        35,275
      Number of       firm-lead bank-year observations in CMIE banker's data                          60,955                                                        13,020
      Number of       firm-year observations matched to a lead banker                                 44,198                                                         9,358
      Number of       firm-bank-year observations matched to DBIE bank-level data                     38,016                                                         8,331
      Number of       firm-bank-year observations with non-missing debt                               25,844                                                         5,791
      Number of       firm-bank-year observations with non-missing solvency status                    33,713                                                         7,555
      Number of       firm-bank-year observations with non-missing liquidity status                   37,187                                                         8,157
      Number of       firm-bank-year observations with non-missing zombie status 1                    38,016                                                         8,331
      Number of       firm-bank-year observations with non-missing zombie status 2                    28,599                                                         6,534
      Number of       firm-bank-year observations with non-missing zombie status 3                    27,342                                                         6,382

                                                                    B. DBIE Sample Coverage: 2006-2016
49




      Variables                                                                                                                        # Observations            # Unique Banks
      Number of       bank-year observations (only domestic Scheduled Commercial Banks)                                                    509                         52
      Number of       bank-year observations: public banks                                                                                 294                         28
      Number of       bank-year observations: private banks                                                                                215                         24
      Number of       stressed banks: public banks                                                                                         187                         17
      Number of       stressed banks: private banks                                                                                        148                         17

     Notes: This table reports the sample summary for the data sets for the period 2006-2016. Panel A 36 reports the CMIE prowess data set's coverage summary at the firm-year
     and firm-lead bank-year level. The table also reports the reduction in number of observations as bank-level variables are merged. We also list the number of observations with
     non-missing values of various measures of firm quality as well as our main dependent variable, debt (in year t + 1). Panel B 37 describes the Reserve Bank of India's DBIE
     dataset coverage at the bank-year level. A firm is classified as Zombie (status 1) if the the firm received subsidized credit in time period T i.e. the firm is able to borrow loans
     at an average interest rate that is lower than the Prime Lending Rate (PLR) of State Bank of India and has Debt to Assets ratio > .15. A firm is classified as Zombie (staus 2)
     if in addition to satisfying zombie status 1, the firm has an ICR below 2. A firm is classified as Zombie (status 3) if the the firm satisfies the IMF`s definition of speculative
     credit i.e. has an ICR less than 4.1 and a net debt-to-assets ratio greater than 0.25. Net debt is gross debt minus cash.

        36
           For the baseline definition of zombie (zombie status 1), we take a conservative approach and classify firms with missing average interest rate
     as `healthy'. We relax this assumption in the alternative zombie definition (zombie status 2), where we only consider non-missing values of average
     interest rate.
        37
           The banks that were merged during our sample are dropped when matching bank-level data to firm-level data resulting in a match of 39 banks
     of which 29 are classified as stressed. The number of stressed public banks is 16 & the number of stressed private banks is 13.
                                       Figure 1: The Time-series Evolution of Troubled Asset Ratios
     Notes: This figure plots the time-series evolution of annual troubled asset ratios for the period 2005­2016 for public and private sector
     banks. Panel A of the figure plots the evolution of average bank level proportion of restructured loans in the total distressed loans
     during the sample period 2006-2016. Panel B of the figure shows the evolution of average bank level proportion of non-performing loans
     in the total loans during the sample period 2006-2016. Panel C of the figure shows the evolution of average bank level proportion of
     distressed loans in the total loans given out by a bank during the sample period 2006-2016. The `Hidden Assets Ratio' is computed as
                                                                                                                       RA
     the restructured assets as a proportion of restructured and non-performing assets on a bank's balance sheet ( DA     ). Distressed Assets
     are defined as the sum of non-performing loans (NPAs) and restructured loans (RA) in any given year. The NPA ratio as the ratio of
     non-performing assets to gross advances ( N   PA
                                                  GA ). The distressed assets ratio is the fraction of restructured assets and non-performing
     assets as a proportion of gross advances by bank ( DAGA ). Public banks are banks with majority ownership of the government of India.
     Public and private sector bank classification is from DBIE.
50




                                     RA
           (a) Hidden Assets Ratio ( DA )           (b) Non-performing Assets Ratio ( N PA
                                                                                       GA )            (c) Distressed Assets Ratio ( DA
                                                                                                                                     GA )
         Figure 2: Firm Borrowing Based on Solvency, Liquidity and Zombie Status
Notes: Panel A of the figure shows the evolution of sum of loans issued by stressed banks and good
banks during the sample period 2006-2016. A bank is classified as Stressed Bank if the proportion
of non-performing loans in the total gross advances (loans) for the bank is in top two terciles in
2007 i.e. the year before the introduction of the forbearance policy by RBI. The remaining one-third
of the banks are classified as good banks. Panel B of the figure shows the log-ratio of total debt
borrowed by zombie and no-zombie firms in a given year relative to the year of the forbearance
announcement, i.e., the y-axis is normalized to 0 at the announcement year in 2008. A firm is
classified as Zombie if the the firm received subsidized credit in time period T i.e. the firm is able
to borrow loans at an average interest rate that is lower than the Prime Lending Rate (PLR) of
State Bank of India and has Debt to Assets ratio > .15. Remaining firms are classified as non-
zombies. Panel C of the figure shows the log-ratio of total debt borrowed by the low-solvency and
solvent firms in a given year relative to the year of the forbearance announcement, i.e., the y-axis is
normalized to 0 at the year of the announcement in 2008. A firm is classified as Low Solvency if the
Debt to equity measure of the firm in time period T is above median. Remaining firms are classified
as solvent. Panel D of the figure shows the log-ratio of total debt borrowed by the low-liquidity and
liquid firms in a given year relative to the year of the forbearance announcement, i.e., the y-axis is
normalized to 0 at the year of the announcement in 2008. A firm is classified as Low Liquidity if
the cash ratio measure of the firm in time period T is below median. Remaining firms are classified
as liquid.




     (a) Aggregate Lending By Banks                 (b) Debt of Zombie & Non-zombie Firms




(c) Debt of Low-solvency & Solvent firms
                                                  51(d) Debt of Low-liquidity & Liquid firms
   Figure 3: Event Study: The Impact of Forbearance on Lending to Zombie Borrowers
Notes: This figure shows the event study plots for the impact of forbearance policy on zombie lending
using the Equation 3 with an indicator for each year. The coefficient for the triple interaction term
with Stressed Bankb , Zombiej,t , and an indicator for each year is plotted below. The gray bars
represent the 5 percent confidence interval. The dependent variable is the firm-level log of debt
in period T+1. A bank is classified as Stressed Bank if the proportion of non-performing loans in
the total gross advances (loans) for a bank is in the top two terciles in year 2007 i.e. before the
introduction of the forbearance policy by RBI. A firm is classified as Zombie if the firm received
subsidized credit in time period T i.e. the firm can borrow loans at an average interest rate that
is lower than the Prime Lending Rate (PLR) of State Bank of India and has a debt to assets ratio
> .15. The specification controls for the year fixed effects, time-invariant bank fixed effects, time-
invariant borrower characteristics and time-varying firm size via log of sales. Standard errors are
clustered at firm level. 95% confidence intervals are shown.




                                                 52
    Figure 4: Public and Private Sector Banks: Distressed Asset Share to Market Share
Notes: Figure 4 plots the time-series evolution of the bank-level average of ratio of distressed assets
share and the market share for the period 2005­2016. The distressed assets share of a bank is
defined as the sum of non-performing assets (NPAs) and restructured assets (RAs) out of gross
advances (loans) in a given year. The market share is defined as the proportion of a bank's loans
in the total loans of the aggregate banking sector in a year. Public banks are banks with majority
ownership of the government of India. Public and private sector bank classification is from DBIE.




                                                  53
                                           Table 1: Panel A: Firm-Year Univariate Tests by Solvency & Liquidity Status

                                                                                       Solvency Status                                          Liquidity Status
                              Variables                                    Solvent         Low-Solvency              Diff           Liquid        Low-Liquidity               Diff
                              Cash Ratio                                    1.62               0.28                 (***)            1.72             0.03                   (***)
                              Quick Ratio                                    3.47              0.90                 (***)            3.39             0.67                   (***)
                              Debt Equity ratio                             0.16               4.91                 (***)            1.47             3.52                   (***)
                              Debt Assets Ratio                              0.12              0.45                 (***)            0.38             0.67                   (***)
                              Interest Coverage Ratio                       50.41             10.07                 (***)           40.65            18.41                   (***)
                              Log Sales                                      4.10              6.47                 (***)            5.15             5.83                   (***)
                              Log Debt                                       5.75              6.95                 (***)            6.10             6.38                   (***)
                              Capex Ratio                                    0.04              0.06                 (***)            0.05             0.04                   (***)
                              Wages Ratio                                    0.15              0.08                 (***)            0.13             0.09                   (***)
                              Avg Interest Rate                             37.98             10.76                 (***)           28.06             13.89                  (***)
                              Observations                                 16,260             17,453                                17,715           19,472
54




                                                              Panel B: Firm-Year Univariate Tests by Zombie Status

                                                                    Zombie Status 1                                 Zombie Status 2                                Zombie Status 3
                Variables                                    Healthy         Zombie           Diff           Healthy         Zombie          Diff           Healthy          Zombie          Diff
                Cash Ratio                                    1.474           0.215          (***)            0.402           0.215         (***)            0.655            0.154         (***)
                Quick Ratio                                   3.121           0.845          (***)            1.180           0.866         (***)            1.716            0.691         (***)
                Debt Equity ratio                             1.953           3.305          (***)            1.352           5.344         (***)            1.365            4.014         (***)
                Debt Assets Ratio                             0.511           0.582          (***)            0.327           0.744         (***)            0.295            0.586         (***)
                Interest Coverage Ratio                      55.710           4.823          (***)           13.710           0.802         (***)           32.476            1.593         (***)
                Log Sales                                     4.154           6.500          (***)            5.668           6.380         (***)            5.001            6.748         (***)
                Log Debt                                      5.436           6.894          (***)            6.946           6.373         (***)            6.518            7.052         (***)
                Capex Ratio                                   0.037           0.053          (***)            0.051           0.038         (***)            0.049            0.046          (*)
                Wages Ratio                                   0.159           0.075          (***)            0.087           0.082         (***)            0.107            0.067         (***)
                Avg Interest Rate                            43.224           7.764          (***)           25.339           8.333         (***)           30.003           11.375         (***)
                Observations                                 19,177          18,839                          19,393           9,206                         13,971           13,371
     Notes: Panels A and B show the summary statistics for the selected firm level ratios used in our analysis. We present the statistics for high and low quality borrowers by: Solvency, Liquidity and
     Zombie status. We also test for the significance of the difference in means between the high and low quality groups. A firm is classified as Low Solvency if the debt to equity measure of the firm in time
     period T is above median. A firm is classified as Low Liquidity if the cash ratio measure of the firm in time period T is below median. A firm is classified as Zombie (status 1) if the the firm received
     subsidized credit in time period T i.e. the firm is able to borrow loans at an average interest rate that is lower than the Prime Lending Rate (PLR) of State Bank of India and has Debt to Assets ratio
     > .15. A firm is classified as Zombie (staus 2) if in addition to satisfying zombie status 1, the firm has an ICR below 2. A firm is classified as Zombie (status 3) if the the firm satisfies the IMF`s
     definition of speculative credit i.e. has an ICR less than 4.1 and a net debt-to-assets ratio greater than 0.25. Net debt is gross debt minus cash. Capex and wages ratio are capital expenditure and wage
     bill respectively scaled by total expenses in a year.
                   Panel C: Bank-Year Univariate Tests by Health Status

                                                     Bank Health Status           t-test
           Variables                        Healthy Banks      Stressed Banks     Diff
           Log Gross Advances                    13.140            12.810          (**)
           Log Assets                            13.672            13.300         (***)
           Restructured Assets Ratio              0.031             0.035
           Non-Performing Loans Ratio            0.024              0.036         (***)
           Distressed Assets Ratio               0.055              0.071         (***)
           Observations                            174               335
Notes: Panel C summarizes the main variables used in analysis from the bank-year data set
obtained from Reserve Bank of India (DBIE website) for the sample period 2006-2016. The
variables, Gross Advances, assets and stressed assets are originally measured in million INR.
Stressed assets are sum of non-performing loans and restructured loans in a year. All the ratio
variables are calculated as proportions out of the gross advances.




                                                55
                Table 2: The Relationship Between Bank and Firm Distress
                                                      RA          NP A         DA
        Measure                                       DA          GA           GA
        % Borrowers    (Debt-Equity Ratio > Q4) 0.722*** 0.0362***            0.144***
        % Borrowers    (Debt-Equity Ratio > Q2) 0.695*** -0.00164             0.0769***
        % Borrowers    (Debt-Equity Ratio > 2)  1.303*** 0.0408***            0.212***
        % Borrowers    (Cash Ratio < Q1)        0.384** 0.0310*               0.0946***
        % Borrowers    (Cash Ratio <Q2)         0.387*** 0.00935              0.0407*
        % Borrowers    (Cash Ratio <1)          0.973*** 0.0776***            0.219***

Notes: This table summarizes the correlation between bank level ratios and the proportion of low
quality borrowers in the bank's portfolio i.e. proportion of firms with low solvency measures and
low liquidity measures in a bank's portfolio. RA/DA is restructured assets as a proportion of
restructured and non-performing assets on a bank's balance sheet. NPA/GA is the ratio of
non-performing assets to gross advances. DA/GA is the fraction of restructured assets and
non-performing assets as a proportion of gross advances by the bank. Debt-Equity Ratio is used
as a measure of solvency and Cash Ratio (Cash to Current Liabilities) is used as a measure of
liquidity. Cash ratio < Q1 refers to the proportion of borrowers with a cash ratio measure in the
lowest quartile Q1. Cash ratio < Q2 refers to the proportion of borrowers with a cash ratio
measure below the median Q2. Cash ratio < 1 refers to the proportion of borrowers with a cash
ratio measure < 1 which is the industry accepted signal of declining liquidity. Debt-Equity Ratio
> Q4 refers to the proportion of borrowers with a debt to equity measure in the top quartile Q4.
Debt-Equity Ratio> Q2 refers to the proportion of borrowers with a debt to equity measure
above the median Q2. Debt-Equity Ratio> 2 refers to the proportion of borrowers with a debt to
equity measure > 2 which is the industry accepted signal of insolvency. All measures are
computed separately for each year.




                                               56
Table 3: Confusion Matrices for the Panel of Firm-Year-Bank Observations in the Sample

                             Healthy Banks                              Stressed Banks
                                Liquidityj,t                                Liquidityj,t
                            High Low Overall                            High Low Overall
                    High    38% 16% 54%                         High    30% 14% 44%
    Solvencyj,t     Low     18% 28% 46%                         Low     18% 38% 56%
                    Overall 56% 44% 100%                        Overall 48% 52% 100%

                                Zombiej,t                                   Zombiej,t
                            No   Yes Overall                            No   Yes Overall
                    High    47% 8% 55%                          High    35% 9% 45%
    Solvencyj,t     Low     12% 33% 45%                         Low     12% 44% 55%
                    Overall 58% 42% 100%                        Overall 47% 53% 100%

                                      Zombiej,t                                 Zombiej,t
                            No         Yes Overall                      No       Yes Overall
                    High    36%        17% 53%                  High    27%      19% 45%
    Liquidityj,t    Low     21%        27% 47%                  Low     19%      36% 55%
                    Overall 56%        44% 100%                 Overall 46%      54% 100%
The total number of firm-year observations in the full sample are 38,016.

Notes: This table shows the distribution of the sample across the measures of firm quality and
bank quality. A bank is classified as Stressed Bank if the proportion of non-performing loans in the
total gross advances (loans) for a bank is in the top two terciles in 2007 i.e. before the
introduction of forbearance policy by RBI. A firm is classified as Low Solvency if the Debt to
equity measure of the firm in time period T is above median. A firm is classified as Low Liquidity
if the cash ratio measure of the firm in time period T is below median. A firm is classified as
Zombie if the the firm received subsidized credit in time period T i.e. the firm is able to borrow
loans at an average interest rate that is lower than the Prime Lending Rate (PLR) of State Bank
of India and has Debt to Assets ratio > .15.




                                                    57
                           Table 4: The Impact of Forbearance on Debt of Low-solvency and Low-liquidity Firms

      Dependent Variable: Log Debtj,t+1                                                   Solvency                      Liquidity
                                                                                 (1)                (2)           (3)               (4)
      Stressed Bankb  Low Solvencyj,t         ForbearancePost
                                                         t
                                                              2008
                                                                              0.359              0.384
                                                                               (0.125)            (0.123)
                                                       2013
      Stressed Bankb  Low Solvencyj,t  ForbearancePost
                                                  t                            0.0661             0.0603
                                                                              (0.0899)           (0.0893)
      Stressed Bankb  Low Liquidityj,t  ForbearancePost
                                                   t
                                                        2008
                                                                                                               0.310             0.306
                                                                                                               (0.0939)          (0.0928)
      Stressed Bankb  Low Liquidityj,t  ForbearancePost
                                                   t
                                                        2013
                                                                                                                -0.0304           -0.0182
                                                                                                               (0.0884)          (0.0883)
      No. of Observations                                                         21827              21827       24080             24080
      R2                                                                          0.931              0.933       0.927             0.928
58




      Borrower FE                                                                   Y                  Y           Y                 Y
      Year FE                                                                       N                  Y           N                 Y
      Bank FE                                                                       N                  Y           N                 Y
      Standard errors in parentheses;  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.
      The total number of firm-year observations in the full sample are 38,016.

     Notes: This table shows the results for the impact on lending to low-solvency (columns 1­2) and low-liquidity (columns 3­4) firms at
     stressed banks using a triple difference specification. The dependent variable is the log of debt of a firm in period T+1. A bank is
     classified as Stressed Bank if the proportion of non-performing loans in the total gross advances (loans) for the bank is in the top two
     terciles in 2007 i.e. before the introduction of forbearance policy by RBI. A firm is classified as Low Solvency if the debt to equity
     measure of the firm in time period T is above median. A firm is classified as Low Liquidity if the cash ratio measure of the firm in time
     period T is below median. The indicator variable ForbearancePost 2008 takes a value 1 in the years post 2008 i.e. after the introduction of
     forbearance. The indicator variable ForbearancePost 2013 takes a value 1 in the years post 2013 i.e. after the announcement of withdrawal
     of forbearance by RBI. Only the triple interaction terms are shown though remaining interaction terms, not absorbed by the fixed
     effects, are also included but not shown for brevity. Borrower, year, and bank fixed effects are as indicated. All specifications control for
     time-invariant borrower characteristics and time-varying firm size via log of sales. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level.
                                          Table 5: The Impact of Forbearance on Zombie and Healthy Firms

                                                                                     Direct Effects                        Spillover Effects
     Dependent Variable: Log Debtj,t+1                                               Zombie Firms                         Non-Zombie Firms
                                                                                                               Within Bankb             Within Industryi
                                                                                    (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)
                                                          2008
     Stressed Bankb  Zombiej,t            ForbearancePost
                                                     t                           0.312         0.323
                                                                                 (0.105)       (0.103)
                                                2013
     Stressed Bankb  Zombiej,t  ForbearancePost
                                           t                                     0.0173        0.0211
                                                                                 (0.0907)      (0.0906)
                     2008
     ForbearancePost
                t          Healthyjt  Bank Frac Zombieb,t                                                   -1.086       -1.062
                                                                                                            (0.438)      (0.448)
                     2013
     ForbearancePost
                t          Healthyjt  Bank Frac Zombieb,t                                                   -0.351       -0.362
                                                                                                            (0.441)      (0.450)
                     2008
     ForbearancePost
                t          Healthyjt  Industry Frac Zombieh,t                                                                         -0.693       -0.896
59




                                                                                                                                      (0.279)      (0.312)
                     2013
     ForbearancePost
                t          Healthyjt  Industry Frac Zombieh,t                                                                         0.136        0.0341
                                                                                                                                      (0.251)      (0.290)
     No. of Obs.                                                                 24126         24126        24126        24126        24126        24126
     R-sq.                                                                       0.930         0.931        0.930        0.934        0.930        0.933
     Borrower FE                                                                 Y             Y            Y            Y            Y            Y
     Year FE                                                                     N             Y            N            N            N            N
     Bank FE                                                                     N             Y            N            N            N            N
     Industry X Yr                                                               N             N            N            N            N            Y
     Bank X Yr                                                                   N             N            N            Y            N            N
                                        Full Sample      Subsample: Stressed Banks=1 Subsample: Healthy Banks=1
                                  BankFrac IndustryFrac BankFrac      IndustryFrac   BankFrac    IndustryFrac
              coefficient         -1.062**     -0.896*** -1.062**       -0.896***    -1.062**      -0.896***
                  p25                 .42          .33       .47             .37         .34           .32
                  p75                 .58          .63       .59             .63         .48           .60
     p25 effect (coeff×p25 value)    -.44         -.29      -.49           -.331        -.36          -.28
     p75 effect (coeff×p75 value)    -.61         -.56      -.62            -.56        -.50          -.53
                                                                     
     Standard errors in parentheses;      p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01. The total number of firm-year observations in the full sample are 38,016.
Notes: This table summarizes the direct (columns 1­2) and spillover effects (columns 3­6) of
regulatory forbearance on debt using a triple difference specification. The dependent variable in
all columns is the firm-level log of debt in T+1. A firm is classified as Zombie if the the firm
received subsidized credit in time period T i.e. the firm is able to borrow loans at an average
interest rate that is lower than the Prime Lending Rate (PLR) of State Bank of India and has
Debt to Assets ratio > .15. A bank is classified as Stressed Bank if the proportion of
non-performing loans in the total gross advances (loans) for the bank is in the top two terciles in
2007 i.e. before the introduction of Forbearance policy by RBI. The indicator variable
ForbearancePost 2008 takes a value 1 in the years Post 2008 i.e. after the introduction of
Forbearance. The indicator variable ForbearancePost 2013 takes a value 1 in the years Post 2013 i.e.
after the announcement of withdrawal of Forbearance by RBI. Industry Frac Zombieh,t is the
fraction of total firms classified as a zombie in an industry in time period T. Bank Frac Zombieb,t
is the fraction of total firms classified as a zombie in a bank`s portfolio in time period T. Only the
triple interaction terms are shown though remaining interaction terms, not absorbed by the fixed
effects, are also included but not shown for brevity. All specifications control for time-invariant
borrower characteristics and time-varying firm size via log of sales. Borrower, year, industry-year
and bank fixed effects are as indicated. Standard errors are clustered at firm level.




                                                 60
                Table 6: The Impact of Forbearance on Investment and Wages
 Panel A: Low-Solvency Firms
                                                                GFAj,t+1                         Wagesj,t+1
 Dependent Variable :                            Capexj,t+1 = Total Assets        Empj,t+1 = Total Expenses
                                                                          j,t+1                             j,t+1


                                                     (1)             (2)              (3)              (4)
 Stressed Bankb  Low Solvencyj,t  RFPost
                                    t
                                         2008
                                                  -0.0171         -0.0173          0.0163           0.0162
                                                 (0.00932)       (0.00931)        (0.00705)        (0.00704)

 Stressed Bankb  Low Solvencyj,t  RFPost
                                    t
                                         2013
                                                  0.00820         0.00790          -0.0116          -0.0111
                                                 (0.00619)       (0.00620)        (0.00666)        (0.00667)
 No. of Observations                               22144           22144            24678            24678
 R2                                                0.453           0.456             0.862            0.863

 Panel B: Low-Liquidity Firms
                                                    (5)              (6)             (7)              (8)
 Stressed Bankb  Low Liquidityj,t  RFPost
                                     t
                                          2008
                                                  -0.0105         -0.00973         0.00302          0.00279
                                                 (0.00804)       (0.00803)        (0.00605)        (0.00604)

 Stressed Bankb  Low Liquidityj,t  RFPost
                                     t
                                          2013
                                                  -0.00489        -0.00458         0.00323          0.00361
                                                 (0.00625)       (0.00620)        (0.00598)        (0.00598)
 No. of Observations                               24136           24136            27002            27002
 R2                                                 0.436           0.439           0.850            0.851
 Borrower FE                                         Y               Y               Y                Y
 Year FE                                             N               Y               N                Y
 Bank FE                                             N               Y               N                Y
 Standard errors in parentheses;  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.
 The total number of firm-year observations in the full sample are 38,016.


Notes: This table summarizes the real effects of regulatory forbearance on capital and employment
for low-solvency (panel A) and low-liquidity (panel B) firms at stressed banks using a triple
difference specification. Panel A shows the results for low-solvency firms and Panel B shows the
results for low-liquidity firms. In columns 1­2 the dependent variable is the capex ratio defined as
the proportion of change in gross fixed assets out of total assets of a firm in period T+1. Columns
3­4 show the results for expenditure on employment as proxied by the proportion of wages in the
total expenses of a firm in period T+1. A bank is classified as Stressed Bank if the proportion of
non-performing loans in the total gross advances (loans) for the bank is in the top two terciles in
2007 i.e. before the introduction of forbearance policy by RBI. A firm is classified as Low Solvency
if the Debt to equity measure of the firm in time period T is above median. A firm is classified as
Low Liquidity if the cash ratio measure of the firm in time period T is below median. The
indicator variable ForbearancePost 2008 takes a value 1 in the years Post 2008 i.e. after the
introduction of forbearance. The indicator variable ForbearancePost 2013 takes a value 1 in the
years Post 2013 i.e. after the announcement of withdrawal of forbearance by RBI. Only the triple
interaction terms are shown though remaining interaction terms, not absorbed by the fixed effects,
are also included but not shown for brevity. All specifications control for time invariant borrower
characteristics and time varying firm size via Log of Sales. Borrower, year, and bank fixed effects
are as indicated. Standard errors are clustered at firm level.




                                                    61
                   Table 7: Identification Using Proximity to the Regulator: Firms Borrowing from State-owned Banks

      Dependent Variable: Log Debtj,t+1                                              (1)       (2)      (3)        (4)        (5)       (6)
      Regulator Proximityb  Low Solvencyj,t  Forbearancet Post 2008               0.318     0.328
                                                                                  (0.118)   (0.117)
      Regulator Proximityb  Low Solvencyj,t  Forbearancet Post 2013               -0.116    -0.118
                                                                                  (0.105)   (0.103)
      Regulator Proximityb  Low Liquidityj,t  Forbearancet Post 2008                                  0.251      0.257
                                                                                                      (0.0891)   (0.0887)
      Regulator Proximityb  Low Liquidityj,t  Forbearancet Post 2013                                  -0.0553    -0.0356
                                                                                                      (0.105)    (0.104)
      Regulator Proximityb  Zombiej,t  Forbearancet Post 2008                                                               0.227     0.249
                                                                                                                            (0.102)   (0.101)
      Regulator Proximityb  Zombiej,t  Forbearancet Post 2013                                                               -0.107    -0.101
                                                                                                                            (0.108)   (0.107)
      No. of Obs.                                                                 16495     16495     18086      18086      18114     18114
62




      R-sq.                                                                       0.936     0.937     0.932      0.933      0.935     0.935
      Borrower FE                                                                 Y         Y         Y          Y          Y         Y
      Year FE                                                                     N         Y         N          Y          N         Y
      Bank FE                                                                     N         Y         N          Y          N         Y
      Standard errors in parentheses;  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01
      The total number of firm-year observations in the full sample are 38,016.

     Notes: This table summarizes the impact of regulatory forbearance on lending to low-solvency (columns 1­2), low-liquidity firms
     (columns 3­4), and zombie (columns 5­6) firms with proximity to the regulator for the subset of firms that borrow from state-owned
     banks. The dependent variable is the Log of Debt of a firm in period T+1. A firm is classified as Zombie if the the firm received
     subsidized credit in time period T i.e. the firm is able to borrow loans at an average interest rate that is lower than the Prime Lending
     Rate (PLR) of State Bank of India and has Debt to Assets ratio > .15. A firm is classified as Low Solvency if the Debt to equity
     measure of the firm in time period T is above median. A firm is classified as Low Liquidity if the cash ratio measure of the firm in time
     period T is below median. Regulator Proximityb is 1 if the distance of the bank headquarters is below the median value and 0 otherwise.
     Only the triple interaction terms are shown though remaining interaction terms, not absorbed by the fixed effects, are also included but
     not shown for brevity. All specifications control for time-invariant borrower characteristics and time-varying firm size via log of sales.
     Borrower, year, and bank fixed effects are as indicated. Standard errors are clustered at firm level.
The Unholy Trinity: Regulatory Forbearance, Stressed
            Banks and Zombie Firms

                      Online Appendix

       Anusha Chari    Lakshita Jain   Nirupama Kulkarni




                               63
Appendix IA.1                  Loan Recovery Processes Prior to the GFC

India did not implement an effective and comprehensive bankruptcy framework until 2016 (Insol-
vency and Bankruptcy Code and Bank Recapitalisation, 2017). Prior to this, and in the absence of
the requisite legal apparatus for resolving stressed assets, the central bank resorted to makeshift ar-
rangements with out-of-court resolutions that mimicked formal bankruptcy laws. Not surprisingly,
India has consistently ranked very low in global rankings of loan recovery prospects and the time
taken for the resolution of stressed-assets.

    Debt Recovery Tribunals (established under the "Recovery of Debts due to Banks and Financial
Institutions Act of 1993") were established to help banks and financial institutions recover their
dues speedily without being subject to the lengthy procedures of the civil courts (See The Indian
Express, 2018 for a perspective on bad loan problem).38 Subsequently, the SARFAESI Act of 2002
allowed banks and other financial institutions to auction off the residential or commercial properties
of defaulters to recover loans. In addition, the RBI introduced the Corporate Debt Restructuring
mechanism in 2001 to allow syndicates or consortium of lenders to restructure the debt of corporate
firms.

    The policy specifically targeted multiple banking accounts along with syndication/consortium
accounts of corporate borrowers with outstanding exposures to banks and other financial institu-
tions exceeding Rs.10 crores (roughly US$1.35 million). Recognizing the difficulties in reaching an
agreement among different lending institutions, the policy specifically targeted exposures involving
more than one lender under a consortium or multiple banking arrangements. The rationale for the
restructuring mechanism was to allow loans to otherwise viable firms to be restructured through an
orderly and coordinated program to help minimize losses to the both borrowers and creditors.

    Criticism arose that the provisions of SARFAESI Act were not being used properly by banks and
recovery rates were a mere 13% of the original amounts at stake in 2013-14. Influential promoters
could still play off one bank against another by choosing to repay some loans while strategically
defaulting on others. Many listed firms in India are backed by promoters who are a set of persons
and/or families that effectively control the firm. The term `promoter' is defined under Section 2(69)
of the Companies Act, 2013 and Regulation 2(1)(za) of the Securities and Exchange Board of India
(Issue of Capital and Disclosure Requirements) Regulations, 2009 to broadly mean persons having
`control' over a company (Faculty of Law, University of Oxford, 2016).39 Overall, banks were not
backed by the regulators in their efforts to recover outstanding loans, particularly those given to
politically-connected promoters.




  38
      See the article by Dr Raghuram Rajan for a perspective on bad loan problem                        at
https://indianexpress.com/article/explained/raghuram-rajan-bad-loans-npa-indian-banking-system-
economy-5351347/
   39
      https://www.law.ox.ac.uk/business-law-blog/blog/2016/12/promoter-exits-india-real-leash-reined-
market-watchdog

                                                   64
                         Figure IA.1: Recent Banking Trends in India
Notes: This figure shows the aggregate growth trends in assets, credit, deposits and non-performing
assets of the banks in India for the period 2013­2017. Panel (a) shows the aggregate growth trends
of assets, credit, deposits and gross non-performing asset (GNPA) ratio for the banks in India for the
period 2013­2017. GNPA ratio is the proportion of non-performing assets to gross advances (loans).
Panel (b) shows the growth in advances (loans) by bank-type. Bank types are public, private, and
foreign banks. Public banks are banks with majority government ownership. Classification for
bank-types is from DBIE.




            (a) Aggregate Growth                        (b) Gross Advances by Bank Type




                                                 65
   Figure IA.2: Relationship between Bank Capital and Bank-level Zombie Proportion
Notes: This figure plots the time-series trend in bank capital and the proportion of zombie firms
in the bank's portfolio for the years 2006­2016. The y-axis on the left-hand-side measures the
average proportion of zombies in a bank's portfolio and the y-axis on the right-hand-side measures
the average bank capital ratio (CRAR Tier I). The horizontal line at 9% refers to the stipulated
minimum capital ratio.




                                               66
                                                          Table IA.1: Characteristics of Zombie Firms

      Dependent Variable: Zombiej,t                        (1)               (2)       (3)              (4)        (5)              (6)
      Manufacturing firm                                0.234                                                                    0.231
                                                       (0.00985)                                                                (0.0113)
      Infrastructure firm                                                 -0.119                                                0.0407
                                                                          (0.0127)                                              (0.0144)
      Young                                                                          -0.164                                    -0.0791
                                                                                     (0.0141)                                   (0.0143)
      Listed firms                                                                                 0.127                        0.0819
                                                                                                  (0.00940)                    (0.00963)
      Size                                                                                                      0.206            0.121
                                                                                                                (0.0198)        (0.0198)
      No. of Obs.                                       38324               38324     39227        39227         39227            38324
      R-sq.                                             0.0547             0.00858   0.00549       0.0160       0.00860           0.0691
                                                                      
      Standard errors in parentheses;      p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01
67




     Notes: This table summarizes the characteristics of zombie firms. Columns 1­5 shows coefficients from uni-variate regressions. Column
     6 shows coefficients for the horse-race regression including all the variables. The dependent variable in all columns is whether a firm is
     classified as a zombie in a given year. A firm is classified as Zombie if the the firm received subsidized credit in time period T i.e. the
     firm is able to borrow loans at an average interest rate that is lower than the Prime Lending Rate (PLR) of State Bank of India and has
     Debt to Assets ratio > .15. Manufacturing firm is a dummy variable that takes the value 1 if a firm is a manufacturing firm. Similarly,
     Infrastructure firm and Listed firms are dummy variables that take the value 1 if a firm is an infrastructure firm and listed firm
     respectively. Young is a dummy variable that takes the value 1 for firms with age less than 5 years. Size is proxied by the log of the
     assets of the firm. Standard errors are clustered at the firm-level.
Table IA.2: Heterogeneity in the Impact of Forbearance for Public and Private Sector Banks

 Dependent Variable: Log Debtj,t+1                                      (1)                  (2)
 Public Bankb  Zombiej,t  Forbearancet Post 2008                      0.229                0.256
                                                                      (0.128)              (0.128)
 Public Bankb  Zombiej,t  Forbearancet Post 2013                       0.132                0.134
                                                                      (0.100)              (0.101)
 No. of Obs.                                                           24126                24126
 R-sq.                                                                 0.930                0.931
 Borrower FE                                                             Y                    Y
 Year FE                                                                 N                    Y
 Bank FE                                                                 N                    Y
 Standard errors in parentheses;  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01
 The total number of firm-year observations in the full sample are 38,016.

Notes: This table summarizes the direct effects (columns 1­2) on debt for public and private sector banks
using a triple difference specification. Public banks are banks with majority government ownership.
Classification for public and private sector banks is from DBIE. The dependent variable in the columns is
the firm-level log of debt in T+1. A firm is classified as Zombie if the the firm received subsidized credit in
time period T i.e. the firm is able to borrow loans at an average interest rate that is lower than the Prime
Lending Rate (PLR) of State Bank of India and has Debt to Assets ratio > .15. Public Bank is 1 for public
sector banks. The indicator variable ForbearancePost 2008 takes a value 1 in the years Post 2008 i.e. after the
introduction of Forbearance. The indicator variable ForbearancePost 2013 takes a value 1 in the years Post
2013 i.e. after the announcement of withdrawal of Forbearance by RBI. Only the triple interaction terms
are shown though remaining interaction terms, not absorbed by the fixed effects, are also included but not
shown for brevity. All specifications control for time-invariant borrower characteristics and time-varying
firm size via log of sales. Bank fixed effects are as indicated. Standard errors are clustered at firm level.




                                                      68
          Table IA.3: The Impact on New Banking Relationships of Healthy Firms

 Dependent Variable: New banking relationshipj,t+1                         (1)         (2)          (3)
 Private Bankb * Healthyj,t * Forbearancet Post 2008                   0.0438      0.0441       0.0414
                                                                        (0.0132)    (0.0132)     (0.0132)
 Foreign Bankb * Healthyj,t * Forbearancet Post 2008                   0.0978      0.0987        0.110
                                                                        (0.0246)    (0.0247)     (0.0247)
 Othersb * Healthyj,t * Forbearancet Post 2008                           0.0288      0.0292       0.0404
                                                                        (0.0316)    (0.0318)     (0.0316)
 Private Bankb * Healthyj,t * Forbearancet Post 2013                    -0.0169     -0.0179      -0.0154
                                                                       (0.00909)   (0.00917)    (0.00911)
 Foreign Bankb * Healthyj,t * Forbearancet Post 2013                    0.00628     0.00545       0.0100
                                                                        (0.0186)    (0.0188)     (0.0188)
 Othersb * Healthyj,t * Forbearancet Post 2013                          0.0590      0.0580       0.0455
                                                                        (0.0290)    (0.0294)     (0.0244)
 No. of Obs.                                                             124170      124170       123999
 R-sq.                                                                    0.131       0.133        0.161
 Borrower FE                                                                Y           Y            Y
 Year FE                                                                    N           Y            Y
 Bank FE                                                                    N           N            Y
                                                                 
 Standard errors in parentheses;      p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01

Notes: This table summarizes the probability of entry regression specification using a triple difference
specification. The dependent variable is a dummy indicating firm entry in period T + 1. A firm is classified
as Zombie if the the firm received subsidized credit in time period T i.e. the firm is able to borrow loans at
an average interest rate that is lower than the Prime Lending Rate (PLR) of State Bank of India and has
Debt to Assets ratio > .15 and Healthy otherwise. Private Bank is an indicator variable which takes the
value 1 for private sector Banks, Foreign Bank is an indicator variable which takes the value 1 for foreign
Banks, and Other is an indicator variable which takes the value 1 for all other non-bank lenders. Public
banks are banks with majority government ownership. Classification for bank-type is from DBIE. The
indicator variable ForbearancePost 2008 takes a value 1 in the years Post 2008 i.e. after the introduction of
Forbearance. The indicator variable ForbearancePost 2013 takes a value 1 in the years Post 2013 i.e. after the
announcement of withdrawal of Forbearance by RBI. Only the triple interaction terms are shown though
remaining interaction terms, not absorbed by the fixed effects, are also included but not shown for brevity.
All specifications control for time invariant borrower characteristics and time varying firm size via log of
sales. Borrower, year, and bank fixed effects are as indicated. Standard errors are clustered at firm level.




                                                         69
                              Table IA.4: The Impact of Forbearance on Low-solvency and High-liquidity Firms

      Dependent Variable: Log Debtj,t+1                                                               (1)                   (2)
      Stressed Bankb * Low Solvencyj,t  High Liquidityj,t * Forbearancet Post 2008                 0.222                 0.248
                                                                                                   (0.0837)              (0.0837)
      Stressed Bankb * Low Solvencyj,t  High Liquidityj,t * Forbearancet Post 2013                  0.0738                0.0802
                                                                                                   (0.0726)              (0.0722)
      No. of Obs.                                                                                   24126                 24126
      R-sq.                                                                                          0.927                 0.929
      Borrower FE                                                                                      Y                     Y
      Year FE                                                                                          N                     Y
      Bank FE                                                                                          N                     Y
70




      Standard errors in parentheses;  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01
      The total number of firm-year observations in the full sample are 38,016.

     Notes: This table summarises the results of the regression examining the impact of regulatory forbearance for low solvency and high
     liquidity firms. The dependent variable is log of debt of a firm in period T+1. A bank is classified as Stressed Bank if the proportion of
     non-performing loans in the total gross advances lent out by the bank is in top two terciles in the year 2007 i.e. before the introduction
     of forbearance policy by RBI. A firm is classified as Low Solvency if the Debt to equity measure of the firm in time period T is above
     median. A firm is classified as Low Liquidity if the cash ratio measure of the firm in time period T is below median. The indicator
     variable ForbearancePost 2008 takes a value 1 in the years post 2008 i.e. after the introduction of forbearance. The indicator variable
     ForbearancePost 2013 takes a value 1 in the years post 2013 i.e. after the announcement of withdrawal of forbearance by RBI. Only the
     quadruple interaction terms are shown though remaining interaction terms, not absorbed by the fixed effects, are also included but not
     shown for brevity. All specifications control for time invariant borrower characteristics and time varying firm size via Log of Sales.
     Remaining interaction variables are included but not shown. Borrower, year, and bank fixed effects are as indicated. Standard errors are
     clustered at firm level.
                                   Table IA.5: Are Firms Able to Switch to Borrowing from Bond Markets?

      Dependent Variable: Log Debtj,t+1                                                      (1)                         (2)
      Stressed Bankb * Zombiej,t * Forbearancet Post 2008                                 0.303                       0.319
                                                                                           (0.104)                     (0.103)
      Stressed Bankb * Zombiej,t * Bondj,t * Forbearancet Post 2008                         0.456                       0.623
                                                                                           (1.716)                     (1.661)
      Stressed Bankb * Zombiej,t * Forbearancet Post 2013                                 0.00287                      0.0180
                                                                                          (0.0910)                    (0.0910)
      Stressed Bankb * Zombiej,t * Bondj,t * Forbearancet Post 2013                         0.347                       0.291
                                                                                           (1.055)                     (1.045)
      No. of Obs.                                                                           24126                       24126
      R-sq.                                                                                 0.930                       0.931
      Borrower FE                                                                             Y                           Y
71




      Year FE                                                                                 N                           Y
      Bank FE                                                                                 N                           Y
      Standard errors in parentheses;  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01
      The total number of firm-year observations in the full sample are 38,016.

     Notes: This table summarises the effects of access to the corporate bond markets. The dependent variable is log of debt of a firm in
     period T+1. A firm is classified as Zombie if the the firm received subsidized credit in time period T i.e. the firm is able to borrow loans
     at an average interest rate that is lower than the Prime Lending Rate (PLR) of State Bank of India and has Debt to Assets ratio > .15.
     A bank is classified as Stressed Bank if the proportion of non-performing loans in the total gross advances (loans) for the bank is in the
     top two terciles in the year 2007 i.e. before the introduction of Forbearance policy by RBI. The indicator variable ForbearancePost 2008
     takes a value 1 in the years Post 2008 i.e. after the introduction of Forbearance. The indicator variable ForbearancePost 2013 takes a
     value 1 in the years Post 2013 i.e. after the announcement of withdrawal of Forbearance by RBI. Bondjt is a dummy variable which
     takes the value 1 if a firm has accessed bond markets in the year T. Only the triple interaction terms are shown though remaining
     interaction terms, not absorbed by the fixed effects, are also included but not shown for brevity. All specifications control for time
     invariant borrower characteristics and time varying firm size via log of sales. Borrower, year, and bank fixed effects are as indicated.
     Standard errors are clustered at firm level.
                                   Table IA.6: Alternative Zombie Measure: Accounting for Firm Distress

     Log Debtj,t+1                                                                  (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)
                                                2008
     Stressed Bankb  Zombiej,t  ForbearancePost
                                           t                                      0.153         0.155
                                                                                 (0.0870)      (0.0864)
                                                2013
     Stressed Bankb  Zombiej,t  ForbearancePost
                                           t                                      0.132         0.144
                                                                                 (0.0737)      (0.0737)
                     2008
     ForbearancePost
                t          Healthyjt  Bank Frac Zombieb,t                                                     -0.781       -0.829
                                                                                                             (0.685)      (0.732)
                     2013
     ForbearancePost
                t          Healthyjt  Bank Frac Zombieb,t                                                   -1.354        -1.306
                                                                                                             (0.487)      (0.511)
                     2008
     ForbearancePost
                t          Healthyjt  Industry Frac Zombieh,t                                          -0.510     -0.670
                                                                                                       (0.287)     (0.312)
                      2013
     ForbearancePost
                  t         Healthyjt  Industry Frac Zombie h,t                                         -0.390      -0.536
                                                                                                       (0.332)     (0.351)
     No. of Obs.                                                  21827    21827        21827 21827     21827       21827
     R-sq.                                                         0.931   0.932        0.931 0.933     0.931        0.935
72




     Borrower FE                                                     Y       Y            Y     Y         Y            Y
     Year FE                                                         N       Y            N     N         N            N
     Bank FE                                                         N       Y            N     N         N            N
     Industry X Yr                                                   N       N            N     N         N            Y
     Bank X Yr                                                       N       N            N     Y         N            N
                                           Full Sample          Subsample: Stressed Banks=1 Subsample: Healthy Banks=1
                                     BankFrac IndustryFrac BankFrac          IndustryFrac     BankFrac        IndustryFrac
              coefficient             -0.829       -0.670**      -0.829         -0.670**       -0.829           -0.670**
                  p25                  .188           .153        .204            .158          .145              .149
                  p75                  .290           .294        .309            .300          .241              .283
     p25 effect (coeff×p25 value)       -.15          -.10        -.16            -.105         -.12              -.099
     p75 effect (coeff×p75 value)       -.24         -.196        -.25            -.201         -.19              -.189

                                                                     
     Standard errors in parentheses;      p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01. The total number of firm-year observations in the full sample are 38,016.
Notes: This table summarizes the direct (columns 1­2) and spillover effects (columns 3­6) of
regulatory forbearance on debt using a triple difference specification and an alternate zombie
measure. The dependent variable in all columns is the firm-level log of debt in T+1. A firm is
classified as Zombie if the the firm received subsidized credit in time period T i.e. the firm is able
to borrow loans at an average interest rate that is lower than the Prime Lending Rate (PLR) of
State Bank of India, has Debt to Assets ratio > .15 and has an interest coverage ratio below 2. A
bank is classified as Stressed Bank if the proportion of non-performing loans in the total gross
advances (loans) for the bank is in the top two terciles in 2007 i.e. before the introduction of
Forbearance policy by RBI. The indicator variable ForbearancePost 2008 takes a value 1 in the years
Post 2008 i.e. after the introduction of Forbearance. The indicator variable ForbearancePost 2013
takes a value 1 in the years Post 2013 i.e. after the announcement of withdrawal of Forbearance
by RBI. Industry Frac Zombieh,t is the fraction of total firms classified as a zombie in an industry
in a period T. Bank Frac Zombieb,t is the fraction of total firms classified as a zombie in an bank`s
portfolio in a period T. Only the triple interaction terms are shown though remaining interaction
terms, not absorbed by the fixed effects, are also included but not shown for brevity. All
specifications control for time-invariant borrower characteristics and time-varying firm size via log
of sales. Borrower, year, industry-year and bank fixed effects are as indicated. Standard errors are
clustered at firm level.




                                                 73
                                Table IA.7: Alternative Zombie Measure: IMF Speculative Credit Definition

     Log Debtj,t+1                                                                   (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)
                                                2008
     Stressed Bankb  Zombiej,t  ForbearancePost
                                           t                                       0.194         0.200
                                                                                  (0.0984)      (0.0982)
                                                2013
     Stressed Bankb  Zombiej,t  ForbearancePost
                                           t                                        0.106         0.108
                                                                                  (0.0879)      (0.0875)
                     2008
     ForbearancePost
                t          Healthyjt  Bank Frac Zombieb,t                                                      -0.459       -0.183
                                                                                                              (0.555)      (0.528)
                     2013
     ForbearancePost
                t          Healthyjt  Bank Frac Zombieb,t                                                     -0.776       -0.723
                                                                                                              (0.406)      (0.410)
                     2008
     ForbearancePost
                t          Healthyjt  Industry Frac Zombieh,t                                            -0.307     -0.543
                                                                                                        (0.274)     (0.306)
                  Post 2013
     Forbearancet            Healthyjt  Industry Frac Zombieh,t                                          -0.133      -0.178
                                                                                                        (0.280)     (0.314)
74




     No. of Obs.                                                   20609    20609       20609  20609     20609       20609
     R-sq.                                                         0.933    0.935        0.933 0.936     0.933       0.937
     Borrower FE                                                     Y        Y            Y     Y         Y           Y
     Year FE                                                         N        Y            N     N         N           N
     Bank FE                                                         N        Y            N     N         N           N
     Industry X Yr                                                   N        N            N     Y         N           N
     Bank X Yr                                                       N        N            N     N         N           Y
                                            Full Sample         Subsample: Stressed Banks=1 Subsample: Healthy Banks=1
                                      BankFrac IndustryFrac BankFrac          IndustryFrac     BankFrac        IndustryFrac
                                                                                        
              coefficient              -0.183       -0.543       -0.183          -0.543         -0.183            -0.543
                  p25                   .280          .212        .340             .230          .181               .204
                  p75                   .426          .459        .448             .475          .337               .430
     p25 effect (coeff×p25 value)        -.05         -.11        -.06             -.12           -.03              -.11
     p75 effect (coeff×p75 value)        -.07         -.24        -.08             -.25          -.061              -.23
                                                                     
     Standard errors in parentheses;      p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01. The total number of firm-year observations in the full sample are 38,016.
Notes: This table summarizes the direct (columns 1­2) and spillover effects (columns 3­6) of
regulatory forbearance on debt using a triple difference specification and an alternate zombie
measure. The dependent variable in all columns is the firm-level log of debt in T+1. A bank is
classified as Stressed Bank if the proportion of non-performing loans in the total gross advances
(loans) for the bank is in the top two terciles in 2007 i.e. before the introduction of Forbearance
policy by RBI. The indicator variable ForbearancePost 2008 takes a value 1 in the years Post 2008
i.e. after the introduction of Forbearance. The indicator variable ForbearancePost 2013 takes a value
1 in the years Post 2013 i.e. after the announcement of withdrawal of Forbearance by RBI. The
IMF definition of speculative credit recipient (we call it zombie) includes a firm with an ICR less
than 4.1 and a net debt-to-assets ratio greater than 0.25. Net debt is gross debt minus cash.
Industry Frac Zombieh,t is the fraction of total firms classified as a zombie in an industry in a
period T. Bank Frac Zombieb,t is the fraction of total firms classified as a zombie in an bank`s
portfolio in a period T. Only the triple interaction terms are shown though remaining interaction
terms, not absorbed by the fixed effects, are also included but not shown for brevity. All
specifications control for time-invariant borrower characteristics and time-varying firm size via log
of sales. Borrower, year, industry-year and bank fixed effects are as indicated. Standard errors are
clustered at firm level.




                                                 75
                                 Table IA.8: Exploiting Within-firm Variation Using Restructured Loans Data

                                                                             (1)          (2)       (3)          (4)       (5)         (6)
      Dependent variable: Restructured loansj,t                           Log amt.      Log #    Log amt.     Log #    Log amt.     Log #
      Zombie definition:                                                        Baseline           Refined measure        IMF definition
                                                 2008
      Stressed Bankb  Zombiej,t  ForbearancePost
                                             t                              0.24         0.01     0.56        0.03        0.23        0.01
                                                                           (0.26)       (0.01)    (0.27)      (0.01)    (0.26)       (0.01)
                                                 2013
      Stressed Bankb  Zombiej,t  ForbearancePost
                                            t                               0.11         -0.00    -0.46 
                                                                                                              -0.02      -0.03        -0.01
                                                                           (0.24)       (0.01)    (0.23)      (0.01)    (0.21)       (0.01)
      No. of Obs.                                                          49940        49940      49940       48246    48246        48246
      R-sq.                                                                 0.60         0.63       0.60        0.63     0.60         0.63
      Firm X Yr                                                               Y            Y         Y            Y         Y           Y
      Bank Group X Yr                                                         Y            Y         Y            Y         Y           Y
76




                                                                      
      Standard errors in parentheses;      p < 0.10,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01.

     Notes: This table shows the effect of regulatory forbearance on restructured loans for the period T-1 to T using loan-level data on
     restructured loans using 3 different zombie measures. The dependent variable in columns 1, 3, and 6 is the logarithm of the total
     restructured loans by bank group (stressed/non-stressed) for each firm in a given year. In columns 2, 4, and 6 the dependent variable is
     the log of the corresponding total number of restructured loans. A bank is classified as Stressed Bank if the proportion of
     non-performing loans in the total gross advances (loans) for the bank is in the top two terciles in the year 2007 i.e. before the
     introduction of Forbearance policy by RBI. The indicator variable ForbearancePost 2008 takes a value 1 in the years Post 2008 i.e. after
     the introduction of Forbearance. The indicator variable ForbearancePost 2013 takes a value 1 in the years Post 2013 i.e. after the
     announcement of withdrawal of Forbearance by RBI. The baseline zombie measure in columns 1­2 is as defined in Table 5. The zombie
     measure in columns 3­4 is as defined in Table IA.6. The zombie measure in columns 5­6 is as defined in Table IA.7. Only the triple
     interaction terms are shown though remaining interaction terms, not absorbed by the fixed effects, are also included but not shown for
     brevity. All specifications include borrower-year fixed effects and the bank group-year fixed effects. Data on restructured loans is from
     the Ministry of Corporate Affairs. Standard errors are clustered at firm level.
            Table IA.9: The Impact on Borrowings of Low-solvency, Low-liquidity, and Zombie Firms by Bank Capitalization

      Dependent Variable: Log Debtj,t+1                            (1)           (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)
      CRARb  Low Solvencyj,t  Forbearancet Post 2008            -0.0841      -0.0901
                                                                (0.0345)      (0.0335)
      CRARb  Low Solvencyj,t  Forbearancet Post 2013             -0.0148       -0.0117
                                                                (0.0216)      (0.0209)
      CRARb  Low Liquidityj,t  Forbearancet Post 2008                                     -0.0892     -0.0878
                                                                                           (0.0277)    (0.0268)
      CRARb  Low Liquidityj,t  Forbearancet Post 2013                                      0.00620     0.00157

      CRARb  Zombiej,t  Forbearancet Post 2008                                                                    -0.0679     -0.0716
                                                                                                                  (0.0295)    (0.0289)
      CRARb  Zombiej,t  Forbearancet Post 2013                                                                    -0.00721    -0.00567
                                                                                                                  (0.0208)    (0.0203)
      No. of Obs.                                                 21817           21817    24068       24068        24114       24114
77




      R-sq.                                                       0.931           0.933    0.927       0.928        0.930       0.933
      Borrower FE                                                   Y               Y        Y           Y            Y           Y
      Year FE                                                       N               Y        N           Y            N           Y
      Bank FE                                                       N               Y        N           Y            N           Y
      Standard errors in parentheses;  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01
      The total number of firm-year observations in the full sample are 38,016.

     Notes: This table examines the impact of the regulatory forbearance on debt of low-liquidity, low-solvency, and zombie firms by bank
     capitalization using a triple difference specification. The dependent variable is log of debt of a firm in period T+1 CRARb is
     capital-to-risk assets ratio, which is a continuous time-varying measure of bank health. A firm is classified as Low Solvency if the Debt
     to equity measure of the firm in time period T is above median. A firm is classified as Low Liquidity if the cash ratio measure of the firm
     in time period T is below median. A firm is classified as Zombie if the the firm received subsidized credit in time period T i.e. the firm
     is able to borrow loans at an average interest rate that is lower than the Prime Lending Rate (PLR) of State Bank of India and has
     Debt to Assets ratio > .15. The indicator variable ForbearancePost 2008 takes a value 1 in the years post 2008 i.e. after the introduction
     of forbearance. The indicator variable ForbearancePost 2013 takes a value 1 in the years post 2013 i.e. after the announcement of
     withdrawal of forbearance by RBI. Only the triple interaction terms are shown though remaining interaction terms, not absorbed by the
     fixed effects, are also included but not shown for brevity. All specifications control for time invariant borrower characteristics and time
     varying firm size via Log of Sales. Borrower, year, and bank fixed effects are as indicated. Standard errors are clustered at the firm-level.
                         Table IA.10: Robustness to Using an Alternate Measure of Forbearance (Provisioning Rates)

      Dependent Variable: Log Debtj,t+1                                    (1)             (2)            (3)           (4)            (5)           (6)
      Stressed Bankb  Zombiej,t  Prov ratet                             -0.0270        -0.0305
                                                                        (0.0116)        (0.0114)
      Industry Frac Zombieh,t  Non Zombiej,t  Prov ratet                                               0.0685        0.0917
                                                                                                       (0.0311)      (0.0345)
      Bank Frac Zombieh,t  Non Zombiej,t  Prov ratet                                                                                0.0800        0.0871
                                                                                                                                    (0.0470)      (0.0498)
      No. of Obs.                                                         24866          24866          24866          24866         24866         24866
      R-sq.                                                               0.928          0.930          0.928          0.933         0.928         0.931
      Borrower FE                                                           Y              Y              Y              Y             Y             Y
      Year FE                                                               N              Y              N              Y             N             Y
78




      Industry X Year FE                                                    N              N              N              Y             N             N
      Bank FE                                                               N              Y              N              Y             N             Y
      Bank X Year FE                                                        N              N              N              N             N             Y
      Standard errors in parentheses;  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01
      The total number of firm-year observations in the full sample are 38,016.

     Notes: This table summarizes the impact of provisioning requirements of restructured loans on zombie lending using a triple difference specification.
     The dependent variable is log of debt of a firm in period T+1. Columns 1­2 look at the Zombie firms borrowing from stressed banks with higher
     provisioning rates. A firm is classified as Zombie if the the firm received subsidized credit in time period T i.e. the firm is able to borrow loans at an
     average interest rate that is lower than the Prime Lending Rate (PLR) of State Bank of India and has Debt to Assets ratio > .15. A bank is
     classified as Stressed Bank if the proportion of non-performing loans in the total gross advances (loans) for the bank is in the top two terciles in the
     year 2007 i.e. before the introduction of Forbearance policy by RBI. Prov ratet is the provisioning rate as given by RBI. Industry Frac Zombieh,t is
     the fraction of total firms classified as a zombie in an industry in a period T. Bank Frac Zombieb,t is the fraction of total firms classified as a zombie
     in an bank`s portfolio in a period T. Only the triple interaction terms are shown though remaining interaction terms, not absorbed by the fixed
     effects, are also included but not shown for brevity. All specifications control for time invariant borrower characteristics and time varying firm size
     via Log of Sales. Borrower, year, industry-year, bank, and bank-year fixed effects are as indicated. Standard errors are clustered at the firm-level.
                             Table IA.11: Placebo Test: Impact of Forbearance on Firms Linked to Foreign Banks

      Dep Var: Log Debtj,t+1                                                         (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)
      Stressed Foreign Bankb  Zombiej,t  Forbearancet Post 2008                   -0.0401      -0.0912
                                                                                  (0.548)      (0.609)
      Stressed Foreign Bankb  Zombiej,t  Forbearancet Post 2013                    -1.042       -1.058
                                                                                  (0.665)      (0.659)
      Industry Frac Zombieh,t  Non Zombiet  Forbearancet Post 2008                                         -0.0449       -0.310
                                                                                                           (1.011)      (2.409)
      Industry Frac Zombieh,t  Non Zombiet  Forbearancet Post 2013                                          2.041         3.174
                                                                                                           (2.079)      (4.401)
      Bank Frac Zombieh,t  Non Zombiet  Forbearancet Post 2008                                                                        0.448        2.617
                                                                                                                                     (1.850)     (3.400)
      Bank Frac Zombieh,t  Non Zombiet  Forbearancet Post 2013                                                                       0.0523       -0.706
                                                                                                                                     (2.182)     (2.987)
      No. of Obs.                                                                  1038         1038         1038        1038         1038         1038
79




      R-sq.                                                                        0.913        0.919        0.913       0.949        0.913       0.949
      Borrower FE                                                                    Y            Y            Y           Y            Y            Y
      Year FE                                                                        N            Y            N           Y            N            Y
      Industry X Year FE                                                             N            N            N           Y            N            N
      Bank FE                                                                        N            Y            N           Y            N            Y
      Bank X Year FE                                                                 N            N            N           N            N            Y
      Standard errors in parentheses;  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01
      The total number of firm-year observations in the full sample are 38,016.

     Notes: This table summarizes the placebo results for the impact of regulatory forbearance on zombie lending using a triple difference specification
     for the subset of firms that borrow from foreign sector banks. The dependent variable is log of debt of a firm in period T+1. A firm is classified as
     Zombie if the the firm received subsidized credit in time period T i.e. the firm is able to borrow loans at an average interest rate that is lower than
     the Prime Lending Rate (PLR) of State Bank of India and has Debt to Assets ratio > .15. A bank is classified as Stressed Foreign Bank if the
     proportion of non-performing loans in the total gross advances (loans) for the foreign bank is in the top two terciles in the year 2007 i.e. before the
     introduction of Forbearance policy by RBI. The indicator variable ForbearancePost 2008 takes a value 1 in the years Post 2008 i.e. after the
     introduction of Forbearance. The indicator variable ForbearancePost 2013 takes a value 1 in the years Post 2013 i.e. after the announcement of
     withdrawal of Forbearance by RBI. Industry Frac Zombieh,t is the fraction of total firms classified as a zombie in an industry in time period T.
     Bank Frac Zombieb,t is the fraction of total firms classified as a zombie in a bank`s portfolio in time period T. Only the triple interaction terms are
     shown though remaining interaction terms, not absorbed by the fixed effects, are also included but not shown for brevity. All specifications control
     for time invariant borrower characteristics and time varying firm size via Log of Sales. Borrower, year, industry-year, bank, and bank-year fixed
     effects are as indicated. Standard errors are clustered at the firm-level.
                   Table IA.12: Identification Using Proximity to the Regulator: Firms Linked to Private Sector Banks

      Dependent Variable: Log Debtj,t+1                                              (1)       (2)      (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)
      Regulator Proximityb  Low Solvencyj,t  Forbearancet Post 2008               0.0317    0.0675
                                                                                  (0.307)   (0.301)
      Regulator Proximityb  Low Solvencyj,t  Forbearancet Post 2013                -0.326    -0.343
                                                                                  (0.215)   (0.214)
      Regulator Proximityb  Low Liquidityj,t  Forbearancet Post 2008                                   0.114      0.128
                                                                                                      (0.234)    (0.230)
      Regulator Proximityb  Low Liquidityj,t  Forbearancet Post 2013                                  -0.0837    -0.0642
                                                                                                      (0.217)    (0.219)
      Regulator Proximityb  Zombiej,t  Forbearancet Post 2008                                                                -0.298      -0.280
                                                                                                                            (0.267)     (0.268)
      Regulator Proximityb  Zombiej,t  Forbearancet Post 2013                                                               0.0101      -0.0384
                                                                                                                            (0.209)     (0.210)
      No. of Obs.                                                                 4808      4808      5376        5376        5393        5393
80




      R-sq                                                                        0.935     0.938     0.932       0.933       0.934       0.936
      Borrower FE                                                                   Y         Y         Y           Y           Y           Y
      Year FE                                                                       N         Y         N           Y           N           Y
      Bank FE                                                                       N         Y         N           Y           N           Y
      Standard errors in parentheses;  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01
      The total number of firm-year observations in the full sample are 38,016.

     Notes: This table summarizes the impact of regulatory forbearance on lending to low-solvency (columns 1­2), low-liquidity firms
     (columns 3­4), and zombie (columns 5­6) firms with proximity to the regulator for the subset of firms that borrow from private sector
     banks using a triple difference specification. The dependent variable is the log of debt of a firm in period T+1. A firm is classified as
     Zombie if the the firm received subsidized credit in time period T i.e. the firm is able to borrow loans at an average interest rate that is
     lower than the Prime Lending Rate (PLR) of State Bank of India and has Debt to Assets ratio > .15. A firm is classified as
     Low Solvency if the Debt to equity measure of the firm in time period T is above median. A firm is classified as Low Liquidity if the cash
     ratio measure of the firm in time period T is below median. Regulator Proximityb is 1 if the distance of the bank headquarters is below
     the median value and 0 otherwise. Only the triple interaction terms are shown though remaining interaction terms, not absorbed by the
     fixed effects, are also included but not shown for brevity. All specifications control for time-invariant borrower characteristics and
     time-varying firm size via log of sales. Borrower, year, and bank fixed effects are as indicated. Standard errors are clustered at firm level.
