                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             HOW THE NEW FED MUNICIPAL BOND FACILITY CAPPED
           MUNI-TREASURY YIELD SPREADS IN THE COVID-19 RECESSION

                                       Michael D. Bordo
                                        John V. Duca

                                      Working Paper 28437
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28437


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2021




The views expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas or the Federal Reserve System. We thank Amy Chapman, Jai
Cunningham, Owen Humpage, Joe Tracy, Meredith Walker, Michael Weiss, Barrie Wigmore,
Mark Wynne, and seminar participants at the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas for comments,
input, and suggestions. Any remaining errors are those of the authors. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Michael D. Bordo and John V. Duca. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
How the New Fed Municipal Bond Facility Capped Muni-Treasury Yield Spreads in the Covid-19
Recession
Michael D. Bordo and John V. Duca
NBER Working Paper No. 28437
February 2021
JEL No. E40,E50,G21

                                         ABSTRACT

For over two centuries, the municipal bond market has been a source of systemic risk, which
returned early in the Covid-19 downturn when borrowing from securities markets became costly
for many private and public entities, and some found it difficult to borrow at all. Indeed, just
before the Fed announced its unprecedented intervention into the municipal (muni) bond market,
spreads of muni over Treasury yields rose in line with the unemployment rate and appeared
headed to levels not seen since the Great Depression, when real municipal gross investment
plunged 35 percent below 1929 levels. To prevent a repeat, the Fed created the Municipal
Liquidity Facility (MLF) to purchase newly issued, (near) investment grade state and local
government bonds at normal ratings-based interest rate spreads over Treasury bonds plus a fee of
100 basis points, later reduced to 50 basis points. Despite a modest take-up, the MLF has
effectively capped muni spreads at near normal levels plus the Fed fee and limited the extent to
which interest rate spreads could have amplified the impact of the Covid pandemic. To establish
the MLF the Fed needed Treasury indemnification against default losses. There are concerns about
whether the creation of the MLF could undermine the efficiency of the bond market if the facility
lasts too long and could induce moral hazard among borrowers. How the MLF will be unwound
will affect these downside aspects and help answer the question whether the program's benefits
exceed its costs.


Michael D. Bordo
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
New Jersey Hall
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901
and NBER
bordo@econ.rutgers.edu

John V. Duca
Department of Economics
Oberlin College
Rice Hall
10 N.Professor St.
Oberlin, OH 44074
and Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas
jduca@oberlin.edu
         In the early weeks of the Covid-19 pandemic, U.S. state and local governments

encountered difficulty in issuing bonds, as reflected in increased spreads between yields on Baa-

rated municipal and 10-year Treasury bonds (henceforth, the "muni spread," shown in Figure 1).

Markets became concerned about pandemic damage to the real economy (which can be proxied

by the unemployment rate), impairing state budgets and raising financial risk premiums. Through

the first week in April 2020, these spreads initially rose in line with the weekly, insured

unemployment rate drawn from the initial claims for unemployment report (adjusted to be

consistent with the more commonly used monthly unemployment report). Based on the strong

positive correlation between the muni spread and the weekly unemployment rate, it appeared that

spreads would have continued rising in step with the unemployment rate absent Fed intervention.

         This occurred as state and local governments needed to borrow. The governments faced

large retail sales tax revenue losses arising from Covid shutdowns and slower brick and mortar

retail sales, coupled with likely decreases in income and property tax revenues and higher

pandemic-related medical and relief spending. 1 If state and local governments could not borrow,

they could have been forced into more dramatic spending cuts and layoffs than occurred. 2 Stress

in the muni market goes back to the nineteenth century long before the Federal government became

the dominant branch of government. Indeed, when bond market stresses--reflected in a widening

of the muni-Treasury spread--occurred during the Great Depression, state and local governments

slashed their investment spending and trimmed consumption spending (Figure 2). 3 As discussed

in Appendix A, one lesson from the Great Depression is that distress in the municipal bond market


1
  Clemens and Veuger (2020) estimate that the pandemic will reduce state revenues by an average of 11.5 percent,
translating into about ½ percentage point of GDP. Chernick, Copeland, and Reschovsky (2020) estimate that 2020
revenue losses for 150 largest cities would range from 5.5 in a less severe scenario to 9 percent in a more severe one.
2
  Haughwout, Hyman, and Lieber (2020) note that state and local governments accounted for 8.5 percent of GDP in
2019, which was higher than the 3.8 percent of GDP from final purchases of the federal government.
3
  Figure 2 plots the yield spread between Aaa-rated muni and long-term Treasury bonds, whereas this study models
the muni spread based off the average Baa-rated muni bond, whose yield series was not available before 1971.

                                                          1
           Percent                                                                                        Percent
                                                                       Post CFMA Upshift Spread
            20                                                                                                     18


            18
                                                                                                                   16

            16
                                                                                                                   14
            14

                                                                                                                   12
            12                                                                     Insured Unemployment
                                                                                      Rate (right axis)
            10                                                                                                     10


               8                                                                                                   8
                                                                                             Fed
               6                                                                          Announces
                                                                                         Muni Facility             6
                              Muni-TR spread
               4                (left axis)                                                (MLF)
                                                                                                                   4
               2

                                                                                                                   2
               0


               -2                                                                                                  0




Figure 1: Spread between Baa-rated Municipal and 10 Year Treasury Bonds Yields Rises
 with the Unemployment Rate Until the Fed Announced its Municipal Liquidity Facility
 (NBER recessions are shaded. Sources: Moody's, Federal Reserve, and authors' calculations)

          percent, spread                                                                    percent, growth rate
            6                                                                                                 20
                                                  Baa-Treasury
                                                  Yield Spread
                                                    (left axis)
           5                                                                                                  10




           4                                                                                                  0
                                               State & Local Gov't.
                                                Real Consumption
                                               Spending (right axis)
           3                                                                                                  -10




           2                                                                                                  -20




           1                                                          State & Local Gov't.                    -30
                                                                           Real Gross
                                                                      Investment Spending
                                                                           (right axis)
           0                                                                                                  -40
                       1930         1931        1932           1933             1934           1935




  Figure 2: In the Great Depression, State & Local Governments Spending Cuts Were
              Mainly in Gross Investment After Default Spreads Widened
           (Sources: BEA, Moody's, Federal Reserve, and authors' calculations)

                                                        2
induced spending cuts by state and local governments to avoid default (Wigmore, 1985),

particularly those that had earlier borrowed heavily and were less constrained by statutory debt

limits (Gunter and Siodla, 2018). These cuts, in turn, were viewed at the time as a major contributor

to overall distress (Siodla, 2020), prompting President Hoover to lobby states and municipalities

to speed up rather than reduce their planned capital expenditures (Wigmore, 1985, p. 111).

       To help state and local governments avoid making even deeper spending cuts and to

continue to function during the pandemic, on April 9, 2020, the Federal Reserve announced it

would create the Municipal Liquidity Facility (MLF) to buy newly issued short-term debt from

large municipalities. The interest rates would depend on the rating of the public entity and be

priced at more normal interest rate spreads over Treasury yields for those ratings classes plus a 1

percent fee. The intent was to stop feedback from anticipated rises in unemployment from pushing

muni spreads wider and preventing many municipal governments from accessing the municipal

bond market. Indeed, muni spreads stopped rising in the week of the Fed announcement, well

before the muni facility opened on May 26. As shown by Bordo and Duca (2020) a similar pattern

occurred in the corporate bond market, where spreads over Treasury yields stopped rising when

the Fed announced the creation of similar corporate bond programs (March 23), well before those

facilities started buying seasoned bonds (May 12) and new issued bonds (June 29).

       This study examines the impact of the announcement of the MLF on muni spreads, the

Fed's first major intervention in the municipal bond market. In financial crises, the Fed has

traditionally limited its interventions to providing short-term liquidity in money markets and to

member banks via the discount window. Instead, the MLF is more of a credit policy or easing

program designed to prevent financial frictions from amplifying the more direct macroeconomic

effects of the Covid pandemic. In this sense and with the Fed intervening in debt with maturities



                                                 3
beyond those of the money market, the MLF resembles the primary and secondary corporate credit

facilities, which also had large backstop announcement effects (Bordo and Duca (2020)).

       From the perspective of the Fed's price, macroeconomic, and financial stability mandates,

intervention in the municipal bond market can be justified if distress in this market is widespread

enough to hurt the macroeconomy or if it poses systemic risk or risk of contagion that could

undermine financial stability and thereby the macroeconomy. With respect to the former, the

functionality of the muni bond market matters because it provides considerable funding ($4 trillion

outstanding) for capital investment and for helping municipalities address intra-year imbalances

between spending and revenues. This is crucial for these governments to provide essential services.

       Regarding the second justification, there have been two instances in the Fed's history when

distress in the municipal bond market posed systemic risk as discussed in section 2. In four of these

(including the Great Depression), there was a lack of intervention by the federal fiscal authority,

an absence of a central bank or of central bank intervention, and a large wave of muni defaults that

accompanied a national depression or serious downturn. Of these, in the case of the Great

Depression, the Fed did not intervene, and state and local government spending fell and worsened

the macro economy until the federal fiscal support was eventually provided during the New Deal.

In contrast, the federal government's assumption of state debt incurred to finance the American

War for Independence ended municipal distress and poor financial conditions that contributed to

a weak economy in the 1780s and laid the groundwork for a recovery in the 1790s (Henning and

Kessler, 2012). Given the experience in prior five cases of systemic risk from municipal distress

and the national nature of the Covid pandemic, the Fed's intervention in the municipal money and

bond markets in the Covid pandemic appears warranted. Systemic risk was evident when a wave

of mutual fund redemptions by household investors triggered large fire sales of muni bonds by



                                                 4
mutual funds that fueled a liquidity crisis in the muni bond market in the spring of 2020 (see Li,

O'Hara, and Zhou, 2020). Their findings largely reflect the behavior of households who indirectly

own about 20 percent of muni securities indirectly via mutual funds and another 45 percent via

direct holdings.       Thus, investor vulnerability to municipal security prices largely falls on

households, with some on banks and insurers who each hold about 12 percent of total muni debt.

         Our study of the municipal bond market has parallels with Wei and Yue (2020b) who

discuss the impact of the Federal Reserve's Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility

(MMMLF) on the ability of municipal governments to access short-term interest rate financing. 4

They show that after rising during the early pandemic, yields on variable rate deposit obligations

(VRDOs, essentially floating rate, bonds that are rolled over) stopped rising when the Fed

announced the creation of the MMMLF on March 18 and subsequently fell back. This was in sharp

contrast to the elevated levels of VRDO yields during the global financial crisis when there was

no similar Federal Reserve facility (also see Wei and Yue, 2020a). 5 These findings are consistent

with those of Cipriani, Haughwout, et al. (2020) who find that municipal money market mutual

fund balances fell sharply prior to the announcement of the MMMLF, which expanded the eligible

collateral to include VRDOs (Cipriani, La Spada, Orchinik, and Plesset, 2020).

         Nevertheless, the size of the debt markets directly affected by the MLF and MMMLF

differ. First, the VRDO market is much smaller--about $150 billion outstanding at the end of 2018

(Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association, SIFMA)--than that of the long-term muni



4
  From the MMMLF qualifying banks can borrow against the collateral of short-term municipal debt and variable rate
deposit obligations at the primary credit rate plus 100 bps.
5
  Wei and Yue (2020a) show that yields on VRDOs rose by less than those on less liquid auction rate securities because
VRDOs benefitted from liquidity backstops from banks. Nevertheless, VRDO yields rose in the GFC perhaps owing
to higher liquidity risk premiums that investors demanded on non-Treasury securities. VRDO yields remained elevated
for much longer in the GFC than in 2020 owing to the creation of the MMMLF, which enhanced the liquidity of
VRDOs, (Wei and Yue, 2020b). The muni-Treasury bond yield spread peak lines up with the April 9 announcement
of the MLF's future creation, and not on the March 18 announcement of the impending creation of the MMMLF.

                                                          5
bond market which was roughly 20 times the size at about $3 trillion at yearend 2018, according

to the Financial Accounts of the U.S. Second, the size of the short-term muni debt market is also

much smaller--about $38 billion at yearend 2018, according to the Financial Accounts of the U.S.

       The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews key institutional and

historical aspects of the muni bond market and the Fed's new MLF. Section 3 lays out a framework

for modeling municipal bond premia, briefly presenting monthly and weekly variants of these

models, and describing the data and variables. Section 4 discusses the empirical results and

counterfactual simulations, and the conclusion provides a broad perspective on our findings.


2. Institutional and Historical Aspects of Muni Spreads and the Municipal Bond Facility

       This section reviews institutional and tax aspects of the municipal bond market that affect

muni spreads. It also provides background on pre-WWII episodes of systemic distress from muni

debt and the post-WWII behavior of defaults and municipal yield spreads that is relevant for

modeling spreads. Then prior experience with national interventions is discussed before providing

details on the Fed's Municipal Liquidity Facility that relate to the recent behavior of muni spreads.

2.1 Institutional and Tax Aspects of Muni Bonds
       There are two broad categories of municipal bonds. General obligation bonds fund current

state and local government current (consumption) spending and are backed by the general taxing

authority of public entities. The second feature makes such bonds less susceptible to default than

so-called revenue bonds. The latter are not explicitly backed by the taxing authority of a state or

local government, but rather are paid from the revenues an entity raises. Revenue bonds are often

used to fund capital projects and are generally viewed as riskier than general obligation bonds.

       There are important differences in the tax treatment of interest income earned on U.S.

government, muni, and corporate debt. The latter is generally taxed by all three major layers of


                                                 6
government in the U.S.--federal, state, and local entities. State and municipal governments do

not tax interest earned on Treasuries and interest income on state and municipal debt is generally

exempt from the federal income tax. In addition, state and local governments are largely exempt

from income tax interest income on their bonds held by their citizens. As a result, the marginal

federal income tax rate creates a wedge between yields on munis and Treasuries that can shift with

notable federal tax changes. Accordingly, spreads between muni and Treasury rates need to be

adjusted for federal tax rates unlike spreads between corporate and Treasury bond yields.

2.2 Pre-Great Depression Episodes of Systemic Risk From the Muni Bond Market

       Before the New Deal, state and local governments were the primary fiscal actors in the

U.S. and relative to the federal government, they played an even larger role in funding public-

related infrastructure than today. State and local government debt helped fund U.S. economic

development, with waves of muni issuance accompanying surges in investment in canals and

railroads in the 1800s, that sometimes later led to waves of muni defaults and collapses in

infrastructure investment (Studenski and Kroos, 1963).

       Well before the Covid-19 pandemic and the Great Depression, there were four episodes in

U.S. history when local debt posed systemic risk. The first involved debt issued by the original

states to fund the American War for Independence, which created massive debt overhangs for the

state governments. This had to be resolved before the fledgling U.S. Treasury could issue its own

debt (Sylla, 2011). The debt overhang was resolved by the national assumption of Revolutionary

War debt by the Hamilton-led Treasury in the 1790s (Perkins 1994). This was crucial to enable

the Treasury to gain the credibility to issue national bonds. According to Rousseau and Sylla

(2003) the creation of a national bond market was a key component of the fiscal revolution that

fostered the remarkable growth of the U.S. economy in the nineteenth century.,



                                                7
       Unfortunately, this precedent may have fostered a belief that the national government

would bail out the states again encouraging and magnifying a major infrastructure boom in the

1820s, 30s and 40s in canals and later railroads, largely funded by state and local debt (Sargent).

Overinvestment and overleverage led to the collapse of state bond prices and the default of 10

states in the early 1840s following the panic of 1839 and a serious economic recession (Studenski

and Kroos, 1963, and Temin, 1969).

       The third episode of systemic risk emanating from the muni market occurred in the

depression of the 1870s, with a wave of muni defaults, this time associated with the post-civil war

expansion of railroads across the continent (Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental

Relations, 1973, p. 11). The fourth systemic episode occurred in the protracted economic slump in

the 1890s when another wave of muni defaults occurred, this time on a mix of railroad and general

obligation bonds (Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations, 1973, p. 11)

       In contrast to the national assumption of Revolutionary War debt which resolved systemic

risk in the 1790s, the other three instances of systemic risk from the muni market were not resolved

by federal action and each was linked to an economic downturn, partly because the earlier

excessive issuance of muni debt had funded overinvestment in economic development projects. In

these respects, the three waves of muni defaults are similar to the wave of muni defaults in the

Great Depression (see Appendix A).

2.3 Historical Aspects of Muni Defaults and Spreads Between WWII and Covid-19

       Since the Great Depression, muni debt has continued to provide a large source of funding

for public infrastructure, albeit to a lesser degree than before the growth of federal government

expenditure in the New Deal (Wallis and Oates 1998). For example, the $1.65 trillion in muni debt

issued between 2003 and 2012 for capital investment funded the construction of schools ($514



                                                 8
billion), hospitals ($288 billion), water and sewer facilities ($258 billion), roads ($178 billion),

power utilities ($147 billion), and mass transit ($106 billion). 6 Thus, a general and severe systemic

shock to the municipal bond market could have notable real consequences for the nation.

        That said, despite the continued importance of muni debt in funding investment and a

generally low overall default rate on rated municipal debt, there have been some prominent muni

defaults since between WWII and the Covid-19 pandemic, but none of these isolated cases seemed

to pose systemic risk. Of the seven largest municipal defaults since WWII, five involved general

obligation debt: New York City's moratorium in late 1975, the bankruptcies of Orange County

(December 1994), Detroit (December 2013), and Puerto Rico (July 2016), 7 and Cleveland's 1978

default on bank loans. In four cases, excess borrowing by these separate entities underappreciated

by markets and officials (Detroit and New York City), increased their individual vulnerability to

default to a major recession or prolonged economic stagnation (Cleveland, Detroit, New York

City, and Puerto Rico). In the fifth case, that of Orange County, the municipality suffered a large

loss on interest rate derivatives that it had issued and whose risks it did not fully appreciate. In

one of the two cases involving revenue bonds, Jefferson County underappreciated the risks of

relying on variable rate and short-run debt financing, whose costs rose in the GFC when the

county's debt was downgraded. The remaining default, that of Washington Public Power Supply

System Projects 4 and 5, involved revenue bonds of a utility rather than the debt of a city or county.

        In all but one of these cases, there were substantial local but not national economic costs

from the sudden cuts in government spending and tax increases which these municipalities

imposed to restore fiscal balance. 8 In the case of New York City, there were notable cuts in police


6
  These figures exclude refunding issues. Source: National Association of Counties (2013, p. 4).
7
  The exception is the 1983 default on bonds issued by the Washington Public Power Supply System Projects.
8
  These adjustment costs were less notable and long-lasting in relatively affluent Orange County whose bankruptcy
was not a result of long-run economic decline or a downshift in future long-run economic growth.

                                                       9
and public health spending that were followed by large increases in crime and declines in public

health--including even a mini-outbreak of tuberculosis (Freudenberg, et al., 2006). Freudenberg,

et al. (2006) estimate that the economic costs to New York City were five-times the short-run

budgetary savings. This case highlights the point that while metro budgets need to be sustainable

in the long-run, the costs of recovering from default can entail sharp short-run, disruptive cuts in

essential services which could have been avoided had pre-default spending been sustainable and

the composition of spending better reflected higher value-added expenditures. Details on the

factors behind these defaults and the costs of short-run adjustments are discussed in Appendix B.

         Although muni default rates have been low since the 1930s relative to default rates on other

publicly traded debt (Moody's, 2017), 9 the tax-adjusted spread between municipal and Treasury

bond yields (MuniTr) is very cyclical (see Benson and Rogowski, 1978). As shown in Figure 3,

the spread widens near the start of recessions and throughout most of them, and sometimes peaks

after recessions before falling in the mid- and late stages of expansions, much like the

unemployment rate. The combination of cyclicality and low default rates suggests that swings in--

and temporary shocks to--liquidity and risk aversion are major drivers of the spread. Consistent

with this view, this study later shows that the five largest U.S. municipal defaults coincided with

temporary, modest rises in average muni spreads that did not persist for long.

2.4 Notable National Interventions in State and Local Debt Before the Covid-19 Pandemic

Despite the ostensible near-term success of the Federal Reserve interventions involving muni debt

markets, the U.S. experience with federal bailouts of state governments suggests that such

interventions could induce moral hazard for borrowing states. In his Nobel Prize lecture, Sargent



9
  As Appleson, Haughwout, and Parsons (2012) stress default rates are notably higher for unrated (which are sizable
in volume) than for rated muni bonds. The yield spreads that are modeled in this study are based on yields for publicly
rated bonds which are available for a much longer time series sample that those on unrated (and less traded) bonds.

                                                          10
            Percent                                                                           Percent
             6                                                                                        16



             5                                                                        Fed             14
                                                                                   Announces
                                                                                   Muni Bond
             4                                                                      Buying            12

                                                     Tax Adj. Muni -
             3                                        10 yr. Treasury                                 10
                                                     Spread (left axis)

             2                                                                                        8



             1                                                                                        6



             0                                                                                        4
                                                                                  Unemp. Rate
                                                                                   (right axis)
            -1                                                                                        2



            -2                                                                                        0
                 6    6   7     7     8     8    9          9        0    0   1          1        2
                 0    5   0     5     0     5    0          5        0    5   0          5        0




    Figure 3: Since 1960, the Municipal-Treasury Bond Yield Spread Moves with the
       Unemployment Rate Until the Fed Announced its Municipal Bond Facility
(NBER recessions are shaded. Sources: Moody's, Federal Reserve, and authors' calculations)

(2012) reviewed the impact of the U.S. federal government's assumption of state debt that largely

emanated from financing the American War for Independence, which is arguably a national

rather than a state obligation. Sargent emphasizes how this assumption was feasible considering

the nation's then future prospects for rapid growth that could fund the debt, as well as efforts of

Hamilton and others to keep the U.S. federal debt on a sustainable downward trajectory.

       Nevertheless, Sargent argues that the precedent helped take the onus off state governments

to have sustainable debt paths and in the 1820s and 1830s many had borrowed in the London bond

market to fund capital improvements. The states assumed that the improvements would stimulate

their economies and generate the revenue needed to service and amortize the debts. A serious

economic downturn following the panic of 1839 led to disappointing tax and toll revenue, which

coupled with higher interest rates, made it difficult for many states to pay. As a result, many

defaulted in the early-1840s. Congress considered but did not approve a federal bailout (Sargent,


                                                11
2012). The consensus in the Congress was that unlike the Revolutionary War debt, the state debt

of the 1830s was not incurred in the national interest. Those defaulting states that eventually repaid

later regained their ability to issue debt before the American Civil War; but those who repudiated

their obligations had less if any access (English, 1996). Sargent (2012) maintains that this sobering

experience ultimately induced the states to enact balanced-budget requirements in their

constitutions to help restore their credibility and reputations. 10

         Moral hazard from national government bailouts of regional governments is not limited to

the early U.S. experience. Bordo, Jonung and Markiewicz (2011) review the history of five

countries with federal unions. In the Canada and the U.S. since the 1840s markets have generally

disciplined state and local government borrowing. By contrast, Bordo, Jonung and Markiewicz

(2011) stress how national government bailouts of state and local governments have prevented

such market discipline in Argentina and Brazil, and how the moral hazard that such bailouts have

engendered has contributed to national defaults and bouts of high inflation. Partly to avoid unduly

supplanting market discipline in the future, the Federal Reserve has limited MLF purchases of

state and local government debt to fund Covid-pandemic related shortfalls, limited the maturity of

debt it would buy to two-years, and limited the time frame when the MLF would purchase debt.

2.5 The Fed's Municipal Bond Facility

         In the early stages of the pandemic in the U.S., heightened cyclical risks as tracked by the

monthly and weekly unemployment rates pushed up muni spreads by over 100 basis points. Further

rises in unemployment and spreads were expected after March. To prevent additional increases in

muni spreads, the Fed announced on April 9 that it would purchase up to $500 billion in revenue


10
   These are critical for states when issuing long-term debt to fund capital projects and short-term debt to smooth out
intra-year imbalances in their current spending budgets. This shift may help explain why while there were more state
defaults in the nineteenth century, only one state has defaulted since the 1840s (Arkansas in 1936).


                                                          12
notes and other short-run debt (under 2 years in maturity) newly issued by states or cities to offset

revenue losses or increased expenses related to Covid's impact. 11 The facility was limited to cities

of at least 1 million residents and counties with at least 2 million residents Later, the maximum

maturity was raised to three years and eligibility was expanded to include multi-state agencies.

Population thresholds were subsequently lowered (250,000 for cities and 500,000 for counties) as

few cities were eligible and at one point, only two entities had borrowed from the facility.

           To shield the Fed from investment losses the MLF is structured as a special purpose

vehicle, funded by Treasury equity stakes of up to $35 billion and up to $465 billion in debt held

by the Fed. Portfolio exposure to any one entity is limited to 20% of an issuer's annual revenue.

The pricing at which purchases are made was designed to prevent muni spreads from rising much

further than their early April 2020 levels. Fixed spreads over Treasury yields for various issues

were set at which eligible muni debt would be bought, plus a 100-basis point fee (lowered to 50

basis points on August 11, 2020). The fees and pricing were designed to make the MLF more of a

backstop than a first stop source of finance for nonfederal public entities.

            Muni-Treasury spreads abruptly stopped rising in the week when the Fed announced that

it would set up MLF, well before the facility opened in late May and despite a rising unemployment

rate. Nevertheless, MLF holdings of muni debt totaled less than $17 billion by the end of August

2020--far below the $500 billion limit on the facility's size. Instead of reflecting a balance sheet

effect (as with QE), this pattern suggests a strong "backstop" effect similar to that of the Fed's

corporate bond buying program on corporate spreads (Bordo and Duca, 2020.)




11
     Governors of each state can designate a limited number of cities and counties that can borrow from the MLF.

                                                          13
3. Modeling the Muni-Treasury Spread

         The municipal spread analyzed in this study is the tax-adjusted gap between yields on

Moody's Baa-rated municipal bonds (MuniBaa) and the 10-year Treasury bond (TR10). The only

other series with a long sample of relatively continuous data is the Aaa-rated muni bond, which,

because its default risk is low and moves little over time, is less relevant than the Baa muni bond.

        Although the Baa-rated municipal bond yield is available on a monthly basis since 1941,

the longest estimated federal marginal tax rate series starts in 1960. That series--the average

marginal rate from Feenberg and Coutts (1993)--is denoted as tf: 12 Since federal income tax is

levied on Treasury interest, the after-tax return on the 10-year Treasury yield equals that yield

multiplied by 1 minus the tf. In contrast, the after-tax return on munis equals the nominal municipal

yield because municipal interest income is exempt from federal income tax and because state and

municipal entities typically exempt interest on their bonds from taxation for local residents. 13

        MuniTRt = MuniBaa ­ (1- tf ) TR10                                                                 (1)

At a weekly frequency, the municipal series is available since 1975. 14

        As shown in Figure 3, this spread (MuniTr) widens in recessions, and tends to be coincident

with business cycle peaks and troughs. The cyclical effect is nonlinear, with a stronger correlation

between the spread and the square of the unemployment rate than with the level, plausibly

reflecting the tail risk nature of defaults and default risk.

        Before the Fed announced its new municipal bond facility, the tax-adjusted muni spread

mainly reflected cyclical risks for municipal debt. Time series measures or proxies of cyclical risks




12
   Specifically, we use their series labeled: "Same 1984 Sample for all Years."
13
   Local residents are treated as the marginal muni investors owing to the local state and municipal tax exemption.
14
   For a few missing monthly observations (owing to thin trading), we interpolate missing weekly observations and
infer monthly data from weekly data. Some incorrectly entered weekly data were also corrected--see Appendix A.

                                                        14
are limited by data availability and endogeneity. 15 Cyclical risk is proxied by the square of the

unemployment rate (UR2), which is expected to be positively correlated with MuniTR.

         A major shift since the late 1990s has affected that correlation. Such a shift can be tracked

by either controlling for long-lasting changes in regulations, or by time trends. The latter provides

little insight and coefficient estimates on time trends can suggest omitted variable bias from not

controlling for other factors. With respect to the former, we found one significant upshift in the

tax-adjusted muni spread after 1960. This was an upshift that we link to the Congress' December

2000 approval of the Commodity Futures Modernization Act (CFMA). As Bolton and Oehmke

(2015) and Stout (2011) show, the CFMA exempts derivatives counterparties from the automatic

stay in bankruptcy, enabling immediate collection from a defaulted counterparty, providing them

a senior claim over most other bankruptcy claimants. The passage of CFMA was quickly followed

by a surge in credit default swaps (Duca and Ling, 2020). By giving bankruptcy priority to

derivatives (mainly credit default swaps), the CFMA lowered the priority of bonds and made bonds

riskier (see Bolton and Oehmke 2015). CFMA can be viewed as a shift in which the use of hard-

to-detect derivative positions became more acceptable for state and municipal finance authorities,

while posing greater risks to bond investors. 16 We find that a shift dummy (CFMA =1 since

December 2000 in monthly models or = 1 since December 15 in weekly models, and 0 otherwise)

captures an upward level shift in the municipal-Treasury yield spread. The alternative approach--



15
   For example, widespread central bank interventions prevent using the commercial paper bill spread (made famous
by Friedman and Kuttner, 1992) for post-2007 samples or using corporate spreads for tracking risk in modeling
commercial paper (Duca, 2013) or municipal-Treasury spreads after February 2020. Endogeneity concerns also raise
doubts about using the yield curve as long-term Treasury yields directly affect its slope and the base off which
corporate and muni spreads are measured. In addition, large holdings of long-term securities following the Fed's use
of quantitative easing starting in 2008 affect the consistency of the yield curve over time. The post-2007 Fed balance
sheet also limits the usefulness of the TED spread (LIBOR-short-term Treasury interest rates) as the high excess
reserves used to fund Fed bond holdings limits the ability of the TED spread to track more general market risk premia.
16
   The famous 1994 bankruptcy by Orange County owed to county government losses on interest rate derivative
positions, while the 2011 bankruptcy of Jefferson County, Alabama also arose from taking much interest rate risk.

                                                         15
included for comparison--is to include a time trend in the long-run relationship of the muni spread.

       These considerations yield two specifications for econometrically modeling the

equilibrium municipal-Treasury spread, one using shift variables and the other a time trend:


       MuniTR*t = 0 + 1 URt2 + 2 CFMAt                                                          (2)

       MuniTR*t = 0 + 1 URt2 + 5Trendt                                                          (3)


where each coefficient i has an expected positive sign. According to KPSS tests (Appendix B),

MuniTR and UR are nonstationary in levels but are stationary in first differences at weekly and

monthly frequencies. By construction, so is the regulatory shift variable, CFMA.

       Accordingly, we estimate equations (2) and (3) with monthly (1960-early 2020) and

weekly (1975-2020) data jointly using a cointegration approach (Johanssen's (1995)). The first

difference equation of the latter includes an error-correction term (the t-1 gap between the actual

and equilibrium spread), lags of first differences of the long-run variables and a vector X of

exogenous event shocks. X includes impact dummies for the Covid pandemic and also dummies

for unusual government policies and five prominent episodes of municipal bond distress. The

former, include lags of DCovid (=1 only in one period, 0 otherwise) for each of the first two months

and first three weeks since the onset of the Covid Pandemic (dated March 2020 and March 13,

2020 for the monthly and weekly models, respectively). In addition, we include a dummy,

DVaccine, equal to 1 in the business weeks of November 20 and December 4, 2020 when Pfizer

and Moderna announced successful stage 3 trial results for their Covid-19 vaccines. For the

monthly models, this dummy equals 1 in December 2020 only.

       Among the other controls are impact dummies for unusual government policy surprises,

including CredControl (= 1 in March 1980 and 0 otherwise in the monthly models, and =1 in the



                                                16
week of March 7, 1980 -1 in the week of August 1, 1980, and 0 otherwise in the weekly models 17)

for the initial impact of the Carter credit controls of 1980 which triggered a jump in Treasury rates

that preceded a similar rise in municipal yields. Another impact dummy is for the Fed's sudden

switch to monetary targeting in 1979 announced on Saturday, October 6, 1979, which caused a

one-week rise in the muni spread in the week ended Friday (October 12, 1979). This jump

unwound in the next business week. The set of impact dummies for the weekly models include the

time t and t-1 impact dummy, Moneytarget, equal to 1 for the week of October 12 and 0 otherwise.

The set of monthly impact dummies does not include a similar variable as there was not a

significant monthly rise in October 1979 followed by a reversal in November 1979.

         The short-run variables also control for the impact of five large and generally unexpected

municipal defaults. Two approaches are taken. The first includes separate dummy variables for

each, including the moratorium on New York City debt payments (DNYC = 1 in September and

October 1975 in monthly models, September 26, 1975 and October 31, 1975 in weekly models,

and 0 otherwise (see Municipal Assistance Corporation for the City of New York, 1976, p. 1129,

and Gramlich, 1976), and impact dummies for the bankruptcies of Cleveland (DCleve = 1 in

January 2020 in monthly models or December 22, 1978 in weekly models, and 0 otherwise), 18

Orange County (DOrange = 1 in December 1994 in monthly models or December 9. 1994 in

weekly models, and 0 otherwise), Jefferson County (DJefferson = 1 in November 2011 in monthly

models or November 18, 2011 in weekly models, and 0 otherwise), and Detroit (DDetroit = 1 in




17
   The Fed lifted the controls on July 24 and the week ending August 1 was the first full week of decontrol. The weekly
effect for the lifting is more discernible on muni spreads (Treasury rates rose) than the monthly effect likely because
averaging weekly responses into month averages spreads the effects over the months of July and August.
18
   Cleveland's default occurred after markets closed on Friday, Dec. 15, 1978, which showed up more in the monthly
average for January partly because of thin trading during the holiday-heavy second half of December and because the
default was on bank loans and likely had a slightly lagging effect on the muni bond market.

                                                          17
December 2013 in monthly models or December 6, 2013 in weekly models, and 0 otherwise). 19

The second approach combines these defaults into one series, DMuniDef, that sums the dummies.

           Results from both approaches are very similar, with estimated coefficients on the major

variables essentially the same and with estimated coefficients on the individual dummies

bracketing the single point estimate using the second approach. The second approach is adopted

as it is more parsimonious and better illustrates the important finding that isolated municipal

defaults may temporarily affect the broader muni market, but do not really pose a systemic risk

unlike a correlated shock such as the Covid-19 pandemic. Results from including five separate

muni default dummies are reported in Appendix Tables A2 and A3.

           Dummies were not included for two other prominent defaults, Washington Power Supply

System Projects 4 and 5 (WPSS), and Puerto Rico, owing largely to difficulties with determining

the timing the market response to news of these largely expected defaults. In the case of WPSS the

utility stopped construction on two nuclear power plants funded by the bonds in January 1982 but

did not declare bankruptcy and default until July 1983. As discussed in Appendix B, timing the

market response to Puerto Rico is complicated partly because the timing of the actual default was

uncertain owing to a series of court decisions about the legality of bankruptcy and partly because

of uncertainty about whether the federal government might bailout the territory.

           For our preferred model (eq. (2)), we estimate:


     MuniTR t = 0 + 1 URt2 + 2 CFMAt                                                                               (4a)

     MuniTR t = 0 + 1ECt-1 + ni=1 2iMuniTR t-i + ni=13iURt-i2 +  ni=14iCFMAt + Xt, (4b)


where EC t-1  MuniTR t-1 - MuniTR *t-1 (the error term from (4a)), lag lengths are chosen to



19
     In the first week of December 2013, a court ruled that Detroit was eligible to file for bankruptcy under Chapter 9.

                                                            18
minimize the SIC while yielding serially uncorrelated errors, X is a vector of exogenous shock

variables,  is a vector of coefficients for the X vector of shocks and the estimation allows for

each of the variables in the long-run equation to have time trends but not a trend in the long-run

relationship.

       The estimated coefficient 1 on the error-correction term is expected to be negative (so that

the actual spread converges toward its equilibrium level), with the absolute magnitude implying

the speed of error-correction. Note that the model implicitly imposes an almost instantaneous

reaction of the municipal bond yield to the long-term Treasury yield, reflecting the Treasury yield's

role as a benchmark rate. The speed of error-correction (i.e., the speed at which the spread adjusts),

really indicates lags in how the perceived relative risk and degree of risk aversion for Baa-rated

municipal bonds adjust in response to the business cycle and the CFMA regime shift in the

bankruptcy priority and relative risk of municipal versus Treasury bonds.

       Equations (4a) and (4b) comprise a baseline, long-sample model of the muni-Treasury

yield spread before the Fed announced in early April 2020 that it would intervene by buying

selected municipal bonds. If the Fed prevents the spread from rising past a threshold, its policy

intervention breaks the normal equilibrium relationship. This is evident in Figures 1 and 3.

Accordingly--and as discussed in more detail later on--for samples extending past early April

2020, we adjust the baseline equation to allow for either a level shift in the equilibrium spread or

a change in the impact of the unemployment rate on the spread.

       The main cyclical variable used in this study are the monthly civilian unemployment rate

and the weekly, insured unemployment rate from the initial claims for unemployment report. The

unadjusted weekly insured unemployment rate has not consistently moved over time with the

monthly unemployment rate. As stressed by Cleary, Kwok, and Valletta (2009), the major reason



                                                 19
is that the eligibility for--and the taxation of--UI benefits has evolved. This stems, in part, from

shifts in the regional and unionized composition of employment that have affected the proclivity

of the unemployed to file for benefits and count in the weekly unemployment rate series. To

address this we multiply the seasonally adjusted weekly series by the centered, 12-week moving

average of the ratio of the weekly unemployment rate to the monthly unemployment rate from the

household survey. 20 While the adjusted and unadjusted weekly unemployment rates are each

significantly related to (cointegrated with) the muni-Treasury spread and with the actual spread

significantly error-correcting toward its equilibrium value, the adjusted series yields short-run

residuals that are not significantly correlated, in contrast to residuals from a model of the

unadjusted series. Accordingly, we use the adjusted insured unemployment rate in weekly models.


4. Empirical Results

           Given the short post-Covid sample, using higher frequency weekly data has the advantage

of helping identify the effects of the pandemic and Fed interventions into the municipal bond

market, but this comes at the disadvantage of not spanning pre-1975 data using weekly data that

are noisier than monthly data owing to thin trading at weekly frequencies.

4.1 Long-Run Estimates of Monthly and Weekly Models

           Results from estimating monthly and weekly models through March and early April 2020

are reported in Tables 1 and 2, respectively. In each table, the long-run results of modeling the

level of the muni spread are shown in the upper panel and short-run results for modeling the

changes in the spread are reported in the lower panel. Lag lengths on the first difference terms in

the short run section of each model (12 or 13 lags for monthly and weekly models) were selected

to minimize the Schwartz Information Criterion among the lag lengths that yield serially


20
     The smoothing of the adjustment parameter limits noise in the weekly series.

                                                           20
uncorrelated errors in the first difference model (eq. (4b)). Models 1 and 2 are estimated over a

pre-Covid sample (February 1961 ­ March. 2020 and April 4, 1975 ­ March 6, 2020) for the

monthly and weekly models, respectively) and respectively exclude and include the municipal

shock variables in the vector X.

       Models 3 and 4 respectively correspond to Models 1 and 2 with three differences. First,

they are estimated over a sample spanning most of the Covid downturn (February 1961­December

2020 and April 4, 1975 ­ Dec. 25, 2020 for the monthly and weekly models). Second, they add

several impact dummies. Third, Models 3 and 4 both zero out the unemployment rate channel after

the Fed announced municipal bond interventions. This is done by multiplying the squared

unemployment rate by one minus the dummy MLF, which equals 1 since April 2020 and the week

of April 10 in the monthly and weekly models, respectively. Models 5 and 6 respectively

correspond to Models 3 and 4 but differ in not zeroing out the unemployment rate channel after

the Fed announced municipal bond interventions.

       For the weekly and monthly versions of the pre-Covid Models 1 and 2 and also for Models

3 and 4 that zero out the post-Covid unemployment effects, significant and unique long-run

cointegrating relationships are found among the variables in levels (we use Johansen's (1995)

method), and short-run models have residuals that are not serially correlated. The long-run

coefficients are significant, with the expected positive effects of unemployment and derivatives

deregulation (the CFMA dummy) on the muni-Treasury spreads. Long-run coefficient estimates

are similar across these four models for monthly and weekly frequencies, as can be seen from the

equilibrium spreads estimated in the monthly and weekly versions of Model 3:


  MuniTRt = 0.192 + 0.022 x URt2** + 1.352 CFMAt**          (Monthly Model)                  (5)
                   (0.004)          (0.186)



                                               21
  MuniTRt = 0.110 + 0.025 x URt2** + 1.287 CFMAt**              (Weekly Model)                   (6)
                   (0.005)          (0.236)


where absolute standard errors are in parentheses, * (**) denotes significant at the 95 (99) percent

confidence level, the monthly model is estimated through December 2020, and the weekly model,

through December 25, 2020. The estimated long-run relationships from Models 1-4 track the

trends in the muni spread, shown in Figure 4 with the estimated equilibrium long-run spreads from

Models 3 and 1, where the latter use pre-Covid coefficients estimates and ignores the MLF.

       In contrast to the full sample Models 3 and 4, for Models 5 and 6 unique and significant

cointegrating relationships could be found using shorter lags, but the short-run models had serially

correlated residuals. If the lag lengths used in models 3 and 4 are applied to monthly versions of

models 5 and 6--which are reported in Table 1--a unique and significant cointegrating

relationship cannot be found, the error-correction term is statistically insignificant, and the model

residuals are serially correlated. For the weekly versions of models 5 and 6 (Table 2), while a

unique and significant cointegrating relationship can be found and the error-correction term is or

is nearly statistically significant, the speeds of error correction are much slower and more

importantly, the model residuals are serially correlated. This pattern of findings indicates

misspecification for the models (5 and 6) that do not zero out the post-Covid impact of the

unemployment rate and is consistent with the Fed's intention to prevent the deepening of the Covid

Pandemic from being amplified further in the municipal market.

4.2 Short-Run Estimates of Monthly and Weekly Models

       Several important patterns are apparent across the short-run models 1 to 4 shown in the

lower panels of Tables 1 and 2. First, the error-correction terms are highly significant with the

expected negative sign, which implies that spreads change to reduce the gap between the t-1 actual



                                                 22
 Percent
 10
                                                                                    Estimated
  9                                                                                Equilbrium
                                                                                   March 1961-
                                                                                   March 2020,
  8                                                                               ignore facility

                                                                                   Estimated
  7                                                                               Equilbrium
                                                                                  March 1971-
                                                                                   Dec, 2020
  6                                                                               with facility


  5                                                                                   Fed
                                                                 Muni - 10 yr.     Announces
                                                                  Treasury         Muni Bond
  4                                                                Spread           Facility


  3

  2

  1

  0




  Figure 4: Equilibrium Spreads Track Actual Muni-Treasury Spreads until March 2020
    (NBER recessions are shaded. Sources: BLS, NBER Macro-History Database, Moody's,
                         Federal Reserve, and authors' calculations)

and equilibrium levels of the muni spread. The coefficients from the monthly models 1 to 4 imply

a 6 to 7 percent monthly or roughly 52 to 60 percent annual speed of error-correction, while those

from the weekly models 1 to 4 imply 1.8 percent weekly or roughly 60 to 61 percent annual speed

of error-correction. In the corresponding full sample models (Models 3 vs. 5 and Models 4 vs. 6)

that do not account for the Fed's announced muni market intervention, the error-correction

coefficient is less significant and smaller, implying slower speeds of adjustment. This pattern for

the short-run models of the change in the muni spread are consistent with the long-run results in

that poorly specified long-run relationships (Models 5 and 6) provide less information for short-



                                                23
run adjustment. The corrected R-squares of the models of the change in the muni spread range

from 4 to 24 percent for the monthly models and from 10 to 16 percent for the weekly models.

         The inclusion of short run controls in pre-Covid models or in full sample models that

account for the Fed's muni bond program is not needed to obtain serially uncorrelated residuals.

Nevertheless, model fits are much higher in corresponding models that include the short-run

shocks. For both weekly and monthly models, the credit control dummy is highly significant and

negative as expected. In the weekly models, the lags on the Fed's surprise October 1979 policy

shift are significant, picking up a temporary rise in the muni spread. Also as expected, the monthly

dummy for five major muni defaults is very significant and positive, indicating that spreads rise

37 to 39 basis points on impact, with speeds of error-correction implying that their effect on the

muni spread takes about 1 to 2 years to wear off. In the alternative models in the Appendix, the

coefficients on separate dummies for each muni default are generally at least marginally significant

and of similar size. This pattern of findings implies that isolated, unexpected municipal defaults

have had short-term--but not long-term--effects on general muni spreads. 21 In comparison, the

more medium-term swings in the unemployment rate and the pre-MLF behavior of muni spreads

suggest that the Covid Pandemic would have had more noticeable and more medium-term effects

on the levels of muni spreads absent the Fed's intervention in the muni market. Finally, the weekly

dummy for the announcements of successful stage 3 trials for the Pfizer and Moderna vaccines is

highly significant, indicating that each individual announcement lowered muni spreads by about

30 basis points. The combined effect of about 60 basis points is close to the roughly 50 basis point

combined effect in fully specified models (3 and 4) and which is only significant in these models


21
  One qualification is that the estimated impact of NY City's default was higher at 80 basis points versus 40 basis
points for the others as the default dummy equaled 1 in two straight months for NY city's default instead of equaling
1 for only one month. Another is that the impact of NY City's default was limited because the city did not declare
bankruptcy and it was effectively bailed out by NY state.

                                                         24
which control for the Fed intervention in the muni market.

4.3 Assessing Covid and Fed Muni Market Intervention Effects on the Muni Spread
       Tthe above results and figures strongly suggest that the Fed's announced intervention into

the muni bond market notably affected the muni spread by nullifying the relationship between the

unemployment rate and the spread and preventing much higher municipal bond interest rates. To

gauge the effects of the MLF, we use coefficients from Model 3 to trace out the equilibrium spread

implied by the long-run coefficients and compare that to the equilibrium spread without shutting

off the estimated impact of the unemployment effects for the monthly and weekly versions of

Model 3. Using the monthly model, the resulting gap implies that had the average unemployment

rate for April 2020 persisted, the equilibrium muni spread would have risen by a further 4.6 pp

from its March levels, as illustrated in Figure 5. Figure 6 plots the implied effect that the announced

Fed municipal bond interventions had on the equilibrium Baa-Treasury spread using the weekly

model, which peaks at 7.9 percentage points in the business week ending April 24, 2020. The

weekly peak effect is somewhat higher than that for the monthly model, but the implied monthly

averages of the weekly effects are similar to those from the monthly model.

4.4 Possible Impact of Muni Market Intervention on State and Local Government Spending
       To our knowledge, there are no available, published econometric models that can gauge

the interest rate impact of the MLF on spending by state and local governments, let alone the

MLF's indirect spending effects via reducing uncertainty and credit constraints facing these public

entities. Nevertheless, while balance budget requirements limit most municipal debt to finance

long-term capital projects, interest payments on such debt are a current expense and limit

nonfederal government purchases of goods and services--especially in a deep recession. This

This implies that debt service savings from lower interest costs on normal annual borrowing can

cushion state and local government spending on final goods.

                                                  25
         Percent
          5




           4




           3
                                                     Implied Impact Fed Intervention on
                                                   Equilibrium Muni-Treasury Spread, from
                                                    Model 3 estimated Mar. 1961-Dec. 2020

           2




           1




           0




       Figure 5: Monthly Model Estimates Suggest a Substantial Effect of the
      Announced Fed Intervention on the Municipal-Treasury Spread in 2020
(NBER recessions are shaded. Sources: Moody's, Federal Reserve, and authors' calculations)

         Percent
           10




               8




               6




               4                              Implied Impact of Fed Intervention on
                                          Equilibrium Muni Spread from Model estimated
                                                    April 1975-December 2020


               2




               0




        Figure 6: Weekly Model Estimates Suggest a Substantial Effect of the
      Announced Fed Intervention on the Municipal-Treasury Spread in 2020
(NBER recessions are shaded. Sources: Moody's, Federal Reserve, and authors' calculations)

                                            26
        Model estimates indicate that the announcement of the MLF lowered municipal bond

yields by around 4 ½ percentage points in the second quarter of 2020, and by an average of about

3 ½ percentage points from early April to mid-September 2020. Municipal bond debt outstanding

is about $3.1 trillion, with issuance of about 1/8 of that per annum or roughly $400 billion a year.

This translates into $14 billion to $20 billion in annual interest rate savings or 0.075 to 0.1 percent

of GDP, with the higher figure being an upper limit estimate of interest rate effects in 2020:q2,

when the MLF had its peak interest rate effect. This figure does not include the effects of the MLF

on increasing the short-term ability of nonfederal governments to issue tax anticipation notes to

avoid sharp, near-term reductions in spending during the second and third quarters. These potential

effects on state and local consumption expenditures also appear to be modest. In the first quarter

of 2020, short-term muni issuance was only $670 million less than in the first quarter of 2019,

while quarterly issuance since the MLF was announced exceeded year-ago quarterly levels by $1.8

and $3.5 billion in the second and third quarters, respectively. These figures may understate the

overall effect of the MLF as they likely omit some long-term investment projects that would have

otherwise been cancelled had the MLF not been created to help restore normal market conditions.22

        Although the MLF was not designed to directly support investment by the nonfederal

public sector, its impact as a backstop may have indirectly done so. Just before the MLF was

announced, long-term muni bond issuance fell in March 2020 from its February pace and was

about 30 percent below its March 2019 levels. Then, long-term issuance surged, outpacing its 2019

rates by $13.0 billion and $30.4 billion in the second and third quarters of 2020, respectively.

These amounts are close to the $14 to $20 billion quarterly savings in debt service from lower



22
  To address its budget crisis in the mid-1970s and to repay its creditors and restore access to bond financing, New
York City not only cut spending on services that had contributed much to its earlier deficits, but also cut long-run
infrastructure projects (see Ferretti, 1974, and Reagan, 2017) that hurt its long-run economic growth.

                                                        27
interest rates, though they may reflect some greater issuance induced by lower interest rates. These

figures imply that the potential effect on state and local government investment expenditures could

have been more notable than those on nonfederal government spending on consumption items.

         Nevertheless, the impact on investment spending of the MLF may have been greater to the

extent that it prevented declines in gross issuance that could have otherwise occurred. On the other

hand, much of the second and third quarter issuance likely reflected refinancing of long-term debt

and to that extent did not boost state and local government spending in the middle quarters of 2020.

         It seems plausible that the overall effect of the MLF on state and local government spending

likely bolstered those expenditures by about 0.1 percentage points through interest rate saving

effects on current purchases plus a small multiple of that by preventing tighter liquidity constraints

on these public entities. In sum, a plausible 0.1 to 0.3 percentage point macro effect of the MLF

on state and local government purchases of final goods (coupled with a government spending

multiplier of near unity) seems more modest than the 0.8 to 2 ¼ percentage point beneficial effect

on GDP of the Fed's corporate facilities calculated by Bordo and Duca (2020). 23 Nevertheless, the

contribution of the MLF may be understated as it could omit some infrastructure project

cancellations that the creation of the MLF prevented.


5. Conclusion

         In early April 2020, it was becoming more difficult for state and local governments to issue

debt, evidenced in rapidly widening muni spreads and sharply lower muni issuance in March

compared with both February 2020 and its year-ago pace. The Fed's April 9th announcement of a

future muni bond buying program through creation of the Municipal Liquidity Facility stopped



23
  It is difficult to assess the relative local impact of the backstop effects of these programs which are harder to pinpoint
than the impact of direct lending which has been very modest so far given limited take-up by borrowers.

                                                            28
spreads from further rising, triggering an ebbing of spreads and a sharp revival of muni bond

issuance. Analysis of a half-century of weekly and monthly municipal bond pricing indicates that

the MLF kept municipal bond rates from rising nearly 5 percentage points further for April 2020

as a whole and by as much as 8 percentage points in mid-April using more granular weekly data.

That these effects occurred far in advance of the opening of the MLF and given the very modest

borrowing by municipal entities at the MLF together imply that the announcement of this new

facility had a pronounced and rapid backstop effect. These results along with others imply that

there was systemic risk in the muni bond market in the Covid-19 pandemic, that was not the case

for the isolated, but prominent, muni defaults in the prior half century.

       In so doing, the MLF prevented the deepening of the Covid-19 Recession from further

pushing up muni rates and amplifying the downturn. From this perspective, the MLF has been very

successful, much like the Money Market Municipal Liquidity Facility that helped stabilize short-

term funding sources for municipal governments (Wei and Yue, 2020b). Such effects occurred

well before the announcement effects of successful vaccine trials lowered spreads in November

and December 2020. Nevertheless, the net effects of the MLF (and MMMLF) on state and local

government purchases of final product appear to be modest in absolute terms and relative to

estimates of the cushioning effects of the Fed's corporate bond programs, which are more notable.

       Depending on how and when the MLF is unwound, its net effect may not be as positive as

the upfront benefits many suggest for at least three reasons. First, the creation of the MLF may

have lessened pressure on the Congress to provide federal fiscal relief to state and local

governments. Second, the precedent set by the MLF may create moral hazard that induces

municipal authorities to worry less about downside tail effects. For example, the precedent of the

MLF could reduce the incentives for many states to build up "rainy day" surpluses that could be



                                                 29
used to bolster muni spending and avoid tax hikes. And there is evidence of moral hazard in other

countries; notable examples are Argentina and Brazil, where excess borrowing by state

governments has been bailed out by the national government that later was forced to default

(Bordo, Jonung and Markiewicz, 2011). 24 Finally, it will be important to end the MLF to restore

market forces as the primary determinant of muni rates and the allocation of finance to the

nonfederal public sector. Partly on this concern, the Treasury decided to terminate the MLF at

yearend 2020, even though the Fed saw this as premature. Thus, the net benefit of the MLF will

depend on whether it was correctly unwound and the extent of the moral hazard effects that it

induces relative to the notable benefits of stopping a municipal liquidity crisis in the spring of 2020

and capping muni spreads.




24
  On the other hand, one could point to the successful example of the U.S. federal government's assumption of the
revolutionary war debt issued by states (Sargent, 2020) which was for a national purpose, and argue that in the Covid
pandemic, state and local governments have de facto borne the burden of a national emergency.

                                                         30
                                            References

Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations. 1973. City Financial Emergencies: The

       Intergovernmental Dimension. U.S. Government Printing Office: Washington, DC.

Appleson, Jason, Andrew F. Haughwout, and Eric Parsons. 2012. "The Untold Story of

       Municipal Bond Defaults." Liberty Street Economics 20120815. Federal Reserve Bank of

       New York.

Benson, Earl D., and Robert J. Rogowski. 2020. "The Cyclical Behavior of Risk Spreads on New

       Municipal Issues." Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 10 (3): 348-62.

       https://doi.org/10.2307/1991513

Bolton, Patrick and Martin Oehmke. 2015. "Should Derivatives Be Privileged in Bankruptcy?"

       Journal of Finance 70 (6): 2353-94. https://doi.org/10.1111/jofi.12201

Bordo, Michael D. and John V. Duca. 2020. "How New Fed Corporate Bond Programs Dampened

       the Financial Accelerator in the Covid-19 Recession." NBER Working Paper 28097.

       https://doi.org/10.3386/w28097

Bordo, Michael D., Lars Jonung and Agnieszka Markiewicz. 2011. " A Fiscal Union for the

       Euro:     Some      Lessons   from      History'   NBER     Working      Paper   17386.

       https://doi.org/10.3386/w17380

Braun, Martin Z. 2020. "Jefferson County Bankruptcy Foreshadows Fate of Cities in

       Crisis." Bloomberg Quint. May 12, 2014.

       https://www.bloombergquint.com/business/jefferson-county-bankruptcy-foreshadows-

       fate-of-cities-in-crisis

Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2020. "The Impact of the Coronavirus (COVID-19) Pandemic on The



                                                31
       Employment Situation for June 2020." July 2, 2020. https://www.bls.gov/cps/employment-

       situation-covid19-faq-june-2020.pdf

Chernick, Howard, David Copeland, and Andrew Reschovsky. 2020. "The Fiscal Effects of the

       Covid-19 Pandemic on Cities: An Initial Assessment." National Tax Journal 73 (3): 699-

       732. https://doi.org/10.17310/ntj.2020.3.04

Cipriani, Marco, Andrew Haughwout, Ben Hyman, Anna Kovner, Gabriele La Spada, Matthew

       Lieber, and Shawn Nee. 2020. "Municipal Debt Markets and the COVID-19 Pandemic."

       Liberty Street Economics 20200629, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

Cipriani, Marco, Gabriele La Spada, Reed Orchinik, and Aaron Plesset. "The Money Market

       Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility." Liberty Street Economics 20200508, Federal Reserve

       Bank of New York.

Cleary, Aisling, Joyce Kwok, and Rob Valletta. 2009. "New Highs in Unemployment Insurance

       Claims." FRBSF Economic Letter, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, September.

Clemens, Jeffrey and Stan Veuger. 2020. "Implications of the Covid-19 Pandemic for State

       Government        Tax      Revenues."         NBER     Working       Paper      27426.

       https://doi.org/10.3386/w27426

Corman, Hope, and H. Naci Mocan. 2016. "A Time-Series Analysis of Crime, Deterrence, and

       Drug Abuse in New York City." American Economic Review 90 (3): 584-604.

       https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.90.3.584

Duca, John V., and David C. Ling. 2020. "The Other (Commercial) Real Estate Boom and Bust:

       the Effects of Risk Premia and Regulatory Capital Arbitrage." Journal of Banking and

       Finance 112(C): https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbankfin.2018.03.006

English, William B. 1996. "Understanding the Costs of Sovereign Default: American State Debts



                                               32
       in the 1840s." American Economic Review 86 (1): 259-75.

Feenberg, Daniel, and Elizabeth Coutts, 1993. ''An Introduction to the Taxsim Model.'' Journal

       of Policy Analysis and Management 12 (1): 189-94. (https://www.nber.org/taxsim)

Ferretti, Fred. 1974. "New Construction Virtually Barred in Capital Budget," New York Times,
       December 4, 1974, p. 89.
Freudenberg, Nicolas, Marianne Fahs, Sandro Galea, and Andrew Greenberg. 2006. "The Impact

       of New York City's 1975 Fiscal Crisis on Tuberculosis, HIV, and Homicide Syndemic."

       American Journal of Public Health 96 (3): 424-34.

       https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2005.063511

Gramlich, Edward M. 1976. "New York: Ripple or Tidal Wave." American Economic Review 66

       (4): 415-29.

Greenspan, Alan, Paul W. MacAvoy, and Burton G. Malkiel. 1975. "An Economic Analysis of

       the New York City Financial Crisis." Memorandum to the President of the United States.

       October 27, 1975.

       https://www.fordlibrarymuseum.gov/library/document/0117/75501931.pdf

Gunter, Samara and James Siodla. 2018. "Local Origins and Implications of the 1930s Urban

       Debt Crisis." Paper presented at the 111th Annual Conference of the National Tax

       Association.

Haughwout, Andrew F., Benjamin G. Hyman, and Matthew Lieber. 2020. "Helping State and

       Local Governments Stay Liquid." Liberty Street Economics 20200410b, Federal Reserve

       Bank of New York.

Hempel, George H. 1964. The Postwar Quality of Municipal Bonds. Ph.D. Dissertation,

       University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan.

Henning, C. Randall and Martin Kessler. 2012. "Fiscal Federalism: US History for Architects of

                                               33
       Europe's Fiscal Union." Working Paper 12-1, Petersen Institute for International

       Economics.

Hobijn, Bart, Philip Hans Franses, and Marius Ooms. 2004. "Generalizations of the KPSS-test for

       Stationarity." Statistica Neerlandica 58 (4): 483-502.

       https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9574.2004.00272.x

Joffe, Marc D. 2013. Drivers of Municipal Bond Defaults During the Great Depression. Masters

       Dissertation, San Francisco State University. http://ssrn.com/abstract=2189889

Johansen, Soren. 1995. Likelihood-Based Inference in Cointegrated Vector Autoregressive

       Models. New York: Oxford University Press.

       https://doi.org/10.1093/0198774508.001.0001

Lavertu, Stéphane and Travis St. Clair. 2018. "Beyond Spending Levels: Revenue Uncertainty

       and the Performance of Local Governments." Journal of Urban Economics 106 (c): 59-80.

       https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jue.2018.06.003

Li, Yi, Maureen O'Hara, and Xing (Alex) Zhou. 2020. "Mutual Fund Fragility, Dealer Liquidity

       Provisions, and the Pricing of Municipal Bonds." (November 11, 2020). Available at

       SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3728943 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3728943.

Moody's Investor Service. 2017. "US Municipal Bond Defaults and Recoveries, 1970-2016."

       Data Report, June 27.

Municipal Assistance Corporation for the City of New York. 1976. Annual Report. New York

       City: New York.

National Association of Counties. 2013. "Municipal Bonds Build America: A County

       Perspective on Changing the Tax-Exempt Status of Municipal Bond Interest." NACo

       Policy Research Paper 1.



                                               34
Orange County Grand Jury Report. 2013. An Investment and Compliance Review of the Orange

       County Treasurer. Orange County California: Orange County Grand Jury.Org.

       https://www.ocgrandjury.org/pdfs/2012_2013_reports/OCGJ-Investment062413.pdf

Perkins, Edward J. 1994. American Public Finance and Financial Services 1700-1815.

       Columbus, Ohio: Ohio State University Press.

Reagan, Michael. 2017. Capital City: New York in Fiscal Crisis, 1966-1978. Ph.D. dissertation,

       Seattle: University of Washington.

Reuters Staff. 2014. "Fees, Expenses for Detroit Bankruptcy Hit Nearly $178 Million." Reuters,

       December 30, 2014.

Rousseau, Peter, and Richard Sylla. 2003. "Financial Systems, Economic Growth and

       Globalization." Chapter 8 in Michael D. Bordo, Allan Taylor and Jeffrey G. Williamson

       (eds.) Globalization in Historical Perspective. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Sargent, Thomas. 2012. "Nobel Lecture: United States Then, Europe Now." Journal of Political

       Economy 120 (1): 1-40. https://doi.org/10.1086/665415

Siodla, James. 2020. "Debt and Taxes: Fiscal Strain and US City Budgets during the Great

       Depression." Explorations in Economic History 76 (C).

       https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eeh.2020.101328

Stout, Lynn A. 2011. "Derivatives and the Legal Origin of the 2008 Credit Crisis." Harvard

       Business Law Review 1 (1): 1­38.




                                               35
Studenski, Paul, and Herman E. Krooss. 1963. Financial History of the United States: Fiscal,

       Monetary, Banking, and Tariff, Including Financial Administration and State

       and Local Finance, Volume 2. New York: McGraw-Hill.

Sylla, Richard. 2011. "Financial Foundations: Public Credit, the National Bank, and Securities

       Markets." In Founding Choices: American Economic Policy in the 1790s. Douglas A.

       Irwin and Richard Sylla (eds.). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Temin, Peter. 1969. The Jacksonian Economy. New York: W.W. Norton.

Wallis, John and Wallace Oates. 1998. "The Impact of the New Deal on American Federalism."

       Chapter 5 in Michael D Bordo, Claudia Goldin, and Eugene N. White (eds.). The Defining

       Moment: The Great Depression and the American Economy in the Twentieth Century.

       Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Wei, Bin and Vivian Z. Yue. 2020 (a). "The Federal Reserve's Liquidity Backstops to the

       Municipal Bond Market during the COVID-19 Pandemic." Policy Hub 2020-5, Federal

       Reserve Bank of Atlanta. https://doi.org/10.29338/ph2020-05

Wei, Bin and Vivian Z. Yue. 2020 (b). "Liquidity Backstops and Dynamic Debt Runs." Journal

       of Economic Dynamics and Control 116: 1-20. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jedc.2020.103916

Wigmore, Barrie. 1985. The Great Crash and Its Aftermath: A History of Securities Markets in
       the United States, 1929-33. Greenwood Press, Westport, Connecticut.
Winegarden, Wayne H. 2014. Going Broke One City at a Time: Municipal Bankruptcies in
       America . Pacific Policy Institute: San Francisco.
       https://www.pacificresearch.org/wp-

       content/uploads/2014/01/MunicipalBankruptcy2014_F.pdf

Yglesias, Matthew. 2016. "The Puerto Rico Crisis, Explained." Vox. May 2, 2016.
       https://www.vox.com/2015/7/1/8872553/puerto-rico-crisis

                                               36
              Table 1: Six Decade Sample Models of the Muni-Treasury Spread, 1961-2020

                     Long-Run Equilibrium: MuniTR*t = 0 + 1 URt2 + 2 CFMAt
     Sample:                 Mar. 1961-March 2020                  February 1961 to December 2020
     Model No.                  1            2              3i            4            5          6i
     Constant                0.1867       0.3750         0.1915        0.3496       -1.1891    -1.6867
     URt2                    0.0211**    0.0156**        0.0216**      0.0169**    0.0541**    0.0661**
     x(1-muni) 3 & 4          (4.69)      (2.99)          (4.90)        (3.34)      (8.62)      (8.07)
     CFMAt                   1.3762**    1.4472**        1.3519**      1.4081**    1.6117**    1.7024
                              (7.29)     (6.67)          (7.28)        (6.67)      (6.05)      (1.56)
     unique coint.            Yes**       Yes*            Yes**         Yes*         No          No
     vec. # lags                12         13              12            13          13          13
     trace no vec.            38.02**     33.87*         37.14**        32.43*      60.27**     48.72**
     trace only 1             11.43       11.91           9.92          10.39       22.07**     21.92**
Short-Run: MuniTRt = 0 + 1ECt-1 + ni=1 2iMuniTRt-i + ni=13iURt-i2 + ni=14i CFMAt + Xt + t
     ECt-1,                   -0.073**   -0.059**        -0.074*        -0.059**    -0.007      0.004
                               (4.26)     (3.87)         (4.33)          (3.83)      (0.71)     (0.51)
     annual adjust. speed:      60%        52%             60%             52%          8%       n.a.

     MuniTRt-1                -0.004      0.023          -0.005          0.023      -0.042     -0.006
                               (0.11)     (0.61)         (0.12)          (0.65)      (1.07)     (0.15)
     URt-i2                   0.002       0.004           0.002          0.004      -0.000      0.000
     x(1-muni) 3 & 4          (0.43)      (1.23)         (0.50)          (1.36)      (0.05)     (0.38)
     CFMAt-1                  0.037       0.037           0.043           0.046      0.054      0.055
                              (0.18)      (0.20)          (0.21)         (0.25)      (0.26)     (0.29)
     Constant                 0.001      -0.004          -0.001          -0.006     -0.006     -0.006
                              (0.15)      (0.51)          (0.13)          (0.93)     (0.00)     (0.84)
     CredControlt                         1.880**                        1.892**                2.002**
                                          (9.88)                        (10.02)                (10.51)
     DMuniDeft                            0.387**                        0.391**                0.348**
                                          (4.91)                         (5.01)                 (4.42)
     DCovidt                                              0.557**        0.584**     0.589**    0.605**
                                                          (2.77)         (3.16)      (2.88)     (3.22)
     DCovidt-1                                            1.223**        1.177**     1.232**    1.208**
                                                          (6.00)         (6.29)      (5.99)     (6.40)
     DVaccinet                                            0.499*         0.532**     -0.089    0.328
                                                          (2.25)         (2.66)       (0.13)   (0.46)
     Adj. R2                  0.038       0.186           0.095          0.236       0.062      0.209
     S.E.                     0.201       0.185           0.200          0.184       0.204      0.187
     VEC Auto (1)              4.01       13.81            4.81          13.53      215.67**   216.94**
     VEC Auto (2)              4.09       15.60            1.74           9.65      305.39**   284.35**
                                                    37
VEC Auto (4)                   6.37              7.80             6.93             8.20        179.93**        102.56**
Notes: Absolute t-statistics are in parentheses. ( ) denoted significant at the 99% (95%) confidence level. (i) Coefficients for
                                                ** *

the UR2 terms are multiplied by (1 ­ Muni) in models 3-4. (ii) Absolute t-statistics in parentheses. (iii) Long-run: Maximum
likelihood estimates of the long-run equilibrium relationship using a two-equation system with at most one cointegrating vector.
(iv) ECt-1 = MuniTRt-1 - 0 + 1 URt-12 + 2 CFMAt-1. (v) First difference terms of elements in the long-run cointegrating vector.
(vi) Lag lengths chosen to minimize the SIC criterion. (vii) significance of the trace and VEC Auto statistics reflects lag length.




                                                           38
       Table 2: Four Decade Sample Weekly Models of the Muni-Treasury Spread, 1975-2020
                      Long-Run Equilibrium: MuniTR*t = 0 + 1 URt2 + 2 CFMAt
     Sample:                 Apr. 4, `75 - Mar. 27, `20              April 4, 1971 ­ Dec 25, 2020
     Model No.                  1              2               3i             4           5          6i
     Constant                0.0569         0.1072          0.1095         0.1542     -0.5468     -0.5364
     URt2                    0.0254**       0.0243**        0.0248**      0.0237**    0.0370**    0.0367**
     x(1-muni) 3 & 4          (4.86)         (4.67)          (4.79)        (4.62)      (7.70)      (7.67)
     CFMAt                   1.2977**       1.2948**        1.2873**      1.2859**    1.4867**    1.4870**
                              (5.49)        (5.53)          (5.45)        (5.48)      (6.73)      (6.75)
     unique coint.            Yes**         Yes*             Yes**         Yes*        Yes**      Yes**
     vec. # lags                12           12               12            12         12          12
     trace no vec.            31.66*        32.72*          32.81*        33.71*      46.26**     47.06**
     trace only 1              8.02          8.89            7.57          8.36       10.13       11.01
Short-Run: MuniTRt = 0 + 1ECt-1 + ni=1 2iMuniTRt-i + ni=13iURt-i2 + ni=14i CFMAt + Xt + t
     ECt-1,                   -0.018**      -0.018**        -0.018**      -0.018**    -0.010*     -0.009*
                               (3.37)        (3.48)         (3.63)         (3.71)      (2.20)      (2.18)
     annual adjust. speed:      60%           60%             61%           61%         40%          39%
     MuniTRt-1                -0.113**      -0.101**        -0.112**       -0.100**   -0.114**    -0.102**
                               (5.36)        (4.89)          (5.37)        (4.91)     (5.46)       (5.00)
     URt-i2                   -0.001        -0.001          -0.001         0.001       0.001       0.001
     x(1-muni) 3 & 4           (0.71)       (0.59)          (0.73)         (0.60)      (0.40)      (0.56)
     CFMAt-1                  0.014         0.013            0.013          0.012      0.017       0.016
                              (0.10)        (0.10)           (0.09)        (0.09)      (0.12)      (0.12)
     Constant                 0.001         -0.000           0.000         -0.001      0.001       0.000
                              (0.21)         (0.04)          (0.03)         (0.22)     (0.25)      (0.00)
     CredControlt                           0.527**                         0.523**                0.529**
                                            (5.44)                          (5.42)                 (5.46)
     MoneyTargett                           0.716**                         0.717**                0.729**
                                            (5.24)                          (5.27)                 (5.33)
     MoneyTargett-1                         -1.013**                      -1.008**                -1.011**
                                             (7.38)                        (7.37)                  (7.35)
     DMuniDeft                              0.294**                         0.296**                0.290**
                                            (5.69)                          (5.75)                 (5.61)

     DCovidt                  0.294*        0.290*           0.295*        0.291*       0.292*     0.289*
                              (2.10)        (2.13)           (2.11)        (2.14)       (2.08)     (2.12)
     DCovidt-1                -0.803**      -0.808**        -0.802**       -0.806**    -0.808**    -0.811**
                               (5.71)        (5.92)          (5.73)         (5.93)      (5.75)     (5.95)
     DCovidt-2                 1.782**       1.791**         1.784**        1.793**    1.767**      1.777**
                              (12.53)       (12.98)         (12.60)        (13.04)     (12.43)     (12.87)
                                                       39
DCovidt-3                                                        0.657**         0.628**          0.528**        0.500**
                                                                 (3.78)          (3.72)           (3.17)         (3.09)
DVaccinet                                                        0.312*          0.311**          0.323**        0.322**
                                                                 (3.15)          (3.24)           (3.24)         (3.32)
Adj. R2                       0.110            0.162            0.112            0.163           0.104          0.155
S.E.                          0.140            0.136            0.139            0.135           0.140          0.136
VEC Auto (1)                   6.93             3.99             3.49             3.79           92.41**        90.14**
VEC Auto (2)                  10.89            11.57             5.58             6.42          165.15**       167.21**
VEC Auto (4)                   9.98             7.62             9.16             8.52           74.64**        18.63*
Notes: Absolute t-statistics are in parentheses. ** (*) denoted significant at the 99% (95%) confidence level. (i) Coefficients for
the UR2 terms are multiplied by (1 ­ Muni) in models 3-4. (ii) Absolute t-statistics in parentheses. (iii) Long-run: Maximum
likelihood estimates of the long-run equilibrium relationship using a two-equation system with at most one cointegrating vector.
(iv) ECt-1 = MuniTRt-1 - 0 + 1 URt-12 + 2 CFMAt-1. (v) First difference terms of elements in the long-run cointegrating vector.
(vi) Lag lengths chosen to minimize the SIC criterion. (vii) significance of the trace and VEC Auto statistics reflects lag length.




                                                           40
                  Appendix A: The Muni Bond Market in the Great Depression
        This appendix reviews the main developments affecting muni spreads, volumes, and

issuance in the Great Depression. 25 As noted by Wigmore (1985, pp. 110-11), before the Great

Crash of 1929, muni bonds were considered very safe (all but two states had Aaa-ratings and all

major cities were rated Aaa), and this segment of the overall bond market was large; indeed, the

volume of existing muni bonds was nearly the size of outstanding Treasuries and was about 50

percent larger than the amount of outstanding non-railroad corporate bonds, as well as of that of

utility bonds and also railroad bonds. In the few weeks immediately following the October 1929

Crash, muni yields fell reflecting their earlier, highly safe reputation.

        But by yearend many cities' financial condition weakened and could not issue bonds nor

could they speed up--let alone sustain--their planned capital projects for 1930 as President

Hoover had requested (Wigmore (1985, p. 111). Muni spreads widened near yearend 1929. In

1930 there had been some recovery in the overall muni market despite defaults by Miami and

several municipal entities in Florida. But by late 1931, a number of states and cities were once

again unable to issue bonds and began cutting expenditures (Wigmore (1985, p. 290-91). Reflected

in increases in muni spreads (particularly for lower rated securities), pressures on state and local

budgets intensified in 1932, when many municipal governments were downgraded, had difficulty

issuing bonds--some turning to bank loans as a substitute, and greatly cut spending (Wigmore,

1985, pp. 400-09).

        To limit further cuts by state and local governments (whose combined expenditures were

twice those of the federal government in 1932), Congress authorized the Reconstruction Finance


25
  Aside from the wave of municipal defaults in the 1840s, there were many defaults in the slump of the 1870s when
about one-quarter of municipal debt was in default. Defaults were concentrated in railroad bonds, particularly in the
South and to a lesser extent, in the Midwest (Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations, 1973, p. 11).
According to the same source, another wave occurred in the downturn of the 1890s, which was not as large. and which
included more general obligation debt and was not as concentrated in railroad debt.

                                                         41
Corporation (RFC) in mid-1932 to make loans to state and local governments to fund both capital

projects and current spending. Nevertheless, conditions worsened in the first half of 1933 with

several more state and local governments defaulting (e.g., Arkansas, Detroit, and Cook County

(home to Chicago) or being unable to issue debt (particularly Southern states), and many cutting

spending (especially on investment) amid further declines in revenues which amplified increases

in debt service burdens. Between 1929 and 1933, 33 of the 48 states had seen their bond ratings

downgraded. 26 In contrast, the federal government was much better able to debt-finance spending.

Partly in response, Congress funded transfers from the Roosevelt-run federal government to fund

state and local government spending and the RFC greatly expanded lending to fund construction

projects, such as the Golden Gate Bridge in San Francisco and the Lincoln Tunnel in New York

City (Wigmore, 1985, pp. 511-17).

        Between these measures and other steps to stimulate the macroeconomy, muni market

conditions improved by the end of 1933 and into 1934, which allowed some better rated state and

local governments the opportunity to refinance older, higher yield bonds and helped support a

rebound in real investment by state and local governments in 1934 (see Figure 2 in the main text).

The rebound is particularly evident in the annual pace of bond issuance by state and local

governments for funding capital projects (Table A-1), especially when deflated by the investment

spending price index for state and local governments.

        One lesson from the Great Depression is that distress in the municipal bond market affects

the spending of more than just entities that declare default. Indeed, only one state (Arkansas) out



26
  Sources: Table A-11 from Wigmore (1985, pp. 598-99) who derived his figures from annual Moody's Governments
Manuals. The 33 downgraded states include Florida, which defaulted in 1930 losing its bond rating and erasing its
debt. Of the 15 states not downgraded, 7 maintained their Aaa debt rating from 1929 to 1933 and had outstanding
debt in 1933; one had no debt outstanding between 1929 and 1933 and no rating; 3 had debt outstanding but no rating
in 1933, while not seeing a change in their Aaa rating between 1929 and 1932; and 5 had eliminated their debt between
1929 and 1933 and had not seen their Aaa rating in 1929 downgraded between 1929 and 1933.

                                                         42
of 48 defaulted between 1929 and 1933, 27 but many states had cut spending partly in response to

being unable to issue municipal debt either at reasonable interest rates and several states sought

federal aid to fund their spending (e.g., see Wigmore 1985, pp. 400-09). This is not to say that

defaults did not directly result in spending cuts by bankrupt municipalities. There were about 4,800

state and municipal government entities that defaulted on principal or interest payments during the

Great Depression (1929-37), including many cities and towns, capital and water-related

improvement districts, school districts, and counties as reported by Joffe (2013, see p. 68 for a

tabulation between 1920 and 1939). Nevertheless, the amount of municipal debt affected by

defaults in the Great Depression ($2.5 billion cumulative, Hempel (1964) was a fraction of

outstanding municipal debt and of the declines in state and local spending. This too implies that

reduced or more costly access of non-defaulting state and local governments to the municipal bond

market could induce lower spending.

     Year    Nominal State & Local Government Bond                    Real State & Local Government Bond
               Issuance for Capital Projects, billions             Issuance for Capital Projects, $2012 billions
 1928                          1.33                                                     n.a.
 1929                               1.42                                                  24.90
 1930                               1.43                                                  26.73
 1931                               1.24                                                  25.65
 1932                               0.76                                                  19.43
 1933                               0.48                                                  10.82
 1934                               0.80                                                  15.49
 1935                               0.86                                                  17.15
 1936                               0.74                                                  13.64
 1937                               0.73                                                  13.22

            Table A-1 State and Local Municipal Bond Issuance to Fund Capital Projects
            (Sources: Wigmore (1985, Appendix Table A-27), BEA, and author's calculations)

27
     Arkansas's default owing, in large part, to high borrowing before the Great Depression (Joffe, 2012).?

                                                           43
      Appendix B: Major Post-WWII Defaults by Local Governments and Their Impact

          This appendix provided details on the factors driving several notable defaults by local

governments in the last half century and discusses the short-run costs and disruption from these

governments adjusting their budgets in a sharp and sudden way.

     I.      Major Post-WWII Episodes of Municipal Defaults

          There have been six noteworthy defaults of local governments since 1975 28, one on bank

loans (Cleveland, 1978) and five on bonds: New York City (1975), Orange County (California, in

1994), Jefferson County (Louisiana in 2011), Detroit (2013), and Puerto Rico (2016). Five of

these cases (Orange County being the exception) plausibly fit Winegarden's (2014, p. 6)

characterization that, "Typically, those municipalities that are pushed into insolvency by an

economic shock have been stagnating economically for a long time."

          Although New York City did not declare bankruptcy and eventually paid its bond holders

in full, New York City technically defaulted in 1975 when it did not make timely payments to its

bond holders. The city's default stemmed from several factors (see Greenspan, MacAvoy, and

Malkiel, 1975). First, the city's spending was unsustainable given its tax base whose long-run

growth suffered from shifts in economic activity to lower cost metropolitan areas and higher

income residents to outlying suburbs. Second, this imbalance was compounded by the city

amassing increasing amounts of short-run debt to mask and fund a series of budget deficits. Third,

the unsustainability of spending and borrowing practices became apparent to bond investors, who

demanded higher risk premiums on the city's debt. Higher service costs, especially on short-run

debt, further worsened its imbalances and the city lost access to both bond issuance and bank loans.

The state of New York stepped in to provide temporary funding and put the management of the


 Between the Great Depression and 1975, the only major municipal default was that by New York City's Urban
28

Development Corporation in 1974 (see Moody's, 2017).

                                                     44
city's budget under the auspices of the Municipal Assistance Corporation, which mandated a series

of deep cuts to city spending and some tax hikes to bring the city's budget into long-run balance.

       Cleveland's default in 1978 was lesser known, partly because of its size but also because

the city defaulted on bank loans rather than bonds. After the city's tax base and population was

hurt by negative short- and long-run shocks to its manufacturing-oriented economy in the 1970s,

Cleveland lost its ability to fund its prior spending path. In the short run, the city borrowed from

local banks to fund deficits. In late 1978, its mayor and city council could not agree on selling a

utility to cover some of its short-run imbalances and on spending cuts and tax increases to address

its longer-run budget problems. At that point, when local banks refused to roll-over the city's

maturing short-run bank loans, the city declared bankruptcy and was put under the financial

supervision of the state of Ohio. The next mayor and city council agreed to spending cuts and tax

increases that restored budget balance and the city emerged from bankruptcy in late 1980.

       Orange County, California, declared bankruptcy after the municipality's county

investment pool suffered a large loss (over $1.5 billion) on interest rate exposures that had

generated enough interest income to cover 12 percent of county expenditures in 1994, above the 3

percent average for all other California counties that year (Orange County Grand Jury Report,

2013, p. 1). However, the risks entailed were not appreciated or understood by local leaders and

"circumvented" the fiduciary responsibilities of the county investment pool (Orange County Grand

Jury Report, 2013, p. 1). When interest rates rose quickly following the slow recovery from the

moderate-sized recession of the early 1990s, Orange County suffered losses for which it was

unprepared. This example highlights how financial innovations have given rise to new, less visible

downside risks to holders of municipal and other bonds. While the short-run adjustment was

notable, this affluent county recovered, largely because its default did not partially arise from a



                                                 45
failure to adjust to a downshift in long-run economic prospects.

       Detroit missed a scheduled debt payment in June 2013 and the next month filed to declare

bankruptcy. This followed a long period of decline in the city's population and auto-oriented

manufacturing base, which left it with a municipal workforce and pension liabilities more suited

for its earlier, larger population. The impact of this long downtrend on the city's solvency was,

according to Winegarden (2014, p. 8) exacerbated by financial mismanagement and an overhang

of unfunded retiree benefits. In November 2014, Detroit emerged from bankruptcy after it was

able to cut its debt load and cut pension benefits, as well as cut current spending and raise revenues.

       Jefferson County, Alabama's bankruptcy stemmed, in large part, not from unfunded

pensions, but rather from the debt burden of repairing and improving its sewer system to meet

previously neglected federal mandates. According to Winegarden (2014, pp. 14-15), these costs

were amplified by corruption and financial mismanagement. The latter included a high reliance

on variable rate and short-term debt that repriced upwards when the county's debt rating was

downgraded during the subprime and global financial crisis. The county filed for bankruptcy in

November 2011 and emerged from it two years later when it issued new debt.

       The default of the U.S. territory Puerto Rico in July 2016 ended a drawn-out fiscal crisis,

reflecting unsustainable budgeting practices and the long-run relative decline of the territory's

economy (see Yglesias, 2016). Compounding these structural ailments were the impact of two

severe hurricanes that damaged the island when the local government lacked access to tax revenues

and debt finance. The number of public pronouncements and warnings that predated its 2016

default also make it difficult to pinpoint discernible short-run effects on the muni market in general.

As a result, it is difficult to discern any impact of Puerto Rico's default the timing of shocks and

expectations to muni spreads in contrast to the more unexpected defaults of other municipalities.



                                                  46
II. Some Real Consequences of Financial Distress on Municipal Governments

       This section reviews some evidence on the impact of sudden cuts in spending by state and

local governments in response to episodes of default and acute financial distress. The focus is not

on the size of the public sector which needs to be sustainable in the long-run, but rather on the cost

of sudden spending cuts and tax hikes to address fiscal imbalances that may stem from poor

budgeting (e.g., New York City in the mid-1970s), fiscal uncertainties from unexpected economic

shocks (e.g., oil busts or the Covid-19 pandemic), or combinations of the two (e.g., Detroit, 2013).

       Four noteworthy cases of post-WWII defaults of municipal governments include those of

New York City (1975), Cleveland (1978), Jefferson County (2011), and Detroit (2013) whose size

and structural problems has made analysis more feasible than the defaults of more well-off

municipalities (Orange county) or revenue bonds issuers (e.g., Washington Public Power Supply

System Projects 4 and 5). The impact on Puerto Rico is not reviewed here given its more recent

occurrence and the difficulties in distinguishing between the impacts of spending cuts from those

of the hurricanes and earthquakes that have hurt the island.

       The social and economic costs entailed by default are considerable in several dimensions.

For one, debt costs usually rise as investors demand higher risk premia and municipality bond

ratings are often lowered. In cases of outright bankruptcy, municipalities can incur large legal

expenses, amounting to $178 million in the case of Detroit (Reuters, 2014). These costs cut into

funds available for city services and capital expenditures, such as in the case of New York City

(Reagan, 2017). Second, spending cuts can impair public infrastructure as in the cases of New

York (Reagan, 2017) and Jefferson County--where street repaving was even suspended (Braun,

2020). Third, cuts to social services can be dire. In the case of Jeffersion County, 1,300 public

employees were fired, hospital services were cut, courthouses were closed, and even a new jail



                                                 47
could not be staffed (Braun, 2020). As noted by Freudenberg, et al. (2006), cuts in public health

spending hurt efforts to address drug addiction and even contributed to an outbreak of tuberculosis

in New York City. Furthermore, there were sizable reductions in the city's police force (Corman

and Mocan (2006, p. 588) of about 25 percent between 1974 and 1980, whose size negatively

affects burglaries and robberies (Corman and Mocan, 2006). While many--but not all--of the

spending cuts were eventually reversed, Freudenberg, et al. (2006), estimate that the economic

costs ($50 billion) outweighed the short-run budgetary savings ($10 billion) of the cuts enacted.

        Aside from the impact of direct cuts on municipal spending is the impact of budgetary

uncertainty on how local governments perform. This issue is especially pertinent to the Covid-19

pandemic given the uncertainty about spending and revenues that the outbreak has posed for state

and local governments. In a pre-Covid study, Lavertu and St. Clair (2018) find that unexpected

revenue shortfalls for Ohio school districts lead to statistically significant declines in future student

performance on math and reading exams, but that positive revenue surprises have much smaller

effects. Plausible explanations include that when faced with revenue uncertainty, school districts

preemptively reduce spending partly to build reserves to avoid more drastic and disruptive cuts,

and that such precautionary cutbacks are also motivated by the incentive to head off ratings

downgrades on debt or paying higher risk premiums on debt. Reminiscent of the classic adage, "

be careful what you hope for," Lavertu and St. Clair (2018) ironically wrote, "More generally, we

hope to see a growing body of research examining the impact of revenue uncertainty on service

delivery." Clearly these public economists neither hoped for nor expected the tragedy of Covid.

While the Fed's Municipal Liquidity Facility has plausibly ameliorated revenue uncertainty from

the Covid-19 Pandemic, municipal revenue uncertainty unfortunately abounds and will likely

impair the ability of state and local governments to limit the human cost of the pandemic.



                                                   48
     Appendix Table A2: Six Decade Sample Models of the Muni-Treasury Spread, 1961-2020


                     Long-Run Equilibrium: MuniTR*t = 0 + 1 URt2 + 2 CFMAt
     Sample:                 Mar. 1961-March 2020               February 1961 to December 2020
                                                            i
     Model No.                  1            2              3          4            5          6i
     Constant                0.1867       0.3692         0.1915     0.3429       -1.1891    -1.6229
     URt2                    0.0211**    0.0158**        0.0216**   0.0172**    0.0541**    0.0646**
     x(1-muni) 3 & 4          (4.69)      (3.05)          (4.90)     (3.43)      (8.62)      (8.09)
     CFMAt                   1.3762**    1.4391**        1.3519**   1.3970**    1.6117**    1.6917
                              (7.29)     (6.65)          (7.28)     (6.65)      (6.05)      (4.99)
     unique coint.            Yes**       Yes*            Yes**      Yes*         No          No
     vec. # lags                12         13              12         13          13          13
     trace no vec.            38.02**     33.90*         37.14**     32.51*      60.27**     60.44**
     trace only 1             11.43       11.76           9.92       10.23       22.07**     22.28**
Short-Run: MuniTRt = 0 + 1ECt-1 + ni=1 2iMuniTRt-i + ni=13iURt-i2 + ni=14i CFMAt + Xt + t
     ECt-1,                   -0.073**   -0.060**        -0.074*     -0.060**    -0.007      0.003
                               (4.26)     (3.88)         (4.33)       (3.85)      (0.71)     (0.43)
     annual adjust. speed:      60%        52%             60%          52%          8%       n.a.
     MuniTRt-1                -0.004      0.022          -0.005       0.024      -0.042     -0.006
                               (0.11)     (0.59)         (0.12)       (0.66)      (1.07)     (0.16)
     URt-i2                   0.002       0.004           0.002       0.004      -0.000      0.000
     x(1-muni) 3 & 4          (0.43)      (1.25)         (0.50)       (1.35)      (0.05)     (0.35)
     CFMAt-1                  0.037       0.037           0.043        0.045      0.054      0.055
                              (0.18)      (0.20)          (0.21)      (0.24)      (0.26)     (0.29)
     Constant                 0.001      -0.005          -0.001       -0.007     -0.006     -0.006
                              (0.15)      (0.65)          (0.13)       (0.94)     (0.00)     (0.83)
     CredControlt                         1.880**                     1.890**                1.208**
                                          (9.86)                      (9.99)                 (6.39)
     DNYCt                                0.311*                      0.327*                 0.228
                                          (2.15)                      (2.29)                 (1.60)
     DClevt-1                             0.360+                      0.347+                 0.385*
                                          (1.89)                      (1.84)                 (2.02)
     DOranget                             0.460*                      0.459*                 0.428*
                                          (2.44)                      (2.46)                 (2.26)
     DJeffersont-1                        0.333+                      0.347+                 0.307
                                          (1.69)                      (1.78)                 (1.55)
     DDetroitt                            0.525**                     0.523**                0.489*
                                          (2.77)                      (2.78)                 (2.57)

                                                    49
DCovidt                                                          0.557**         0.584**          0.589**        0.605**
                                                                 (2.77)          (3.15)           (2.88)         (3.21)
DCovidt-1                                                        1.223**         1.178**          1.232**        1.208**
                                                                 (6.00)          (6.28)           (5.99)         (6.39)
DVaccinet                                                        0.499*          0.556**         -0.089         0.266
                                                                 (2.25)          (2.72)           (0.13)        (0.37)
Adj. R2                       0.038            0.182            0.095            0.233           0.062          0.206
S.E.                          0.201            0.186            0.200            0.184           0.204          0.187
VEC Auto (1)                   4.01            15.25             4.81            13.90          215.67**       214.04**
VEC Auto (2)                   4.09            14.43             1.74             9.13          305.39**       282.65**
VEC Auto (4)                   6.37             8.46             6.93             8.66          179.93**       177.67**
Notes: Absolute t-statistics are in parentheses. ** (*) denoted significant at the 99% (95%) confidence level. (i) Coefficients for
the UR2 terms are multiplied by (1 ­ Muni) in models 3-4. (ii) Absolute t-statistics in parentheses. (iii) Long-run: Maximum
likelihood estimates of the long-run equilibrium relationship using a two-equation system with at most one cointegrating vector.
(iv) ECt-1 = MuniTRt-1 - 0 + 1 URt-12 + 2 CFMAt-1. (v) First difference terms of elements in the long-run cointegrating vector.
(vi) Lag lengths chosen to minimize the SIC criterion. (vii) significance of the trace and VEC Auto statistics reflects lag length.




                                                           50
 Appendix Table A3: Four Decade Sample Weekly Models of the Muni-Treasury Spread, 1975-2020
                      Long-Run Equilibrium: MuniTR*t = 0 + 1 URt2 + 2 CFMAt
     Sample:                 Apr. 4, `75 - Mar. 27, `20              April 4, 1971 ­ Dec 25, 2020
     Model No.                  1              2               3i             4           5          6i
     Constant                0.0569         0.1072          0.1095         0.1566     -0.5468     -0.5639
     URt2                    0.0254**       0.0242**        0.0248**      0.0237**    0.0370**    0.0373**
     x(1-muni) 3 & 4          (4.86)         (4.65)          (4.79)        (4.61)      (7.70)      (7.67)
     CFMAt                   1.2977**       1.2909**        1.2873**      1.2820**    1.4867**    1.4973**
                              (5.49)        (5.50)          (5.45)        (5.45)      (6.73)      (6.69)
     unique coint.            Yes**         Yes*             Yes**         Yes*        Yes**      Yes**
     vec. # lags                12           12               12            12         12          12
     trace no vec.            31.66*        32.93*          32.81*        33.97*      46.26**     47.32**
     trace only 1              8.02          9.19            7.57          8.70       10.13       11.50
Short-Run: MuniTRt = 0 + 1ECt-1 + ni=1 2iMuniTRt-i + ni=13iURt-i2 + ni=14i CFMAt + Xt + t
     ECt-1,                   -0.018**      -0.018**        -0.018**      -0.018**    -0.010*     -0.009*
                               (3.37)        (3.54)         (3.63)         (3.76)      (2.20)      (2.17)
     annual adjust. speed:      60%           61%             61%           62%         31%          39%
     MuniTRt-1                -0.113**      -0.100**        -0.112**       -0.100**   -0.114**    -0.102**
                               (5.36)        (4.86)          (5.37)        (4.89)     (5.46)       (4.99)
     URt-i2                   -0.001        -0.001          -0.001         0.001       0.001       0.001
     x(1-muni) 3 & 4           (0.71)       (0.58)          (0.73)         (0.60)      (0.40)      (0.56)
     CFMAt-1                  0.014         0.013            0.013          0.012      0.017       0.015
                              (0.10)        (0.10)           (0.09)        (0.09)      (0.12)      (0.11)
     Constant                 0.001         -0.000           0.000         -0.001      0.001       0.000
                              (0.21)         (0.04)          (0.03)         (0.21)     (0.25)      (0.00)
     CredControlt                           0.527**                         0.523**                0.530**
                                            (5.44)                          (5.42)                 (5.47)
     MoneyTargett                           0.715**                         0.716**                0.729**
                                            (5.25)                          (5.26)                 (5.34)
     MoneyTargett-1                         -1.014**                      -1.009**                -1.012**
                                             (7.38)                        (7.38)                  (7.37)
     DNYCt                                  0.212**                         0.216**                0.213**
                                            (2.69)                          (2.75)                 (2.70)
     DClevt-1                               0.296*                          0.295*                 0.301*
                                            (2.16)                          (2.16)                 (2.20)
     DOranget                               0.289*                          0.289*                 0.283*
                                            (2.12)                          (2.12)                 (2.07)


                                                       51
         DJeffersont-1                                  0.370**                           0.372**                        0.355*
                                                        (2.69)                            (2.72)                         (2.59)
         DDetroitt                                      0.465**                           0.466**                        0.452**
                                                        (3.40)                            (3.43)                         (3.32)

         DCovidt                       0.294*           0.291*           0.295*           0.291*          0.292*         0.289*
                                       (2.10)           (2.13)           (2.11)           (2.15)          (2.08)         (2.12)
         DCovidt-1                    -0.803**         -0.807**          -0.802**        -0.806**        -0.808**        -0.812**
                                       (5.71)           (5.92)            (5.73)          (5.93)          (5.75)         (5.95)
         DCovidt-2                     1.782**          1.792**           1.784**         1.794**         1.767**         1.777**
                                      (12.53)          (12.98)           (12.60)         (13.04)          (12.43)        (12.87)
         DCovidt-3                                                        0.657**         0.626**         0.528**        0.498**
                                                                          (3.78)          (3.70)          (3.17)         (3.08)
         DVaccinet                                                        0.312*          0.310**         0.323**        0.322**
                                                                          (3.15)          (3.23)          (3.24)         (3.32)
         Adj. R2                       0.110            0.161            0.112            0.163           0.104          0.155
         S.E.                          0.140            0.136            0.139            0.135           0.140          0.136
         VEC Auto (1)                   6.93            10.06             3.49             8.67           92.41**        76.24**
         VEC Auto (2)                  10.89            11.17             5.58             6.01          165.15**       162.89**
         VEC Auto (4)                   9.98             7.10             9.16             7.87           74.64**        17.30*
Notes: Absolute t-statistics are in parentheses. ** (*) denoted significant at the 99% (95%) confidence level. (i) Coefficients for the UR2
terms are multiplied by (1 ­ Muni) in models 3-4. (ii) Absolute t-statistics in parentheses. (iii) Long-run: Maximum likelihood estimates
of the long-run equilibrium relationship using a two-equation system with at most one cointegrating vector. (iv) ECt-1 = MuniTRt-1 - 0
+ 1 URt-12 + 2 CFMAt-1. (v) First difference terms of elements in the long-run cointegrating vector. (vi) Lag lengths chosen to minimize
the SIC criterion. (vii) significance of the trace and VEC Auto statistics reflects lag length.




                                                                    52
                                      Appendix B: KPSS Stationarity Tests
                                                      (with time trend)


                                              Monthly (January 1960 ­ December 2020)

                              Stationarity (bandwidth)                                    Stationarity (bandwidth)
MuniTR                        0.1626*        (10.4)                    MuniTR             0.0199         (5.78)
UR                            0.2378**       (10.4)                    UR                 0.0269         (8.65)
                                     *
UR2                           0.2076         (10.3)                    UR2                0.0244         (12.1)

                                           Weekly (January 3, 1975 ­ December 25, 2020)

                              Stationarity (bandwidth)                                    Stationarity (bandwidth)
MuniTR                        0.5169*        (15.6)                    MuniTR             0.0339         (13.9)
UR                            0.5618**       (15.6)                    UR                 0.0128         (6.78)
                                     **
UR2                           0.5388         (15.5)                    UR2                0.0075         (7.14)


Notes: * and ** denote 95% and 99% significance levels, respectively. Lag lengths for the KPSS stationarity tests are
based on the Newey-West bandwidth selector using a Quadratic Spectral kernel for the spectral estimation method
(see Hobjin, et al. 2004). The combination of a significant KPSS stationary test statistic on the level of a variable
(rejecting that it is stationary) and a significant test statistic on its first difference (accepting it is stationary) is evidence
against trend stationarity.




                                                                53
