                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             THE IMMIGRANT NEXT DOOR:
                         EXPOSURE, PREJUDICE, AND ALTRUISM

                                      Leonardo Bursztyn
                                        Thomas Chaney
                                    Tarek Alexander Hassan
                                         Aakaash Rao

                                      Working Paper 28448
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28448


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                            February 2021, Revised March 1




We thank Isaiah Andrews, Michela Carlana, Ray Fisman, Ross Mattheis, Nathan Nunn, Kevin
Lang, Ricardo Perez-Truglia, Gautam Rao, Chris Roth, Andrei Shleifer, Marco Tabellini, Romain
Wacziarg, David Yang, and numerous seminar participants for helpful comments and
suggestions. We thank Andrew Kao, Andrei Kim, Lisa Tarquinio, Thomas Yu, and Alison Zhao
for outstanding research assistance. We are grateful for financial support from the Sloan
Foundation. Chaney is grateful for financial support from the European Research Council (ERC
grants N°337272 and N°884847). All remaining mistakes are our own. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Leonardo Bursztyn, Thomas Chaney, Tarek Alexander Hassan, and Aakaash Rao. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Immigrant Next Door: Exposure, Prejudice, and Altruism
Leonardo Bursztyn, Thomas Chaney, Tarek Alexander Hassan, and Aakaash Rao
NBER Working Paper No. 28448
February 2021, Revised March 1
JEL No. D83,D91,J15,P16,Z1

                                         ABSTRACT

We study how decades-long exposure to individuals of a given foreign descent shapes natives'
attitudes and behavior toward that group, exploiting plausibly exogenous shocks to the ancestral
composition of US counties. We combine several existing large-scale surveys, cross-county data
on implicit prejudice, a newly-collected national survey, and individualized donations data from
large charitable organizations. We first show that greater long-term exposure to Arab-Muslims: i)
decreases both explicit and implicit prejudice against Arab-Muslims, ii) reduces support for
policies and political candidates hostile toward Arab-Muslims, iii) increases charitable donations
to Arab countries, iv) leads to more personal contact with Arab-Muslim individuals, and v)
increases knowledge of Arab-Muslims and Islam in general. We then generalize our analysis,
showing that exposure to any given foreign ancestry leads to more altruistic behavior toward that
group.

Leonardo Bursztyn                               Tarek Alexander Hassan
Department of Economics                         Department of Economics
University of Chicago                           Boston University
1126 E. 59th Street                             270 Bay State Road
Chicago, IL 60637                               Boston, MA 02215
and NBER                                        and NBER
bursztyn@uchicago.edu                           thassan@bu.edu

Thomas Chaney                                   Aakaash Rao
Sciences Po                                     Harvard University
28 rue des Saints Peres                         Department of Economics
75005 Paris                                     Littauer Center of Public Administration
France                                          1805 Cambridge St
thomas.chaney@gmail.com                         Cambridge, MA 02138
                                                arao@g.harvard.edu
1        Introduction

What is the impact of decades-long exposure to individuals of a given foreign ancestry on natives'
attitudes and behavior toward that group? In this paper, we investigate this question using cross-
county data from the United States and an identification strategy exploiting the confluence of "push"
and "pull" factors in historical migrations to generate plausibly exogenous variation in the ancestral
composition of US counties. Our findings indicate that long-term exposure to a given ethnic group
reduces explicit and implicit prejudice against that group, reduces support for policies hostile toward
that group, and increases altruism toward that group's ancestral country.
        We begin our analysis with one of the most targeted minorities in the recent surge of nationalist
authoritarianism in the United States: Arab-Muslims. Despite their relatively small size -- approxi-
mately one to two percent of the US population is of Arab heritage, and approximately one percent
identifies as Muslim -- Arab-Muslims have received substantial attention in the policy debate (Bey-
doun, 2018).1 For example, President Trump floated the idea of implementing a registry of Muslims
entering the country (though his campaign later walked back these comments), and in 2017, the ad-
ministration issued a series of executive orders banning travelers from several Arab-Muslim countries
from entering the country.2 More generally, discrimination against Arab-Muslims and Islamophobic
violence and hate speech have risen substantially in recent years (M¨
                                                                    uller and Schwarz, 2018; Abdelka-
der, 2016), making it especially important to understand factors that may exacerbate or reduce these
prejudices.3
        In the first part of our analysis, we investigate how long-term exposure to people of Arab-Muslim
ancestry affects the attitudes of the "majority group" -- White, non-Muslim Americans -- toward
Arab-Muslims. Using two large, cross-county datasets, we find that exposure leads to more positive
attitudes, as measured by both explicit questions and the Implicit Association Test (IAT): White,
non-Muslim respondents who reside in US counties with (exogenously) larger populations of Arab
ancestry are less explicitly and implicitly prejudiced against Arab-Muslims.4 Having documented
    1
     We plot the distribution of Arab-ancestry individuals across US counties in Appendix Figure A2.
    2
     See, for example, "Protecting the Nation from Foreign Terrorist Entry into the United States", federalregister.gov,
Jan 27, 2017; Timeline: Legal fight over Trump's `Muslim ban' and the Supreme Court ruling, Chicago Tribune, Jun 26,
2018.
   3
     We focus on Arab-Muslims for three additional reasons. First, it allows us to use several large-scale datasets, including
Implicit Association Test (IAT) data, which specifically elicit attitudes toward Arab-Muslims and allow us to provide
evidence on a wide range of outcomes and mechanisms. Second, Arab-Muslims represent a relatively well-defined and
easily observable ancestral group, in contrast to, for example, Latinos. Finally, insofar as it leverages migration flows
leaving out the group of interest, our identification strategy is most convincing when applied to relatively small groups.
   4
     This finding is robust to controlling for a set of observable characteristics of test-takers and the counties in which
they live. We also show that measured prejudice against Arab-Muslims does not simply proxy for more or less racial
prejudice in general or more or less conservative political views: controlling for the overall racial prejudice of respondents
in a county does not significantly affect the estimated impact of exposure to Arab-Muslim neighbors on prejudice against
Arab-Muslims, nor does controlling for the Republican vote share in 2008 and 2012.


                                                              1
these effects on attitudes, we then show that they carry over into measures of political preferences :
non-Muslim Whites in counties with greater exposure to people of Arab ancestry are less supportive
of the "Muslim Ban" restricting travelers from Iran, Iraq, Libya, Somalia, Sudan, Syria, and Yemen.
In 2016, they were also less likely to vote for Donald Trump, who aggressively promoted legislation
targeting Arab-Muslims during his campaign.5 These results hold even when we control for county-
level voting behavior in 2012, suggesting that exposure not only makes voters less likely to support
conservative policies in general, but also decreases support for anti-Muslim policies in particular.
      We next turn toward a revealed preferences measure of generosity toward Arab-Muslims. Using
large-scale individualized datasets from two charity organizations, we document that individuals from
counties with (exogenously) larger populations of Arab ancestry are more likely to donate, and donate
larger sums, to charitable causes in Arab countries.6 Importantly, we can remove from our sample
donors with Arab names, ensuring that our estimates are indeed capturing individuals of non-Arab
ancestry donating to Arab countries.7
      We conclude our analysis of Arab-Muslims by shedding light on the mechanisms underlying our
estimated effects. In December 2020, we conducted a large-scale custom survey to measure two poten-
tial mechanisms: first, that a greater Arab-Muslim population increases direct, personal interaction
between non-Muslim White residents and Arab-Muslims; and second, that a greater Arab-Muslim
population increases knowledge of Arab-Muslims and reduces the extent to which non-Muslim Whites
hold negative stereotypes about Islam. While neither mutually exclusive nor jointly exhaustive, these
mechanisms may be important in determining treatment effects on attitudes and behavior. The results
of our survey analysis indicate that an (exogenously) larger Arab-Muslim population in a respondent's
county substantially increases both the probability that the respondent has visited a Middle East-
ern restaurant and the probability that the respondent knows an Arab-Muslim friend, neighbor, or
workplace acquaintance. A larger Arab-Muslim population also substantially increases respondents'
knowledge of Arab-Muslims and Islam in general and decreases the probability that respondents be-
lieve that "holy war against non-believers" or the "subservience of women and children to men" are
among the fundamental tenets of the faith.
      We then expand our analysis beyond the context of Arab-Muslims: in general, does exposure to
a local population of a given foreign ancestry increase generosity toward that country? We show
it does. We exploit the bilateral (dyadic) structure of our donations data, with donations flowing
  5
     See, for example, "`I think Islam hates us': A timeline of Trump's comments about Islam and Muslims", The
Washington Post, May 20, 2017.
   6
     Every Arab country is predominantly Muslim, so we do not refer to them as "Arab-Muslim" countries.
   7
     We follow a strict protocol to protect donor anonymity; importantly, we never directly observe donors' names or
other personally identifying information. See Appendix D for details.



                                                         2
from many US counties to many different foreign countries. This allows us to include origin county
and destination country fixed effects, ruling out that our estimates are driven solely by particular
immigrant groups making residents more altruistic in general or immigrants making residents more
altruistic toward particular countries. Our estimated effects of exposure operate on both the extensive
and the intensive margin of donations: for example, White residents of counties with an exogenously
larger Haitian minority are more likely to donate to causes in Haiti (relative to their donations to
other countries in general) while White residents of counties with an exogenously larger Dominican
minority are more likely to donate to causes in the Dominican Republic (relative to their donations
to other countries in general). The estimated effect is positive for all recipient countries across our
two datasets. Moreover, the positive effect of exposure is stronger for ancestries that are genetically
more distant, which we interpret as suggestive evidence that the effects of contact may be largest for
populations that look most visibly "foreign."
   Identifying a long-term effect of exposure to outside groups on beliefs about and behavior towards
those groups, particularly at a more aggregate level, presents two primary challenges to identification.
First, immigrants from a given country may disproportionately migrate to counties that are more
tolerant toward that country or toward foreigners in general. To address this selection concern, we
build on the approach from Burchardi, Chaney, and Hassan (2019a) to isolate quasi-random variation
in the ancestral composition of present-day US counties stemming exclusively from the historical
interaction of two forces: (i) time-series variation in the relative attractiveness of different destinations
within the United States for the average migrant arriving at the time and (ii) the staggered arrival of
migrants from different origins. Taken together, the interaction of these two historical forces allows us
to identify variation in the composition of foreign ancestry inherited from plausibly exogenous shocks
to historical migrations to the United States going back as far as 1880. That is, we leverage plausibly
exogenous variation in historical migrations to a US county -- a flow variable -- to isolate quasi-random
variation in the present-day ethnic composition of that county -- a stock variable. In this sense, our
analysis is focused on the long-term impact of ancestral composition on attitudes and behavior towards
ethnic minorities, not on the short-term impact of the most recent migrations. Our contribution is
therefore not to develop a new identification strategy, but rather to build upon an existing approach
(subsequently used in other work, such as Arkolakis et al. 2020) in order to investigate the long-term
effects of exposure to members of particular foreign ancestral groups on natives' attitudes, political
preferences, and altruism toward those groups. More fundamentally, our findings shed light on how
preferences are shaped by social interactions.
   Second, even when conditioning on quasi-random variation in the ancestry of US counties, different



                                                     3
types of "natives" (White Americans) might still selectively move within the United States to avoid
living near descendants of migrants from specific origins. For example, one type of White American
may dislike Arabs and like Haitians, while another type might have the reverse (selectively bigoted)
preference. In this sense, the composition of the White Americans in a given county might respond
endogenously to the arrival of specific minorities through out-migration of natives, even if immigration
is plausibly exogenous. We show that none of our results are attributable to such "selective White
flight". Using thirty years of detailed census data, we show that White Americans who leave a county
with a large community descended from a given foreign origin are not disproportionately likely to
move to places with a small community from that same origin. Taking the evidence together, we
conclude that the more positive explicit and implicit attitudes, the lower support for anti-immigrant
political policies, and the greater altruism of residents towards ethnic groups to which they are dis-
proportionately exposed (but do not themselves belong) are driven by the long-term presence of that
ethnic group itself.
       We add three primary caveats to this interpretation. First, our most tightly identified results
speak to relative differences in attitudes and generosity towards different ethnicities, not to the overall
(average) level of bigotry in a given location. Second, our results focus on ethnic differences induced
by voluntary historical migrations, but not those induced by the legacy of slavery. Though it may be
possible to extrapolate our findings regarding donations to causes in Africa to more positive attitudes
towards African Americans in general, the legacy of slavery in the United States is highly complex and
deserves careful, separate, attention. Third, our focus is on the types of long-run effects of the presence
of foreign ethnicities that are relevant for aggregate outcomes. While we are able to characterize these
average effects in some detail, we are purposely agnostic about what types of contact or exposure
may have larger or smaller effects in particular circumstances. That is, we do not claim that every
interaction between an American of European descent with a neighbor of Arab descent reduces bias, nor
that the presence of Arab-Americans produces positive attitudes toward Arabs in every circumstance.
Instead, our work characterizes the sum of the effects of the presence of foreign ethnic groups over
periods of time stretching decades.


Related literature Our paper contributes to a large literature in sociology, social psychology,
and economics studying the effect of intergroup contact on attitudes and discrimination, building
on the seminal work by Allport (1954). Given the selection issues inherent to most observational
designs studying contact, much work in this literature takes the form of randomized experiments.8
   8
   See, for example, Pettigrew and Tropp (2006) and Paluck et al. (2018) for meta-analyses of this literature. Experi-
ments studying the effects of long-run contact on adults, rather than children, are especially scarce: Paluck et al. (2018)



                                                            4
Other papers exploit natural experiments, such as the random assignment of roommates or classmates
(Boisjoly et al., 2006; Rao, 2019; Carrell et al., 2019; Corno et al., 2019; Scacco and Warren, 2018),
the random composition of military bootcamp cohorts (Dahl et al., 2020; Finseraas and Kotsadam,
2017) or the random assignment of province or country for military or missionary deployment (Bagues
and Roth, 2020; Crawfurd, 2020).9
    One important theme in this literature is persistence. Schindler and Westcott (2020) study the
deployment of African-American soldiers in the United Kingdom during World War II, finding that
residents of locations with more soldiers deployed remained less explicitly and implicitly prejudiced
against minorities over sixty years later. Some studies (Bazzi et al., 2019; Bagues and Roth, 2020)
similarly find that the effects of contact persist over long periods, while others (e.g. Dahl et al., 2020)
find that effects fade out relatively quickly. Recent work has also explored heterogeneity : contact may
lead to more positive social preferences in some contexts, but have no effects or even negative effects
in others. For example, Lowe (2020) and Mousa (2020) randomize the composition of sports teams:
although both find that cooperative contact (playing on the same team) leads to more positive social
preferences, Lowe (2020) finds that adversarial contact (playing on an opposing team) has the opposite
effect, and Mousa (2020) finds that these more positive social preferences do not translate to contexts
beyond the sports pitch. Bazzi et al. (2019), which exploits a population resettlement program to
identify the long-run effects of intergroup contact on national integration in Indonesia, finds that the
program leads to greater integration in fractionalized communities with many small groups, but has
the opposite effect in polarized areas with a few large groups.
    Given these disparate findings, an crucial class of remaining questions concerns the aggregate effect
of long-run contact: summing up over all types of naturally-occurring interactions over the course of
decades, how does intergroup exposure shape beliefs and prejudices, how does this exposure translate
into real-world outcomes, and to what extent are these effects consistent across different out-groups?
Our identification strategy and data afford us unique insight into these questions. We identify the
causal effect of long-term intergroup contact on a comprehensive range of outcomes in the most natural
possible setting -- day-to-day interaction over the course of decades -- and we generalize our results
to examine exposure to over one hundred ancestral groups.
    Our paper also complements a growing body of work on the relationship between immigration
and political attitudes and voting behavior. Some recent papers have found evidence that higher
immigration flows lead to stronger support for right-wing parties (see, for example, Barone et al.,
find that there are no randomized studies that show the effects of interracial and interethnic contact on adults over the
age of 25, and there are only three such studies that quantify the effects more than a single day after treatment.
   9
     Other work examining the effects of contact with out-groups in schools includes (Billings et al., forthcoming; Cascio
and Lewis, 2012)


                                                            5
2016; Halla et al., 2017; Dustmann et al., 2019; Brunner and Kuhn, 2018; Becker and Fetzer, 2016),
while other work has found evidence going in the opposite direction (see Dill, 2013; Steinmayr, 2016).
Tabellini (2020) uses historical data to show that increased immigration to US counties led to the
election of more conservative legislators, higher support for anti-immigration legislation, and lower
redistribution -- despite the economic benefits immigrants generate for non-immigrants, as also doc-
umented in Sequeira et al. (2020), Burchardi et al. (2019b), Kerr and Kerr (2016), and Arkolakis
et al. (2020). Colussi et al. (2016) find that vote shares for both right- and left-wing extremist parties
increase in German municipalities containing mosques when election dates are closer to the Ramadan
period (a shock to the salience of the Muslim community). Alesina et al. (2018b) experimentally find
that priming subjects to think of immigration lowers support for redistribution. Though right-wing
voting is often associated with negative views toward out-groups (and especially so with the recent
surge of nationalist populism), comparing right-wing platforms across countries reveals substantial
heterogeneity along economic, social, and political dimensions: voting, while important, may not be
a sufficient statistic for the effects of exposure to immigrants on beliefs and prejudice. This may help
explain the diverging results documented above. We contribute to this literature by isolating the
direct effect of exposure to out-groups on attitudes and altruistic behavior towards these groups, thus
shedding light on the underlying mechanisms, and also by extending the results to dozens of different
nationalities. More generally, there are several reasons to think that exposure to out-groups over the
period of decades may have very different effects than exposure over the period of months or years; we
find robust evidence across several different domains that long-term exposure results in more positive
attitudes and political preferences and greater altruism toward the out-group.10
       Recent contributions in economics have used Implicit Association Test (IAT) scores as a predictor
of biased behaviors.11 For example, Glover et al. (2017) show that cashiers assigned to biased grocery-
store managers (as measured by the IAT) are absent more often and perform less well, while Carlana
(2019) shows that teachers' gender stereotypes about scientific ability predict the gender gap in math-
ematical performance.12 Our work instead uses the implicit attitudes as an outcome and provides
  10
     Fouka et al. (2020b) finds that the Great Migration, which led millions of African-Americans to migrate out of the
rural South, improved Whites' views of immigrants and facilitated social integration of European immigrant groups. In
the same context, Derenoncourt (2019) finds that migration of African-Americans increased police spending, crime, and
incarceration in destination counties. Similarly, Fouka et al. (2020a) find that Mexican immigration improves Whites'
attitudes and behavior towards blacks.
  11
     Developed by social psychologists (Greenwald et al., 1998), the IAT is a measure of implicit bias that is difficult
to manipulate (Greenwald et al., 2009). An important motivation for studying implicit bias is that respondents may
not even be aware of their own prejudices, introducing potentially non-classical measurement error into standard survey
measures of prejudice even if respondents answer honestly. However, the IAT has also come under increasing scrutiny:
we summarize this debate in more depth in Section 2.2.
  12
     Alesina et al. (2018a) find evidence that informing teachers of their implicit bias against immigrants increases the
grades they assigned to immigrants.




                                                           6
novel evidence that implicit bias can be shaped by long-term exposure to out-groups, complementing
recent work in other contexts (e.g. Lowes et al. 2015, 2017; Schindler and Westcott 2020). Moreover,
our findings also provide additional validation of IAT scores as a measure of bias, given the robust
county-level correlation we observe between IAT scores and measures of explicit bias and between IAT
scores and revealed altruism.
         Finally, our work also contributes to an extensive literature on cultural persistence and change (see,
for example, Alesina et al., 2013; Grosjean and Khattar, 2019; Giuliano and Nunn, 2017) by showing
that local exposure changes long-term attitudes toward out-groups.13 This relates to the finding in
Voigtl¨
      ander and Voth (2012) that anti-Semitism in Germany is less persistent in cities with high levels
of trade and immigration. More generally, we relate to an extensive literature on prejudice reduction
(reviewed in e.g. Paluck et al. 2021).

         The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes our data. Section 3 discusses
our econometric approach. In Section 4, we show that exposure to a local population of Arab ancestry
reduces both explicit and implicit prejudice against Arabs, reduces support for political policies tar-
geting Arab-Muslims, increases altruism toward Arab countries, increases direct contact with people
of Arab ancestry, and increases knowledge of Arab-Muslims and Islam. In Section 5, we generalize
our results to show that exposure to a local population of any foreign ancestry increases altruism
toward that ancestry, we probe the robustness of our results, and we explore heterogeneity. Section 6
concludes.


2         Data

We collect several series of data broadly corresponding to exposure, prejudice, hostility, and altruism.
Throughout the analysis, we denote domestic US counties by d and foreign countries by f . In analyses
with individual-level data (all of which are cross-sectional), our variables are therefore generically
defined as Xi,d,f , denoting the outcome X pertaining to foreign country f of individual i residing
in domestic county d. In some instances, f refers not to a single country but to a group of foreign
countries: countries in the Arab League.14 In analyses with county-level data, our variables are
                        t , denoting outcome X pertaining to foreign country f , measured at time t
generically defined as Xd,f
    13
     More generally, we relate to a literature on the role of experiences in shaping preferences. For example, Malmendier
and Nagel (2011) find that individuals who have experienced low stock market returns throughout their lives display
more risk-averse investment behavior, while Giuliano and Spilimbergo (2014) find that individuals who experienced a
recession when young are more supportive of redistribution and are more likely to vote for left-wing parties.
  14
     The Arab League consists of Algeria, Bahrain, Comoros, Djibouti, Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya,
Mauritania, Morocco, Oman, Palestine, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Sudan, Tunisia, the United Arab Emirates, and
Yemen. Syria was suspended from the Arab League in 2011; we nonetheless include Syria given that our latest Census
data dates to 2010. All of these countries are majority Muslim.


                                                           7
in domestic US county d.

2.1    Historical Migrations, Ancestry, and Exposure

To quantify long-term exposure to members of a given ethnicity, we collect data on the historical
ancestral composition of US counties. We assume implicitly that a person living in a domestic US
county d with a larger community with ancestry from a given foreign country f has a stronger exposure
to that community. In order to isolate plausibly exogenous variation in the composition of local
ancestry (see Section 3.2), we also use data on historical migrations. We follow Burchardi et al. (2019a)
and extract information on immigration and ancestry from the individual files of the Integrated Public
Use Microdata Series (IPUMS) samples of the 1880, 1900, 1910, 1920, 1970, 1980, and 1990 waves of
the US Census and from the 2006-2010 five-year sample of the American Community Survey (ACS).
We weight observations using the personal weight from these data providers. We provide additional
details on these datasets in Appendix B.1.
                                                  t : the number of immigrants who were born in
    Our key measure of historical immigration is If,d
foreign country f , who live in domestic county d at time t, and who immigrated to the US between
t - 1 and t (the interval between two Census waves). For the initial 1880 census, which did not report
the immigration date, we measure instead the total number of respondents in d who were either born
in f or whose parents were born in f . Starting in 1980, respondents are also asked about their primary
                                                                                 t
ancestry in both the US Census and the ACS. Our stock ancestry variable, Ancestryf,d corresponds
to the number of respondents in d at t who report ancestry from f . The resulting dataset covers 3,141
domestic US counties, 195 foreign countries, and 10 census waves.

2.2    Implicit and Explicit Prejudice

We draw data on implicit and explicit prejudice against Arab-Muslims from two sources. The first
source is Project Implicit, a website run by Harvard University researchers through which respon-
dents can complete Implicit Association Tests (IATs) quantifying implicit prejudice against different
groups.15 IAT scores are generally regarded as difficult to manipulate (Egloff and Schmukle, 2002),
   15
      IATs require subjects to associate two sets of words and images with either the left or the right side of their screen.
Typically, one set includes words and images associated with two demographic groups (for instance, White names
and Arab-Muslim names), while the other set includes both positive and negative affective words (such as "peaceful,"
"frightening," etc.). In each round of the IAT, subjects are told to place one subset of affective words on the same
side as one demographic group's names and to place the other subset of affective words with other group's names. For
example, if the left side of the screen contains both the "Arab-Muslim" and the "good" categories and the right side
contains the "Other People" and the "bad" categories, the subject must assign a positive affective word to the left as
quickly as possible, ignoring the "Arab-Muslim" category). Different combinations of these potential categorizations are
randomized, and the measure of bias is computed from the difference in speed between categorizing the stereotypical out-
group with negative versus positive words. This difference is typically attributed to the respondents' implicit associations
or stereotypes.



                                                             8
and a number of studies have correlated these scores with real-world psychological responses and
decision-making (Bertrand et al., 2005). For example, IAT scores are linked to employment callback
decisions for minorities (Rooth, 2011), voting behavior (Friese et al., 2007), the gender gap in math
performance (Carlana, 2019), and discrimination in the workforce (Glover et al., 2017).16
    After completing the IAT, subjects are asked to respond to a number of additional questions,
including an "Arab-Muslim Thermology" question which asks subjects to rate their feelings towards
Arab-Muslims on a scale of 0 ("very cold") to 10 ("very warm"). This is the first question on explicit
attitudes that is asked and the most directly relevant to our investigation, so we use this as our first
measure of explicit attitudes.17
    We make use of data from all Arab-Muslim and Race (Black/White) tests taken by July 1, 2020
(we use the Race IAT as a county-level control).18 Subjects taking the IAT indicate their race and
the reason for which they are taking the test. In order to assuage concerns about respondents endoge-
nously selecting into taking the IAT, we classify those taking the test as an "Assignment for work,"
an "Assignment for discussion group," or an "Assignment for school" as "forced respondents" and
conduct our primary analyses with the 58,987 White, non-Muslim respondents to the Arab-Muslim
IAT in this subsample (though our results, displayed in the Appendix, are qualitatively unchanged
and quantitatively similar if we also include the additional 80,179 "unforced respondents").
    Although a wide range of institutions, from law firms to tech companies to police forces to schools
and universities,19 administer the IAT as part of diversity trainings and other initiatives, limiting
the sample to "forced respondents" does not eliminate selection concerns entirely: the type of insti-
tution that requires people to take the IAT or the type or number of people associated with such
institutions may be endogenous to the Arab-Muslim population.20 Thus, to ensure that our estimates
generalize to a representative sample, we turn to Nationscape, a large-scale survey administered by
the Democracy Fund Voter Study Group in partnership with the University of California, Los An-
  16
     However, the IAT has also drawn criticism on multiple dimensions (see, for instance, Clayton et al. 2020; Schimmack
2019.) Blanton et al. (2007) argue that the mapping from the continuous IAT score to discrete qualitative feedback
(e.g. "This respondent has a slight preference for European-Americans over Arab-Muslims") is arbitrary and has little
basis in empirical evidence. Our analysis uses only continuous IAT scores, thus circumventing this concern. Cunningham
et al. (2001) document that the IAT exhibits substantial measurement error, with even the same subject performing
differently in subsequent repetitions of the test. Because our analysis uses IAT scores as an outcome, rather than as a
predictor, classical measurement error will not bias our estimates.
  17
     There are four other questions measuring explicit attitudes toward Arab-Muslims and social norms surrounding
treatment of Arab-Muslims; we show estimates using these alternative outcomes in the Appendix.
  18
     See https://implicit.harvard.edu. Last accessed: December 14, 2020.
  19
     See, for instance, Lawyers Are Uniquely Challenging Audience for Anti-Bias Training, Bloomberg Law May 13, 2019;
What Facebook's Anti-Bias Training Program Gets Right, Harvard Business Review, Aug 24, 2015; Lenora Billings-
Harris Leads Unconscious Bias Training for Leadership, Office for Diversity and Inclusion, The University of Alabama
at Birmingham, Sep 1, 2020.
  20
     For this to generate a positive bias, we would require that IAT respondents in counties with a large Arab-Muslim
population are more tolerant toward Arab-Muslims relative to others in the county, while respondents in counties with
a small Arab-Muslim population are less tolerant toward Arab-Muslims relative to others in the population.


                                                           9
geles. Nationscape was fielded online to over 300,000 respondents between July 2019 and July 2020
and is broadly representative of the US population in terms of gender, the four major Census regions,
race, Hispanic ethnicity, household income, education, age, language spoken at home, nativity (U.S.-
or foreign-born), 2016 presidential vote, and the urban-rural mix of the respondent's ZIP code. Our
second measure of explicit prejudice is the average response among respondents in a given county
to the following question: "Here are the names of some groups that are in the news from time to
time. How favorable is your impression of each group or haven't you heard enough to say. . . Muslims."
Because the survey is administered online and respondents are anonymous, responses are arguably
less sensitive to experimenter demand or social desirability bias than those obtained from face-to-face
or phone surveys. Unfortunately, the Democracy Fund Voter Study Group does not make individ-
uals' county-level identifiers publicly available; the most granular available geographical identifier is
congressional district c (of which there are 435). Because our instrument is at the county level d, we
proceed by duplicating observations and assigning one duplicate to each county d within district c.
We then weight each observation by the population share of district c that lives in county d, and we
cluster standard errors at the district rather than the county level. We again restrict the sample to
White, non-Muslim respondents.
   For ease of comparability, we normalize all three measures -- implicit bias against Arab-Muslims
(Project Implicit), warmth toward Arab-Muslims (Project Implicit), and favorability toward Muslims
(Nationscape) -- to mean zero and standard deviation one, with higher values representing more
positive attitudes.

2.3   Political Preferences

We assess how exposure to Arab-Muslims shapes political preferences using two distinct outcomes.
First, we examine the effect of exposure to individuals of Arab-Muslim ancestry on support for the
"Muslim Ban". During his 2016 presidential campaign, Donald Trump repeatedly called for a "total
and complete" ban on Muslims entering the country. Among Trump's first executive orders upon enter-
ing office in January 2017 was Executive Order 13769, "Protecting the Nation From Foreign Terrorist
Entry Into the United States," which severely restricted travel from Iran, Iraq, Libya, Somalia, Sudan,
Syria, and Yemen. Although it was not officially framed as a ban on Muslims, Trump's repeated
comments on the campaign trail -- and the fact that all countries on the list were Muslim-majority --
caused it to be widely interpreted as such; indeed, many legal challenges to the ban alleged that the
order violated the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment, which bars the government from
instituting policies that disfavor a particular religion.



                                                    10
    We use two datasets to assess support for the Muslim Ban. Nationscape, described in Section 2.2,
asks participants to indicate whether they agree or disagree with the policy to "Ban people from
predominately Muslim countries from entering the United States". As a second measure, we use
the Cooperative Congressional Election Study (CCES), a widely-used representative stratified survey
tracking public opinion and political attitudes fielded annually by YouGov. The 2017 and 2018 waves
include a question on the executive order: respondents are asked to indicate whether they support or
oppose the order, which they are told "bans immigrants from Iran, Somalia, Sudan, Yemen, Syria,
and Libya from coming to the United States for 90 days" and "permanently prohibits Syrian refugees
from entering the country". As before, for all outcomes, we restrict the sample to White, non-Muslim
respondents.
    As our second measure of political preferences, we study voting behavior in the 2016 Presidential
Election. Both Nationscape and CCES ask participants to indicate whom they voted for in 2016;
CCES asks this question in every year since 2016. Even aside from his calls for a Muslim Ban,
Trump's campaign rhetoric often singled out Arab-Muslims, suggesting that Islam was incompatible
with American values and portraying Muslims as terrorists. For example, Trump suggested that he
might implement a national database of American Muslims and that he would be open to surveilling or
closing mosques.21 We thus attribute at least part of the Republican vote share in the 2016 election as
an indication of hostility toward Arab-Muslims. We of course recognize that a ballot cast for candidate
Trump is not just a ballot against Arab-Muslims, so we systematically control for other predictors
of the Republican voting. Most importantly, we control for Republican voting in 2012, during which
anti-Muslim sentiment was arguably a less salient campaign issue.

2.4    Contact and Mechanisms

To further understand the mechanisms through which exposure to Arab-Muslims shapes beliefs, we
fielded a large-scale survey between December 30, 2020 and January 2, 2021 in cooperation with Luc.id,
a consumer research company widely used in the social sciences (e.g. Bursztyn et al. 2020; Fetzer et al.
2020). We restrict our sample to White, non-Muslim respondents who were born in the US and who
report that they are not of Arab descent. Our resulting sample (n = 6536) is broadly representative of
the targeted population in terms of age, gender, income, Hispanic ethnicity, and education (Appendix
Table A4). We include the survey questionnaire in Appendix E.
    In addition to eliciting demographics, voting behavior in 2012, 2016, and 2020, and county of
 21
    See, for example, Why Trump's Proposed Targeting of Muslims Would Be Unconstitutional American Civil Liberties
Union, Nov 22, 2016; Donald Trump's Plan for a Muslim Database Draws Comparison to Nazi Germany NBC News,
Nov 19, 2015




                                                       11
residence, we survey respondents about their contact with Arab-Muslims and about their knowledge
of Arab-Muslims and Islam in general. To measure contact, we ask respondents to indicate whether
they have interacted with Arab-Muslims in any of three capacities: as friends, as neighbors, and as
workplace acquaintances. To measure knowledge of Arab-Muslims, we ask three questions. First, we
ask respondents to select the correct definition of Ramadan among one correct and three incorrect
definitions. Second, we ask a multiple-choice, multiple-response question asking them to highlight the
Pillars of Islam among a number of possible choices; they receive one point for each correct answer they
highlight and for each incorrect answer they do not highlight. Finally, we ask respondents to indicate
the percentage of the US population which is Muslim, and we measure accuracy as the (negative)
of the absolute value of the difference between their guess and the correct percentage (1.1 percent).
As an auxiliary measure of exposure, we ask respondents whether they have ever dined in a Middle
Eastern restaurant.
      In our analysis, we report specifications using each of the three contact-related questions separately,
and we also report specifications that instead estimate effects on a single indicator of contact taking
value one if the respondent reported interacting with Arab-Muslims in any of the three capacities.
Similarly, we report specifications using each of the three knowledge-related questions separately, and
we also report specifications that estimate effects on an index of knowledge about Arab-Muslims: we
construct this index by scaling each of the three knowledge questions to mean zero and standard
deviation one, summing the scaled values, and dividing the sum by three (such that the resulting
index has mean zero and standard deviation one).22

2.5      Charitable Donations and Altruism

To measure altruism towards foreign countries, we collect data on charitable donations towards foreign
causes from two major charitable organizations, to which we refer as Charity 1 (C1) and Charity 2
(C2).23 While both organizations sometimes donate to US based causes, they primarily channel
donations from US donors towards foreign non-governmental organizations, particularly in response
to natural or man-made disasters. We focus solely on donations to specific foreign causes, which allow
us to identify the country receiving the donation. After removing donors who we are unable to match
to a unique county of residence, we are left with 80,584 individual donations spanning from 2004 to
2017 for Charity 1 and 715,663 individual donations spanning from 2010 to 2017 for Charity 2. For
each donation, the organizations know the name of the donor, the date of the donation, the foreign
destination of the donation, and, for Charity 2 only, the dollar amount of the donation.
 22
      Results are broadly similar if we instead define the index as the first principal component of the three answers.
 23
      Charity 1 requested anonymity. Charity 2 is GlobalGiving (https://www.globalgiving.org).



                                                             12
       For both charitable organizations, we construct a panel dataset of donations at the county-country-
quarter level. We begin by removing any donation to foreign country f by an individual who, based
on their first and last name, is likely of ancestry from f . This ensures that we are not identifying a
natural tendency of individuals of foreign origin to donate to their ancestral country.24 Because the
classification algorithm is trained to predict the ethnic origin of the name, not the current country
of residence, only respondents with names associated with Native American tribes are matched to
the United States, while most White Americans are matched to European countries.25 In some
specifications, we focus on donations from donors of likely European origin (as all donations in our
dataset go towards countries outside of Europe), or on donations made by donors with likely ancestral
origin from a continent other than the continent receiving the donation. We then aggregate donations
at the county d × foreign country f × quarter t level.
       Figures A1 and 1 map the US distribution of donors and the worldwide distribution of the receiving
countries for Charity 1 and Charity 2, respectively. Both figures show significant variation in the total
number of donations across counties within the US and across foreign countries, with a substantially
wider sample of destination countries for Charity 2 donations.

2.6      Other Data

Finally, we use demographic data from several sources. We source county-level population and popu-
lation density from IPUMS. Our data on average age, racial composition, average household income,
and educational attainment is drawn from the 2018 round of the American Community Survey. Our
county-level measures of poverty is provided by the US Census Bureau under the 2018 Small Area
Income and Poverty Estimates (SAIPE) programs. Our data on unemployment is from the US Bureau
of Labor Statistics' 2019 Local Area Unemployment Statistics (LAUS).
       We compute the distance between foreign country f and a US county d, Distancef,d , as the
great circle distance between the county and country centroids, measured in kilometers. The latitude
difference between a foreign country f and a US county d, LatitudeDif f erencef,d , is the absolute
difference between the latitudes of the two, measured in degrees.26 References to distance as a control
include both distance and latitude difference.
  24
     To identify the likely foreign origin of donors, we contract with NamSor, an organization which uses machine learning
techniques on historical census data to classify names by ethnicity, gender, and religion. To ensure donors' privacy,
individual donor names are never revealed to us researchers, and details about donations are never revealed to NamSor.
Instead, we follow a three-way protocol such that NamSor sees only a list of names, but no information on donations;
the charitable organization provides us with de-identified donations data; and we see only anonymized donations data
and NamSor's classifications. See Appendix D for details.
  25
     For example, "Kenneth Arrow" is matched to the United Kingdom.
  26
     Geo-coordinates for counties and countries are sourced from www.geonames.org and www.cepii.fr respectively, with
a county's latitude and longitude as the average of that of all postal codes within the county, and a country's latitude
and longitude as that of the largest city within the country.


                                                           13
         We source data for genetic, cultural, and linguistic distance from Spolaore and Wacziarg (2016). A
higher value for each of these indices corresponds to a greater degree of separation between the United
States and the given country.

2.7        Summary Statistics

We provide summary statistics in Appendix Table A1. To build intuition about the magnitudes
of the estimated coefficients in the first section of our empirical analyses, we plot counties by their
IHS-transformed Arab population in Appendix Figure A2.


3         Econometric Specification
3.1        Main Specification

Our aim is to estimate the causal impact of exposure to a local population of foreign ancestry on
outcomes relevant to these ancestries: prejudice, political preferences, and charitable donations.
         In our primary analyses, we measure county d's exposure to foreign ancestral group f as the inverse
hyperbolic sine of the number of residents in domestic county d who claim ancestry from a foreign
country or a group of foreign countries f , IHS Ancestryd,f .27 We always control for logged county
population to ensure that our estimates do not simply capture differences between small and large
counties. This functional form places an emphasis on the absolute size of the community with ancestry
from f , capturing the intuition that what may matter for changing the social preferences of residents
in d toward group f is a "critical mass" from group f . For example, a large enough population with
ancestry from a given country supports grocery stores, restaurants, cultural events and centers, etc.
However, one might instead think that the share of the population in county d with ancestry from f
is the measure of interest, since it may better proxy for personal interaction with people with ancestry
from f or for discussion of issues pertinent to f in the local media. To facilitate this alternative
interpretation, we replicate all of our analyses using ancestral shares, rather than IHS-transformed
ancestral population in Appendix C. With one exception, which we flag below, our conclusions are
qualitatively identical, and almost all coefficients which are statistically significant in the main analyses
are statistically significant when estimated through this alternative approach.28
         In our main analyses based upon survey and IAT data, we estimate the effect of exposure at the
    27
    The inverse hyperbolic sine (IHS) approximates the natural logarithm function, but is well defined at zero.
    28
    Because our focus is mostly on small minorities, such as Arab-Muslims, it is unsurprising that the two approaches
yield very similar results.




                                                         14
individual level, running various specifications of the following equation:

                         Yi,d,f = IHS Ancestryd,f + Controlsi,d,f +       i,d,f .                   (1)

Our outcomes, Yi,d,f , include explicit and implicit prejudice against Arab-Muslims, preferences for
policies targeting Arab-Muslims, Trump voting in 2016, and various measures of contact with and
knowledge about Arab-Muslims. In these specifications, f refers collectively to Arab-Muslims (see
Section 4).
   In our main analyses based upon donations data, we estimate this effect at the origin county ×
destination country × quarter level, running various specifications of the form:

                      t
                    Yd,f = IHS Ancestryt                         t
                                       d,f + d + f + t + Controlsd,f +
                                                                                    t
                                                                                    d,f .           (2)

Our measures of donations take the form     1[Donationst
                                                       d,f > 0], an indicator taking value one if this

number is nonzero; IHS #Donationst
                                 d,f , the number of donations from residents in county d to

country f in period t; and IHS $Donationst
                                         d,f , the total dollar value of these donations. Whenever

possible, we include a set of fixed effects for domestic county d (d ), foreign country or group of
countries f (f ), and time periods (t ), as well as various d × f controls. In specifications with IHS
transforms on both sides, the coefficient  in (2) approximates the elasticity of donations with respect
to ancestry.
   We may be worried that unobserved factors affect both the existing stock of ancestry and our
measures of prejudice, political preferences, and altruism. For instance, it is possible that foreign
migrants endogenously prefer settlement in US counties that are and always have been more tolerant
towards foreigners, generating a correlation between Ancestryd,f and our outcome variables even in
the absence of a causal effect of exposure on the outcomes we study. Controlling for a county d fixed
effect (d ) partly addresses this concern, as it controls for the overall level of tolerance towards all
foreigners. Yet we are not always able to control for county fixed effects: in some specifications, we
consider a single group of foreign countries (e.g. Arab-Muslim countries). Second, it remains possible
that some counties are tolerant toward some specific foreign origins, but not others. To address this
concern, we construct an instrument for the present-day ancestry composition of US counties and, in
addition, test explicitly whether Whites may be moving between counties to avoid specific minorities
which they happen to dislike.




                                                   15
3.2      Isolating Exogenous Variations in Foreign Ancestry

We construct instruments for the present-day distribution of foreign ancestry across US counties by
combining data from the long history of foreign migrations to the US with a simple model of inter-
national migration, following closely the approach first developed by Burchardi et al. (2019a).29 This
model purposefully excludes any determinant of migration correlated with the endogenous response
of foreign migrants to natives' attitudes towards specific foreign groups (such as prejudice, hostility,
or altruism toward specific groups), thus ensuring that the migrations isolated by our instruments are
driven solely by factors that are plausibly independent from unobservables affecting our outcomes of
interest.
       In this model, the allocation of foreign migrants across domestic counties over time is governed
by three forces. First, during times when more migrants arrive from a given foreign origin f , more
migrants from f will settle in all domestic counties, all else equal. We label this first source of variation
a "push factor," which varies across foreign origins f and over time t.30 Second, we assume that upon
her arrival in the US, a migrant from f is more likely to settle in d if she can find better economic
opportunities there. We proxy the attractiveness of county d at time t for migrants arriving from
any foreign origin using the fraction of foreign migrants, irrespective of their origin, who settle in
d at time t. We label this second source of variation an `economic pull factor', which varies across
domestic counties d and over time t.31 Third, we assume that upon her arrival in the US, a migrant
from f is also more likely to settle in d if it hosts a large preexisting community of migrants and their
descendants from f . We label this third source of variation a `social pull factor,' which varies across
domestic counties d, across foreign countries f , and over time t. Combining all three elements, we
predict that many migrants from f will settle in d at time t if many migrants from f arrive in the US
at t, and d is attractive to migrants from any country at t, and d hosts a large preexisting stock with
ancestry from f . Finally, we use the fact that the preexisting stock of ancestries at any time is itself
inherited from previous migration waves in earlier periods. Iterating our model forward then allows us
isolate (exogenous) variation in the distribution of ancestries which results purely from the historical
interaction of economic push and pull factors. Burchardi et al. (2019a) show the first-stage expression
for the contemporaneous stock of residents in domestic county d with ancestry from foreign country
  29
     Variants of this approach have since been employed by Burchardi et al. (2019b) and Arkolakis et al. (2020), among
others.
  30
     To further alleviate endogeneity concerns, we leave out from the push factor migrants from f settling in the Census
region where county d is located when predicting ancestry from f in d.
  31
     To address endogeneity concerns, we leave out from the economic pull factor migrants from the same continent as
f when predicting ancestry from f . We also explore various alternative leave-out strategies as robustness checks and
obtain similar results (see Section 5.3).




                                                          16
f at a given time t can then be written as

                                     t              s
                                                   I- c(f ),d
  IHS      Ancestryt
                   d,f       =              s
                                         s If,-r(d) s            +  · PCst                     t     t
                                                                         d,f + d + f + Controlsd,f + d,f , (3)
                                                    I-c(f )
                                  s=1880

where d and f are origin and destination fixed effects. Controlst
                                                                d,f includes d, f , and d × f observables.
 s
If, -r(d) is our push factor, the total number of migrants arriving from country f in period s, excluding
                                         s
those who settle in d's region (-r(d)); I-           s
                                           c(f ),d /I-c(f ) is our economic pull factor, the fraction of all

migrants arriving in the US in period s who settle in county d, excluding migrants from f 's continent
(-c(f )); and the vector PCst
                            d,f are principal components summarizing the information contained in

higher order interactions of push and economic pull factors, which enter the equation by iteratively
substituting for preexisting ancestry. (Collectively, these terms summarize the effect of the social pull
factor on the allocation of migrants across counties.)32
       To understand how the push-pull and higher-order interaction terms affect contemporaneous an-
cestry, it is easiest to consider a stylized historical example. In the 1920s, there was a large influx of
Mexican migrants to the US following the Mexican Revolution: a large "push" from Mexico. At the
same time, due to the newly booming automobile industry, Detroit was attracting large numbers of
migrants: a large "economic pull" for Detroit. The push-pull interaction thus induced a large stock of
Mexican ancestry in Detroit starting in 1920 (Mexico push 1920 × Detroit pull 1920). As immigration
from Mexico again increased in the 1980s, the "social pull" factor led to large inflows of Mexican
migrants, even though Detroit was no longer an attractive place for migrants in general (Mexico push
1980 × Mexico push 1920 × Detroit pull 1920). And the next wave of Mexican migrants in the 1990s
was again in part attracted to Detroit due to the large Mexican ancestry inherited from both 1920 and
1980 (Mexico push 1990 × Mexico push 1980 × Mexico push 1920 × Detroit pull 1920). As a result,
Detroit has a large Mexican community in 2010 inherited from at least three waves. In Equation (3),
                                                                                                   1920
                                                                                                  Inot
                                                       1920
the first wave corresponds to the push-pull term 1920 IM                                               Latin America,Detroit
                                                                                                                             ;   the next
                                                         exico,not M idwest                            1920
                                                                                                      Inot Latin America

two waves are summarized in the principal components.
                                                                                    s
                                                                                   I-
                                                           s
       The push-pull interaction terms in Equation (3) -- If, -r(d)                  s
                                                                                    I-
                                                                                      c(f ),d
                                                                                                for s = 1880 . . . 2010 and PCst
                                                                                                                               d,f
                                                                                       c(f )

-- are the excluded instruments we use in every IV specification of our main estimating equations,
Equation (1) and Equation (2). Our identifying assumption is
                                                    s
                                                   I-
                                            s         c(f ),d t
                                   Cov     If,-r(d) s        ,        controls      = 0, s  t,                                        (4)
                                                    I-c(f ) d,f
  32                                                                    s          s          s        t0     u
    Formally, for all {d, f } pairs, there are 758 higher-order terms: If,-r (d) (I-c(f ),d /I-c(f ) ) u=s+1 If,-r (d) ,  (s, t0 ) s.t.
                                                           t
1880  s < t0  t. The vector Principal Componentsd,f corresponds to the five largest principal components, which
jointly capture over 99% of the total variation among higher-order terms. In practice, including these controls makes has
relatively little impact on our estimates.


                                                                 17
where   t     are the residuals from (2). That is, we require that any unobservable factor that makes
        d,f

residents in a domestic location d more or less prejudiced, hostile, or altruistic toward people with
ancestry from f in period t (    t     in (2) large) is conditionally uncorrelated with migrations from f
                                 d,f

to the entire United States (excluding f 's migrants to d's region) interacted with migrations from all
foreign countries to d (excluding foreign migrants f 's continent) at some earlier time s  t.
   To return to our stylized example, we observe in 2010 many charitable donations from Detroit
residents who are not of Mexican descent to Mexico, even controlling for the fact that Detroit residents
may be more generous towards all foreign countries ­ the Detroit fixed effect d in (2) -- and that
Mexico may be a preferred destination for donations from all US donors -- the Mexico fixed effect
f in (2). Our first stage predicts a large population of Mexican ancestry in 2010 in Detroit because
many Mexicans migrated to the US in 1920 (excluding the Midwest) and Detroit was attracting a large
share of foreign migrants in 1920 (excluding Latin Americans). Our identifying assumption requires
that this interaction of large Mexican out-migrations and large Detroit in-migrations in 1920 affects
donations from non-Mexican Detroiters to Mexico in 2010 through its effect on Mexican settlement in
Detroit, and not through any other channel.
   To better understand this identifying assumption, it is useful to spell out a (stylized) example
where it would fail. For instance, natives in a city (e.g. non-Mexicans in Detroit) may systematically
pay more attention to foreign news at times when their city welcomes large number of foreign migrants
(e.g. 1920), but ignore foreign news at other times. If at that precise time a given foreign country
suffers from domestic instability (e.g. the Mexican revolution and assassination of Zapata in 1919),
natives may develop disproportionate empathy towards that country, purely because they happen
to pay more attention to world events at that time. This disproportionate empathy may then be
passed down across generations of natives, affecting their donation behavior in 2010. Under such a
scenario, the same historical push and pull forces that drive historical migration (the 1920 Mexico push
interacted with the 1920 Detroit pull) also affect unobservables (particular empathy of Detroiters for
Mexico today) that may drive altruism 90 years later (charitable donations from Detroit to Mexico
today), even if exposure to residents of foreign descent has no effect (Mexican ancestry in Detroit). We
partly address this concern by showing evidence of direct contact with local residents of foreign ancestry
(see Section 4.4 and Table 4). We also consider alternative specifications with various definitions of
the pull factor and, reassuringly, find similar results (seeSection 5.3 and Appendix Table A5).




                                                     18
3.3     Ruling Out "Selective White Flight"

One remaining identification concern is "selective White flight": respondents who are not generally
more xenophobic but instead intolerant only toward a specific ethnic group may, in response to a higher
population of immigrants from that group, move to another county. For instance, if White residents in
Detroit who specifically dislike Mexicans (but not other minorities) may leave Detroit as the Mexican
community grows and move to places with small Mexican communities, then Detroit would display
disproportionately positive attitudes and altruism toward Mexicans, biasing our estimated effects of
contact upward.
      A priori, there are several reasons to doubt that selective White flight significantly biases our
estimates. First, mobility has sharply declined in recent decades: around 10 percent of Americans
moved between 2018 and 2019, compared with around 18 percent of Americans between 1985 and
1986. This period coincides with a sharp rise in immigration to the United States: around 7 percent
of the population was foreign-born in 1985, compared to 14 percent in 2019.33 Second, the majority
(65%) of moves are within-county : given that our geographical variation is at the county level, these
moves will not affect our estimates.34 Third, with one exception (Mexican immigrants), immigrants
from the countries in our dataset represent very small shares of the population For example, the
maximum Arab share of the population -- in Wayne County, containing Detroit and Dearborn -- is
less than 4 percent, and the median Arab share is less than half of one percent. It is thus unlikely
that such small populations would meaningfully affect Whites' migration decisions. Finally, to bias
estimates in our dyadic donations data, such selective white flight would have to operate at a highly
granular scale, where for example some types of white Americans dislike Somalis but not Nigerians,
while others dislike Nigerians but not Nicaraguans, and this dislike would have to be intense enough to
prompt these types of white Americans to move in implausibly large numbers to sway survey results.
      Nonetheless, we systematically test for selective White flight by constructing a d × f specific index
designed to capture whether White natives who move out of d (e.g. Detroit) settle in places with larger
or smaller communities with ancestry from f (e.g. Mexico) relative to its national average:
                                                                     t /Ancestry t
                                                             Ancestryd ,f       d
                    WhiteFlightIndext
                                    d,f   =       Outt
                                                     d,d                                      .        (5)
                                                                     t
                                                           E Ancestryd               t   |f
                                              d                          ,f /Ancestryd


Outt                                                                            t             t
   d,d is the number of White natives who move from d to d in period t; Ancestryd ,f /Ancestryd

is the population share in d with ancestry from f ; it is compared to its national average,
          t
E Ancestryd                 t   |f , the average population share with ancestry from f across all US
                ,f /Ancestryd

 33
      https://www.migrationpolicy.org/programs/data-hub/charts/immigrant-population-over-time
 34
      Source: authors' tabulations from the 2019 Current Population Survey.


                                                      19
counties. In other words, our index is a weighted average of out-migrations of White natives from d
to other destinations, with high (low) weights given to a destination if it hosts a large (small) concen-
tration of residents from foreign origin f . For instance, for d = Detroit and f = M exico, this index
takes a high value if many White natives from Detroit move to domestic locations d (OutDetroit,d
                                       t
large) where Mexican ancestry (Ancestryd                   t
                                         ,M exico /Ancestryd ) is large relative to its national average
           t
(E Ancestryd                      t   |M exico ). We then estimate various specifications of
                ,M exico /Ancestryd


        IHS WhiteFlightIndext                 t                         t
                            d,f = IHS Ancestryd,f + t + d + f + Controlsd,f +
                                                                                               t
                                                                                               d,f ,   (6)

where we again instrument for ancestry using (3). Under the selective White flight hypothesis, White
natives who dislike neighbors from f selectively move towards places with few residents from f : the
larger the community from f in d the higher the value of the index. If the hypothesis is true, we would
expect the estimated coefficient  in (6) to be negative and significant. Throughout the empirical
analysis, we estimate this coefficient for the main specification in every dataset we consider to rule out
selective White flight as a driver of our results.


4     Exposure to Arab-Muslims
4.1    Attitudes toward Arab-Muslims

Our first main finding is that long-term exposure to local populations of Arab ancestry reduces prej-
udice against Arab-Muslims. We estimate various specifications of the form

                     Attitudei,d,Arab = IHS Ancestryd,Arab + Controlsi,d +        i,d ,                (7)

where we instrument the number of residents of Arab ancestry (i.e. the number of residents claiming an-
cestry from countries in the Arab League) in individual i's county of residence d, IHS Ancestryd,Arab ,
using (3). This specification uses a single cross-section, so we omit the time subscript. A higher score
for Attituded,Arab signifies lower prejudice against Arab-Muslims. We present a binned scatter plot of
the first-stage fitted values in Panel A of Appendix Figure A3.
    All specifications control for logged population size to ensure that our results are not simply driven
by differences between small and large counties. The choice of whether to include additional county-
level demographic controls and, if so, which controls to add, is not straightforward. Because our
instrument is constructed based on migration flows as early as the 1880s, controlling for any post-
1880 county characteristics -- such as education or population density -- may in theory introduce
a "bad controls" problem to the extent that these controls are themselves partially determined by



                                                     20
the ancestral composition of migrants (Angrist and Pischke, 2009). Yet given that the population
of Arab ancestry is relatively small, many controls, such as those described above, are unlikely to
be substantially affected by Arab migration, and including them to soak up excess variation may be
desirable. Other covariates, such as the 2012 Republican vote share of the county, are more likely to
be directly affected by the local Arab population, yet we are also interested in assessing the extent
to which our estimated coefficient changes as we include these bad controls. Given this tradeoff,
our preferred approach is to display in our regression tables both a fully parsimonious specification
and a series of specifications including various combinations of controls -- including potentially bad
controls. In the appendix, we display, in figure form, estimates of our coefficient of interest under a
every possible combination of a wide range of additional county-level controls.
       Panel A of Table 1 displays results on the IAT score from Project Implicit (implicit bias against
Arab-Muslims); Panel B displays results on the explicit measure of prejudice from Project Implicit
(warmth toward Arab-Muslims); and Panel C displays results on the Nationscape measure (explicit fa-
vorability toward Muslims). The key coefficient of interest represents the effect (in standard deviations)
of a one-unit increase in IHS(Arab ancestry) on the prejudice measure. The first-stage F -statistics
in our more parsimonious specifications are greater than 10, but in all cases, we report p-values from
weak IV-robust inference (based on Conditional Likelihood Ratio tests, following Andrews 2016; Sun
2018).35
       We find that our estimated coefficients are statistically significant and economically meaningful: in
our preferred specification with state fixed effects and individual controls (Column 3), a one-unit in-
crease in the IHS-transformed population of Arab ancestry in a county (approximately half a standard
deviation) causes a 0.077 (s.e.=0.035) standard deviation increase in average Arab-Muslim IAT scores
(Panel A), a 0.135 (s.e.=0.035) standard deviation increase in explicitly stated warmth towards Mus-
lims (Panel B), and a 0.039 (s.e.=0.020) standard deviation increase in favorability toward Muslims.
To put this effect into perspective, a one-IHS increase in the size of the Arab-ancestry population
roughly corresponds to going from the Arab-ancestry population of Orange County, CA to that of
Cook County, IL, or going from the Arab-ancestry population of St. Louis County, MO to San Mateo
County, CA (see Appendix Figure A2).
       Notably, our Project Implicit estimates remain stable with and without state fixed effects (Column
2 vs. Column 3). The magnitude of our Nationscape estimates is cut in half when we introduce
state fixed effects, which we attribute to the nature of our county imputation procedure, though the
  35
    In the presence of weak instruments, the IV estimate is biased toward the OLS estimate. Because our OLS estimates
are smaller in magnitude than our IV estimates, to the extent that weak instruments bias our point estimates, they will
do so toward zero.



                                                          21
coefficient remains statistically significant at the 10% level. The coefficients from both Project Implicit
and Nationscape also remain stable as we introduce a series of "bad controls." Column 5 shows a
placebo experiment where we control for the overall population with non-European ancestry, a proxy
for the total size of the local minority (non-white) population. Doing so has essentially no effect
on the coefficient of interest, and the coefficient on the population with non-European ancestry is
statistically indistinguishable from zero. Thus, our effects are not driven by exposure to non-Whites
in general, but specific to Arab-Muslims. Column 6 instead controls for the average Race IAT score
within county d, while Column 7 controls for the 2012 Republican vote share. The coefficient of
interest remains statistically significant and similar to our preferred specification across all of these
variations, suggesting that our measures of implicit and explicit prejudice toward Arab-Muslims do not
simply proxy for general prejudice against minorities or for political or social conservatism. Instead,
the positive attitudes engendered by the presence of the Arab-Muslim population is specific to Arab-
Muslims themselves.
   Of course, it is possible that some other unobservable county characteristic affecting attitudes
towards Arabs still correlates with our instrument. We cannot fully rule out this possibility when
considering only outcomes relating to a single group (Arab-Muslims). However, we will be able to rule
out this kind of subtle concern when we generalize our results to all groups in Section 5.


Quantile regressions In the top panes of Figure A4, we estimate quantile treatment effects (QTEs)
and the associated standard errors (following Chernozhukov and Hansen, 2005). Given the sizeable
standard errors, these results should be interpreted cautiously. Nonetheless, we find no consistent
evidence of a "backlash" effect by which exposure exacerbates the implicit or explicit biases of individ-
uals who were predisposed toward prejudice. Instead, exposure to a local population of Arab-Muslims
appears to shift the entire distribution of attitudes towards them into more positive territory.


All respondents      Appendix Table A2 presents our Project Implicit results if, instead of restricting
to respondents who were forced to take the Implicit Association Test as part of a job, school, or
university training, we include all respondents. All of our results remain statistically significant at the
1% level and coefficient estimates change little, suggesting a limited role of endogenous selection of
more tolerant residents taking the IAT to confirm their lack of prejudice.


Auxiliary explicit outcomes         Appendix Table A3 shows coefficient estimates on the four other
measures of explicit attitudes toward Arab-Muslims from Project Implicit. We find strong and robust
positive treatment effects on measures of personal beliefs (Panels C and D), in line with our earlier


                                                    22
estimates on warmth and implicit bias. However we find weaker and less robust treatment effects on
measures of social norms against Islamophobia (Panels A and B); indeed, in all specifications with
state fixed effects, these coefficients are statistically indistinguishable from zero at a 10% significance
level. Interpreting these results is not straightforward: for example, does disagreement with the
statement in Panel B ("I attempt to appear nonprejudiced toward Arab Muslims in order to avoid
disapproval from others") indicate that the respondent is unconcerned with being prejudiced against
Arab-Muslims, or that she avoids prejudice against Arab-Muslims for reasons other than avoiding
disapproval from others? Nevertheless, we view these results as suggestive evidence that exposure
causally improves private attitudes toward Arab-Muslims, and that these changes in private attitudes
are more important in explaining changes in behavior than changes in social norms.

4.2   Exposure to Arab-Muslims and Political Preferences

To what extent do these effects on attitudes translate into political preferences? We consider two out-
comes: support for the Muslim Ban and 2016 voting for Donald Trump. Analogous to our specification
for attitudes, we run county-level analyses of the form:


                  PoliticalPreferencei,d = IHS Ancestryd,Arab + Controlsi,d +        i,d ,             (8)

where PoliticalPreferencei,d assesses respondent i's support for the Muslim Ban or support for Donald
Trump in 2016.
   We present our coefficient estimates in Table 2. Estimates based upon the CCES data (Columns
1­5) suggest that exogenous exposure to people of Arab ancestry significantly reduces both support
for the Muslim Ban and voting for Donald Trump in 2016. Controlling for state fixed effects and
individual demographic characteristics lowers our estimates somewhat (Columns 3 and 4), but they
remain significant at the 5% level. The same is true if we add a control for the 2012 Republican
vote share of the respondent's county (Column 5), which suggests that Trump, the most saliently
anti-Muslim presidential candidate in recent memory, activated latent political preferences concerning
Arab-Muslims in a way that candidates McCain and Romney did not. The results imply that a one-
unit increase in the IHS of Arab ancestry (approximately half a standard deviation increase) reduces
the likelihood that an individual supports the Muslim Ban by around 5% and the likelihood that an
individual voted for Trump (conditional on voting in 2016) by around 6%.
   We replicate these results qualitatively in the Nationscape data (Columns 1­5), although for some
specifications in Panel B, the coefficients are not significant at the 10% level. The effects estimated
based upon the CCES data are larger in magnitude than those estimated based on the Nationscape


                                                    23
data, which may again reflect the measurement error associated with our assignment of Nationscape
respondents to counties. Nonetheless, our estimated effects of exposure on Muslim Ban and Trump
support are consistently negative, and they are statistically significant in the more parsimonious spec-
ifications.


Quantile regressions      We plot quantile treatment effects in the bottom two panes of Appendix
Figure A4. We again do not find a consistent "backlash" effect, although treatment effects appear
somewhat less pronounced in the upper half of the distribution of support for the Muslim Ban and for
Trump.

4.3    Charitable Donations toward Arab-Muslim Countries

Having documented that exposure to a local population of Arab descent induces a positive effect
on attitudes towards and political preferences concerning Arab-Muslims, we now test whether this
exposure also affects revealed altruism, as measured by charitable donations. We estimate various
specifications of

               Donations Measuret                    t               t
                                d,Arab = IHS Ancestryd + t + Controlsd +
                                                                                    t
                                                                                    d,Arab ,         (9)

where t is a time fixed effect and we instrument the (IHS-transformed) number of residents of Arab
ancestry in domestic county d, IHS Ancestryd,Arab , using (3). Our variation is thus at the time
× county level. All specifications again control for a time fixed effect (t ), and for logged county
population in 2010.
    We present results in Table 3 separately for the Charity 1 and Charity 2 data. In both datasets, we
examine effects on an indicator for the existence of a donation from county d to country f in quarter t
and on the IHS-transformed number of donations from county d to country f in quarter t. In Charity
2, we can additionally examine the IHS-transformed dollar value of donations from county d to country
f in quarter t (data on the value of donations is unavailable in Charity 1). In all specifications, we
restrict to donors who have European-ethnicity names to ensure that we are not capturing a natural
tendency of people of Arab-Muslim descent to donate to their home countries (see Section 2.5 for
further details).
    We find that an exogenously larger Arab population in county d substantially increases the flow of
donations from d to Arab countries. This finding holds at the extensive and intensive margins for both
donations datasets. It is also robust to controlling for a battery of county-level demographic controls
(2010 population density, the share of the 1970 prime-age population with a high school education, and
the share of the 1970 prime-age population with a college education) and state fixed effects. Controlling

                                                   24
for demographics and state fixed effects does not significantly affect the estimated coefficients or their
statistical significance. The effects are substantial: in our preferred specification (Column 4), a one-unit
increase in the IHS-transformed Arab population (approximately half a standard deviation increase)
causes a 0.136 increase in the IHS-transformed number of donations in the Charity 1 dataset and a
0.489 increase in the corresponding outcome in the Charity 2 dataset, corresponding to increases of
0.74 and 1.69 standard deviations, respectively. Although the first-stage F -statistics are below 10,
using weak instrument-robust inference, we are able to reject the null of a zero coefficient for every
specification. Our estimates are stable to including a wide range of additional controls; we defer a
discussion of robustness to Section 5.1, where we make fuller use of the dyadic nature of our donations
data.
   Do these results reflect a fundamental change in social preferences toward groups to which counties
have greater exposure, or do they simply reflect a change in awareness and salience of causes associated
with these groups' ancestral countries? We cannot fully separate these possibilities, but the results on
explicit and implicit prejudice and on political attitudes strongly suggest a role for greater exposure
changing underlying social preferences.

4.4     Mechanisms: Contact and Personal Knowledge

To gain further insight into the mechanisms by which greater exposure to Arab-Muslims might af-
fect implicit and explicit attitudes, political preferences, and charitable donations, we turn to our
custom survey. We evaluate two possible mechanisms, which are by no means mutually exclusive:
personal contact and knowledge. First, to the extent that a greater population of Arab-Muslims in
a respondent's county leads to more personal interaction with Arab-Muslims, it may improve atti-
tudes, preferences, and altruism, in line with the contact hypothesis (Allport, 1954). Second, even
in the absence of direct personal contact, a larger Arab-Muslim community may increase knowledge
of Arab-Muslims and Islam in general -- for example, due to greater and more accurate coverage
on local media and social media, due to changes in information-seeking behavior, or due to greater
"indirect contact" (e.g. with social acquaintances who themselves have greater personal contact with
Arab-Muslims). Such increased knowledge may translate into improved attitudes, preferences, and
knowledge, especially if it leads residents to update negative priors (Grigorieff et al., 2020; Audette
et al., 2020).


Personal contact      We begin by examining whether living in a county with an exogenously greater
population of Arab-Muslims indeed translates into substantially greater personal contact with Arab-
Muslims. In Panel A of Table 4, we estimate the effects of the IHS-transformed Arab population in


                                                    25
a respondent's county on several binary outcomes: whether the respondent has eaten in a Middle
Eastern restaurant (Column 1), whether the respondent is friends with an Arab-Muslim (Column 2),
whether the respondent is acquainted with an Arab-Muslim through work (Column 3), whether the
respondent has an Arab-Muslim neighbor (Column 4). Columns 5­7 report effects on a binary variable
taking value one if any of the binary variables in Columns 2­4 take value one.
       We find statistically significant effects on all outcomes except for the "friends" indicator (though
the estimate here, too, is positive). The effect sizes are large: a one-unit increase in the IHS of the
Arab population (approximately half a standard deviation increase) translates into an approximately
13% increase in the probability that the respondent has an Arab-Muslim friend, neighbor, or workplace
acquaintance. The point estimates are stable to controlling for individual demographics (male, age,
age squared, age × male), county-level demographics (2010 population density, share of 1970 prime-age
population with high school education, and share of 1970 prime-age population with college education),
and individual and county-level political controls (the respondent's vote in 2012 and the 2012 county
Republican share).36 Once again, using weak instrument-robust inference, we are able to reject the
null of a zero effect for every coefficient that is statistically significant under Wald standard errors.


Knowledge of Arab-Muslims              In Panel B of Table 4, we examine whether greater exposure to
Arab-Muslims also translates into greater knowledge of Arab-Muslims and Islam in general. We ex-
amine effects on knowledge of the pillars of Islam (Column 2), knowledge of the definition of Ramadan
(Column 3), knowledge of the share of Muslims in the US (Column 4), and an index of these three
outcomes (Columns 5­7). In Column 1, we examine a specific outcome (derived from the question on
the pillars of Islam) specifically measuring beliefs about negative traits of Islam: whether "holy war
against non-believers" and/or the "subservience of women and children to men" are among the Five
Pillars. This outcome takes a value of two if the respondent indicated that both traits are among the
Five Pillars, a value of one if the respondent indicated that one of the two is among the Five Pillars,
and a value of zero if the respondent indicated that neither is among the Five Pillars.
       We once again find economically large, if statistically weaker, effects. A one-unit increase in the
IHS of the Arab population (approximately half a standard deviation) translates into a 0.10 decrease
in the measure of negative beliefs about Islam, a 0.13 standard deviation change. It also translates
into a 0.31 higher accuracy in guessing the Pillars of Islam (scored from 0 to 7, with a mean of 4.5 and
a standard deviation of 1.6), and an 8.6% greater probability that the respondent will correctly define
Ramadan. To put these magnitudes into perspective, the corresponding gaps between respondents with
  36
   We avoid using 2016 voting given the direct evidence presented in Table 2 that greater exposure to Arab-Muslim
populations significantly reduces both individual and county-level voting for Trump.



                                                       26
college degrees and respondents without college degrees are -0.15, 0.678, and 14%, respectively. An
exogenously greater Arab population also increases the accuracy of respondents' guess about the size
of the Arab population in the United States: a one-unit increase translates into 1.6% greater accuracy,
approximately 0.13 standard deviations, though this estimate is not statistically significant at the 10%
level. Turning to the index, a one-unit increase in the size of the Arab population increases scores
by between 0.10 and 0.25 standard deviations, although these estimates do not remain statistically
significant at the 10% level when we control for county-level demographics or for individual-level and
county-level voting in the 2012 election.

4.5   Robustness

"Selective White flight" One concern is that natives who have disproportionately negative atti-
tudes toward Arabs, and those who are disproportionately less likely to donate, move to other counties
with smaller Arab communities -- "selective White flight". Column 1 of Table 5 tests this hypothesis
using the specification described in Section 3.3. We find no evidence that natives in counties with
greater Arab populations endogenously relocate to counties with small Arab populations. Indeed, if
anything, exposure to Arab communities makes residents more likely to relocate to areas with large
Arab populations, conditional on moving at all.


Binned scatter plots We graphically present the results in Tables 1 and 2 in Figure 2. We construct
binned scatter plots by residualizing our instruments, our endogenous variable (IHS-transformed Arab
ancestry), and our outcomes by age, age squared, a male indicator, state fixed effects (the specification
of Column 3 of Table 1 and Columns 3 and 8 of Table 2). We then estimate a two-stage least-squares
regression of the (residualized) outcome on the (residualized) endogenous variable, instrumented by
the (residualized) instruments, thus recovering the coefficient from the full regression. We then bin
our data into forty equally-sized groups based on the fitted values of the endogenous variable and plot
means. To assess the extent to which our estimated coefficients are driven by counties with extremely
high or extremely low fitted values of Arab ancestry, we also drop observations with fitted values in
the top and bottom 2.5% (i.e. the top and bottom bin) and re-estimate the model. The slopes from
the regression line fit on the full data (in black) and from the regression line fit on the middle 95% of
data (in red) are very close for all four outcomes, confirming that results are not driven by counties
in the tails of the distribution of fitted ancestry.
   We follow the same approach for the survey outcomes presented in Table 4, presenting the asso-
ciated binned scatter plots in Figure 3. We residualize by the same set of individual covariates, but
we omit the state fixed effects given the smaller sample (thus matching the specifications of Columns


                                                       27
1­5 in Table 4). For the restaurant and contact outcomes, the slope of the regression line fit on the
middle 95% of data is extremely similar to that of the line fit on the full dataset; for the negative
beliefs about Islam and knowledge outcomes, the slope is steeper if we drop the top and bottom 2.5%
of fitted values.


Coefficient stability    To probe the robustness of our estimates to the inclusion of different controls,
we run specifications of Equation 7 under a wide variety of individual-level and county-level controls,
following the procedure of Bursztyn et al. (2020): individual age, age squared, gender, age × gender,
and education; county population density in 2010; the share of the population below 18, the share of
the population below 65, the median age, and the sex ratio in 2018; the share of prime-age men and
women with a high school education, the share of prime-age men and women with a college education,
the share of the population below the poverty line, and the log median income in 2018; the inverse
hyperbolic sine-transformed population of non-European descent in 2010; the average race IAT score;
the 2008 and 2012 Republican vote shares; and state fixed effects. We report results in Panels A and
B of Appendix Figure A5. Almost all of our estimates remain significant at the 1% or 5% level, and
our coefficient estimates are relatively stable under different combinations of covariates, confirming
that our estimates are not driven by arbitrary choices of controls. However, the estimated effects on
support for the Muslim Ban and for support for Trump are smaller in magnitude and less statistically
significant when simultaneously controlling for multiple "bad controls," such as the 2012 Republican
vote share and the race IAT score.


5     Generalized Exposure to Foreign Ancestries

Are the positive effects of exposure specific to the context of Arab-Muslims, or does exposure to any
given foreign ancestral group change social preferences toward that group? To shed light on this
question, we now generalize our analysis to all foreign ancestries. For this analysis, we exploit the
dyadic structure of our donations dataset -- that is, the fact that we observe donation flows originating
from many different US counties and flowing to many different countries.

5.1    Donations to Individual Arab-Muslim Countries

To maximize comparability with our previous estimates, we begin by examining the effects of exposure
to Arab-Muslims on donations to Arab-Muslim countries. This analysis differs from the analysis
presented in Section 4.3 in that rather than pooling all Arab-Muslim countries into a single group (not
distinguishing between attitudes toward, for example, Syrians vs. Lebanese), we now exploit variation



                                                   28
in donations toward different Arab countries, since our variation is at the county-country-time level
(d × f × t). As before, we restrict our set of donors to those with European-ethnicity names.
    Our estimates, presented in Table 6, are broadly similar to those presented in Table 3. An ex-
ogenously larger population with ancestry from country f in county d increases the flow of donations
from d to f , both on the extensive and intensive margin and in both Charity 1 and the Charity 2
data. This finding is robust to controlling for the logged distance from d to f and the absolute d-f
latitude difference, county-level demographic controls (2010 population density, the share of the 1970
prime-age population with a high school education, and the share of the 1970 prime-age population
with a college education), state fixed effects, and destination country fixed effects. A one-unit in-
crease in the IHS of ancestry from country f (approximately half a standard deviation) leads to an
estimated 0.02 increase in the IHS of the number of donations to f (approximately 25% of a standard
deviation). Interpreting this estimate as a partial elasticity, doubling the size of the ancestral group
in a county increases the number of donations from European-ancestry residents of that county by
1.5% and the total dollar value of donations by 6%. Though still sizeable, these country-specific elas-
ticities are substantially smaller than the "pooled elasticities" (ArabDonations/ArabP opulation)
reported in Table 3, suggesting a substantial role of spillovers between Arab countries: an exogenously
larger population from one Arab country improves natives' attitudes and generosity toward all Arab
countries, not just the country to which they are exposed.37

5.2    Charitable Donations to All Countries

We now generalize our results to all foreign countries, not just Arab countries. This approach gives
us enough variation across county-country pairs to include both domestic county and foreign country
fixed effects. Those fixed effects control for the possibility that donors residing in some counties may
be more generous (towards any foreign country), and for the possibility that some countries may be
more likely to be struck by disaster and attract more donations (from any domestic county). Our
specifications take the form:


            Donations Measuret                 t                         t
                             d,f = IHS Ancestryd,f + d + f + t + Controlsd,f +
                                                                                                        t
                                                                                                        d,f ,       (10)

where d , f are domestic county and foreign country fixed effects.
    Table 7 presents our main results. In Column 1, we restrict the population of donors to those
  37
     As before, the appendix shows robustness for these results: Appendix Figure A6, shows the stability of coefficients
when introducing every possible combination of the same county-level controls used above; Figure 4 presents binscatters
displaying the relationship between residualized ancestry and residualized IHS-transformed number of donations, where
the residuals are taken with respect to the controls and fixed effects in Column 5 of Table 6. As before, the coefficient
estimates appear robust and remain highly significant when dropping tails of fitted values.



                                                           29
with European-origin names; in Column 2, we restrict to donors whose names originate from countries
on a different continent than foreign country f ; and in Column 3, we restrict to donors whose name
originates from a country other than country f . The estimates are highly stable across these different
populations. Relative to our estimates when we restrict to Arab countries, our estimated coefficients
are even larger: a one-unit increase in the IHS of ancestry from country f (approximately half a
standard deviation) increases the IHS of the number of donations to f by 0.052-0.058, approximately
36-45% of a standard deviation depending on the specification. The estimated partial elasticity of the
number of donations to f with respect to the size of the ancestral group from f is 5-6%, while the
corresponding partial elasticity of the total dollar value of donations to f is 15-16%. The estimated
elasticities are very close to those estimated for just donations to Arab countries (i.e. those presented
in Table 6, and they are also strikingly similar across both the datasets from Charity 1 and Charity 2.
   The inclusion of county fixed effects also allow us to rule out lingering concerns from Section 4
about county-level unobservables being correlated with our instrument. More generally, the fact that
estimates remain positive and significant even after including these fixed effects indicates that exposure
to immigrant in general does not simply increase altruism toward foreign countries: instead, exposure
to a specific immigrant group over a period of years or decades increases altruism toward that group's
ancestral country.


Binscatters    Figure 5 presents binscatters displaying the relationship between the population with
ancestry from country f in county d and the IHS-transformed number of donations from d to f ; we
restrict to European-origin donors and residualize by quarter, domestic county, and foreign country
fixed effects. Once again, we find that although the relationship is most pronounced in the upper half
of the distribution of ancestry, it is mostly increasing throughout the entire distribution.


Split-sample regressions We can also run split-sample versions of Equation 10, estimating the
effects of ancestry on donations separately for each foreign country in our two datasets. Our variation
in these specifications is at the county × time level, so we omit domestic county and foreign country
fixed effects, but we control for the county's logged population and for time fixed effects. Figure 6
presents the corresponding coefficient estimates for Charity 2 and for Charity 1, focusing on the IHS-
transformed number of donations in each quarter. All coefficient estimates are positive and all but
eight are statistically significant at the 5% level. These results confirm that the results are not driven
by a small number of countries or a small number of regions, but rather reflect a general tendency for
counties with (exogenously) greater populations with ancestry from a given country to donate to that
country.


                                                   30
5.3   Robustness

"Selective White flight"       As before, we may be worried that these estimates simply reflect the
endogenous out-migration of natives who are disproportionately hostile toward minorities with ancestry
from foreign country f rather than a positive treatment effect. County fixed effects somewhat alleviate
these concerns, as for this mechanism to generate a positive bias in our estimated coefficients, we
would require that natives are specifically intolerant toward minorities with ancestry from f rather
than intolerant of non-natives in general. Nonetheless, we test for "selective White flight" using the
specification described in Section 3.3, reporting results in Table 5. Columns 5­6 restrict the sample to
Arab countries only, while Columns 7­8 consider the whole dataset. As before, for all specifications, we
can rule out even small negative coefficients: if anything, exposure to a local population with ancestry
from f makes movers more, rather than less, likely to relocate to counties with larger populations
from f .


Correlated migrations Our first set of robustness checks considers alternative instruments for our
first stage Equation (3). We focus on the specification of Equation (10), as this specification allows
us to control for the most exhaustive set of controls, including quarter, domestic county, and foreign
country fixed effects.
   One potential concern is that when predicting ancestry from f in d, even though we exclude from
our "pull" factor any migrant to d coming from the same continent as f , the choices of migrants from
other continents may mimic those of migrants from f , so that our pull factor may be contaminated
by unobserved d × f factors. We construct two alternative instruments. First, instead of constructing
our pull factor based on migrants from other continents, we do so based only on European migrants.
Because Americans tend not to donate to causes in (rich) European countries, doing so may further
alleviate endogeneity concerns. This is also a natural robustness check given that our baseline specifi-
cations include only donors who have European-origin names. Second, we directly address the concern
that the migration patterns of country f may be very similar to that of another country (across time
and space). Instead of leaving out migrants from any country f in the same continent as f when
predicting ancestry from f (our standard specification), we remove instead migrants from any country
f with correlated migrations. For every pair {f, f } of countries, we compute the correlation between
                               s , I s |f, f . If this correlation is above a 0.5 threshold and is
migration from f and f , corr If,d  f ,d

statistically significant at the 5% level, we exclude f from the construction of the pull factor.
   In Column 1 of Appendix Table A5, we present our baseline estimate for comparison; Column 2
presents estimates if we exclude foreign countries with correlated migration patterns; and Column 3



                                                   31
presents estimates if we calculate the pull factor based only upon European migration. Our first-stage
F -statistics remain strong, and none of the five second stage estimates (Charity 1 donations indicator,
Charity 1 number of donations, Charity 2 donations indicator, Charity 2 number of donations, and
Charity 2 dollar value of donations) are substantially smaller or less precisely estimated under these
alternative specifications. Indeed, the point estimates in most specifications are slightly larger.


Country leave-outs Appendix Table A6 instead explores the robustness of our main finding to
removing specific subsets of countries. The organization of the table is similar to table A5, with the
five panels corresponding to the five different outcomes across the two datasets and the first column
repeating our baseline specification. The second column removes all Arab countries. The third column
removes Hispanic countries. We remove both Arab and Hispanic countries in the fourth column, and
in the fifth column, we remove all (non-Arab) African countries: to the extent that communities
of sub-Saharan African ancestry may be perceived as similar to African-American communities, the
effect of exposure to those communities on altruism may be different than for other minority groups.
Overall, while the coefficient estimates do meaningfully change across these five exclusion criteria,
they remain economically large and, with the exception of the Charity 2 estimates when we remove
African countries, statistically significant at least at the 10% level. We conclude that while the effect
of exposure on altruism may vary between different foreign ancestries (as our results on the interaction
with cultural distance in Table 8 below also suggest), no specific group of countries drives the overall
effect.


Standard errors Throughout our dyadic analyses of charitable donations, we cluster standard errors
at the foreign country level in order to account for the possibility of within-destination correlation in
donation patterns. In Appendix Table A7, we present the standard errors associated with five other
possible clustering choices: robust standard errors, clustering at the domestic county level, clustering
at the domestic state level, two-way clustering by foreign country and domestic county, and two-way
clustering by foreign country and domestic state. The standard errors change little and our estimates
remain statistically significant under every choice; indeed, the table reveals that clustering at the
foreign country level is one of the most conservative choices across all outcomes.

5.4       Heterogeneity

Finally, we examine whether the effects of exposure are magnified or weakened by various measures
of cultural proximity. On one hand, we might expect that the effects would be stronger for more
culturally proximate countries: people with ancestry from such countries may be more integrated and


                                                   32
thus may lead natives to donate more. On the other hand, treatment effects may be stronger for more
culturally distant countries: given lower awareness about events in these countries and lower base rates
of altruism (Alesina et al., 2005), contact with people with ancestry from culturally distant countries
may have a disproportionately large effect on natives' knowledge and altruism.
       To investigate patterns of heterogeneity, we estimate an augmented version of (10),


  Donationst                 t                 t
           d,f = IHS Ancestryd,f + IHS Ancestryd,f × Distance Measured,f

                                             + µDistance Measured,f + t + d + f + Controlst
                                                                                          d,f +
                                                                                                                    t
                                                                                                                    d,f ,   (11)

where we again instrument ancestry using (3) and the interaction of ancestry with the distance measure
by the interactions of each instrument from (3) with the distance measure. We are interested in the
parameter  on the interaction between exposure to foreign ancestry and various measures of the
distance from d to f .
       Table 8 presents results, again focusing on the intensive margin (the number of donations from
county d to country f in quarter t).38 We consider the geographic logged distance between the United
States and country f in Column (2), the genetic distance in Column (3), the linguistic distance in
Column (4), and the religious distance in Column (5) (Spolaore and Wacziarg, 2016).
       We first note that the estimated direct effect of ancestry  remains relatively stable and statistically
significant whether or not we control for the interaction between ancestry and distance (Column 1
versus Columns 2­5). This is reassuring, and suggests our results are not driven by specific countries
which may be more or less dissimilar to US counties. Second, our results suggest that the positive
effect of exposure on altruism is stronger for countries which are genetically more dissimilar (Column
3): the interaction of IHS(Ancestry) with genetic distance is statistically significant at the 5% level in
both Charity 1 and Charity 2. We cautiously interpret this result as suggestive evidence that exposure
to local populations whose physical appearance may be more dissimilar to that of the majority local
population has a stronger (positive) effect on altruism.39 We find limited evidence that physical,
linguistic, or religious distance play a role in shaping the effect of exposure.
       We conclude from this exploration that exposure may reduce the perceived distance between local
residents and foreigners, and that this effect may partly explain why exposure to neighbors of foreign
ancestry induces more altruism towards foreigners. These results relate to findings by Fouka et al.
(2020a) and Fouka et al. (2020b) indicating that perceptions of relative distance to an out-group might
  38
    Results for the other three outcomes are similar and are available upon request.
  39
    These results replicate in our alternative ancestry shares functional form (Appendix Table C8), but only for Charity
1. While the interaction of percent ancestry with genetic distance is positive in the Charity 2 dataset, it is not statistically
significant at the 10% level.



                                                              33
shape natives' attitudes toward that group.


6    Conclusion

In this paper, we examine the effect of decades-long exposure to individuals of foreign descent on atti-
tudes, political preferences, and altruism toward them, exploiting exogenous variation in the ancestral
composition of US counties generated by historical "push" and "pull" factors in immigration alongside
large-scale cross-county datasets on implicit and explicit prejudice, political preferences, and charita-
ble donations. Beginning with a detailed analysis of beliefs about and behavior toward Arab-Muslims,
we find that long-run exposure to Arab-Muslims leads to more positive stated attitudes and lower
implicit prejudice, lower support for the "Muslim Ban" and for Donald Trump, and greater charitable
donations to Arab countries. We provide suggestive evidence that greater personal contact with and
greater knowledge of Arab-Muslims may be important mechanisms underlying these effects. Finally,
we generalize our analysis to show that greater exposure to any foreign ancestry causes greater al-
truism toward that ancestry, with these effects particularly strong for ancestries that are genetically
more distant.
    Our results suggest several directions for further research. First, our goal in this paper is to assess
the effects of long-term exposure, intentionally aggregating across different types of interactions and
time periods (e.g. periods of economic growth vs. contraction, periods where international conflicts
are more or less salient, etc.). However, several aspects of heterogeneity deserve closer attention. For
example, are the effects of exposure on altruism muted -- or even reversed -- when local economic
conditions are poor and out-groups may be seen as competitors for scarce jobs? Second, our results on
implicit and explicit prejudice, political preferences, contact, and knowledge focus on Arab-Muslims.
This is a sizeable group which has faced increasing discrimination and political hostility in recent years,
but not all results may generalize to other minorities, such Latinos, East Asians, or South Asians --
particularly given the very different positive and negative stereotypes associated with these groups.
Finally, how do horizontal and vertical transmission of beliefs about immigrant groups -- for example,
transmission from neighbor to neighbor or from parents to children -- mediate the effects of exposure?




                                                    34
References

Abdelkader, E. (2016): "When Islamophobia Turns Violent: The 2016 US Presidential Elections,"
  Report, The Bridge Initiative, Georgetown University.

Alesina, A., M. Carlana, E. L. Ferrara, and P. Pinotti (2018a): "Revealing Stereotypes:
  Evidence from Immigrants in Schools," Working Paper 25333, National Bureau of Economic Re-
  search.

Alesina, A., P. Giuliano, and N. Nunn (2013): "On the Origins of Gender Roles: Women and
  the Plough," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128, 469­530.

Alesina, A., E. Glaeser, and B. Sacerdote (2005): "Work and Leisure in the United States
  and Europe: Why so Different?" NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 20, 1­64.

Alesina, A., A. Miano, and S. Stantcheva (2018b): "Immigration and Redistribution," Working
  Paper 24733, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Allport, G. W. (1954): The Nature of Prejudice, Addison-Wesley Pubishing Company.

Andrews, I. (2016): "Conditional Linear Combination Tests for Weakly Identified Models," Econo-
  metrica, 84, 2155­2182.

Angrist, J. D. and J.-S. Pischke (2009): Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricist's Com-
  panion, Princeton university press.

Arkolakis, C., M. Peters, and S. K. Lee (2020): "European Immigrants and the United States'
  Rise to the Technological Frontier," Working Paper, Stanford University.

Audette, N., J. Horowitz, and K. Michelitch (2020): "Personal Narratives Reduce Negative
  Attitudes toward Refugees and Immigrant Outgroups: Evidence from Kenya," Working Paper 1-
  2020, Vanderbilt University.

Bagues, M. and C. Roth (2020): "Interregional Contact and National Identity," Working Paper
  3753981, Social Science Research Network.

Barone, G., A. D'Ignazio, G. de Blasio, and P. Naticchioni (2016): "Mr. Rossi, Mr. Hu
  And Politics­ The Role of Immigration in Shaping Natives' Voting Behavior," Journal of Public
  Economics, 136, 1­13.




                                                35
Bazzi, S., A. Gaduh, A. D. Rothenberg, and M. Wong (2019): "Unity in Diversity? How
  Intergroup Contact Can Foster Nation Building," American Economic Review, 109, 3978­4025.

Becker, S. O. and T. Fetzer (2016): "Does Migration Cause Extreme Voting?" Working Paper
  306, World Bank Policy Research.

                                ¨ llainathan (2005): "Implicit Discrimination," American
Bertrand, M., D. Chugh, and S. Mu
  Economic Review, 95, 94­98.

Beydoun, K. A. (2018): American Islamophobia: Understanding the Roots and Rise of Fear, Uni-
  versity of California Press.

Billings, S. B., E. Chyn, and K. Haggag (forthcoming): "The Long-Run Effects of School Racial
  Diversity on Political Identity," American Economic Review: Insights.

Blanton, H., J. Jaccard, C. Christie, and P. M. Gonzales (2007): "Plausible Assumptions,
  Questionable Assumptions and Post Hoc Rationalizations: Will the Real IAT, Please Stand Up?"
  Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 43, 399­409.

Boisjoly, J., G. J. Duncan, M. Kremer, D. M. Levy, and J. Eccles (2006): "Empathy Or
  Antipathy? The Impact of Diversity," American Economic Review, 96, 1890­1905.

Brunner, B. and A. Kuhn (2018): "Immigration, Cultural Distance And Natives' Attitudes towards
  Immigrants: Evidence from Swiss Voting Results," Kyklos, 71, 28­58.

Burchardi, K. B., T. Chaney, and T. A. Hassan (2019a): "Migrants, Ancestors, and Foreign
  Investments," The Review of Economic Studies, 86, 1448­86.

Burchardi, K. B., T. Chaney, T. A. Hassan, L. Tarquinio, and S. Terry (2019b): "Immi-
  gration, Innovation, and Growth," Tech. rep.

Bursztyn, L., I. K. Haaland, A. Rao, and C. P. Roth (2020): "Disguising Prejudice: Pop-
  ular Rationales as Excuses for Intolerant Expression," Working Paper 27288, National Bureau of
  Economic Research.

Carlana, M. (2019): "Implicit Stereotypes: Evidence from Teachers' Gender Bias," The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 134, 1163­1224.

Carrell, S. E., M. Hoekstra, and J. E. West (2019): "The Impact of College Diversity on
  Behavior Toward Minorities," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 11, 159­82.


                                                 36
Cascio, E. U. and E. G. Lewis (2012): "Cracks in the Melting Pot: Immigration, School Choice,
  and Segregation," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 4, 91­117.

Chernozhukov, V. and C. Hansen (2005): "An IV Model of Quantile Treatment Effects," Econo-
  metrica, 73, 245­261.

Clayton, K., J. Horrillo, and P. M. Sniderman (2020): "The Validity of the IAT and the AMP
  as Measures of Racial Prejudice," Working Paper, Social Science Research Network.

Colussi, T., I. E. Isphording, and N. Pestel (2016): "Minority Salience and Political Extrem-
  ism," Working Paper 10417, IZA-Institute of Labor Economics.

Corno, L., E. La Ferrara, and J. Burns (2019): "Interaction, Stereotypes and Performance:
  Evidence from South Africa," Working Paper W19/03, Institute for Fiscal Studies.

Crawfurd, L. (2020): "Contact and Commitment to Development: Evidence from Quasi-Random
  Missionary Assignments," Kyklos.

Cunningham, W. A., K. J. Preacher, and M. R. Banaji (2001): "Implicit Attitude Measures:
  Consistency, Stability, and Convergent Validity," Psychological Science, 12, 163­170.

Dahl, G. B., A. Kotsadam, and D.-O. Rooth (2020): "Does Integration Change Gender Atti-
  tudes? The Effect of Randomly Assigning Women to Traditionally Male Teams," The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics.

Derenoncourt, E. (2019): "Can You Move to Opportunity? Evidence from the Great Migration,"
  Working paper.

Dill, V. (2013): "Ethnic Concentration And Extreme Right-Wing Voting Behavior in West Ger-
  many," Working Paper 565, German Institute for Economic Research.

Dustmann, C., K. Vasiljeva, and A. Piil Damm (2019): "Refugee Migration And Electoral
  Outcomes," The Review of Economic Studies, 86, 2035­2091.

Egloff, B. and S. C. Schmukle (2002): "Predictive Validity of an Implicit Association Test for
  Assessing Anxiety." Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 83, 1441.

Fetzer, T., L. Hensel, J. Hermle, and C. Roth (2020): "Coronavirus Perceptions and Economic
  Anxiety," The Review of Economics and Statistics, 1­36.




                                                 37
Finseraas, H. and A. Kotsadam (2017): "Does Personal Contact with Ethnic Minorities Affect
  Anti-immigrant Sentiments? Evidence from A Field Experiment," European Journal of Political
  Research, 56, 703­722.

Fouka, V., S. Mazumder, and M. Tabellini (2020a): "Changing In-Group Boundaries: The
  Effect of Immigration on Race Relations in the US," Working Paper 20-100, Harvard Business
  School BGIE Unit.

------ (2020b): "From Immigrants to Americans: Race and Assimilation during The Great Migra-
  tion," Working Paper 14396, Centre for Economic Policy Research.

Friese, M., M. Bluemke, and M. Wanke (2007): "Predicting Voting Behavior with Implicit
  Attitude Measures: The 2002 German Parliamentary Election," Experimental Psychology, 54, 247­
  255.

Giuliano, P. and N. Nunn (2017): "Understanding Cultural Persistence and Change," Review of
  Economic Studies.

Giuliano, P. and A. Spilimbergo (2014): "Growing up in a Recession," The Review of Economic
  Studies, 81, 787­817.

Glover, D., A. Pallais, and W. Pariente (2017): "Discrimination as A Self-fulfilling Prophecy:
  Evidence from French Grocery Stores," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132, 1219­1260.

Greenwald, A. G., D. E. McGhee, and J. L. Schwartz (1998): "Measuring Individual Dif-
  ferences in Implicit Cognition: The Implicit Association Test." Journal of Personality And Social
  Psychology, 74, 1464.

Greenwald, A. G., T. A. Poehlman, E. L. Uhlmann, and M. R. Banaji (2009): "Under-
  standing and using the Implicit Association Test: III. Meta-analysis of predictive validity." Journal
  of personality and social psychology, 97, 17.

Grigorieff, A., C. Roth, and D. Ubfal (2020): "Does Information Change Attitudes Toward
  Immigrants?" Demography, 57, 1117­1143.

Grosjean, P. and R. Khattar (2019): "It's Raining Men! Hallelujah? The Long-Run Conse-
  quences of Male-Biased Sex Ratios," Review of Economic Studies, 86, 723­754.

Halla, M., A. F. Wagner, and J. Zweimuller (2017): "Immigration And Voting for The Far
  Right," Journal of the European Economic Association, 15, 1341­1385.

                                                  38
Kerr, S. P. and W. R. Kerr (2016): Immigrant Entrepreneurship, University of Chicago Press,
  187­249.

Lowe, M. (2020): "Types of Contact: A Field Experiment on Collaborative And Adversarial Caste
  Integration," Working Paper 8089, The Center for Economic Studies.

Lowes, S., N. Nunn, J. A. Robinson, and J. Weigel (2015): "Understanding Ethnic Identity in
  Africa: Evidence from the Implicit Association Test (IAT)," American Economic Review: Papers
  & Proceedings, 105, 340­345.

Lowes, S., N. Nunn, J. A. Robinson, and J. L. Weigel (2017): "The Evolution of Culture and
  Institutions: Evidence From the Kuba Kingdom," Econometrica, 85, 1065­1091.

Malmendier, U. and S. Nagel (2011): "Depression Babies: Do Macroeconomic Experiences Affect
  Risk Taking?" The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126, 373­416.

Mousa, S. (2020): "Building Social Cohesion between Christians and Muslims through Soccer in
  Post-ISIS Iraq," Science, 369, 866­870.

 ¨ ller, K. and C. Schwarz (2018): "Making America Hate Again? Twitter and Hate Crime
Mu
  under Trump," Working paper, University of Warwick.

Paluck, E. L., S. A. Green, and D. P. Green (2018): "The Contact Hypothesis Re-evaluated,"
  Behavioural Public Policy, 1­30.

Paluck, E. L., R. Porat, C. S. Clark, and D. P. Green (2021):                     "Prejudice Re-
  duction:   Progress and Challenges," Annual Review of Psychology, 72, 533­560,          eprint:
  https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-psych-071620-030619.

Pettigrew, T. F. and L. R. Tropp (2006): "A Meta-analytic Test of Intergroup Contact Theory."
  Journal of Personality And Social Psychology, 90, 751.

Rao, G. (2019): "Familiarity Does Not Breed Contempt: Generosity, Discrimination, And Diversity
  in Delhi Schools," American Economic Review, 109, 774­809.

Rooth, D.-O. (2011): "Work Out Or Out of Work­The Labor Market Return to Physical Fitness
  And Leisure Sports Activities," Labour Economics, 18, 399­409.

Scacco, A. and S. S. Warren (2018): "Can Social Contact Reduce Prejudice And Discrimination?
  Evidence from A Field Experiment in Nigeria," American Political Science Review, 112, 654­677.


                                                39
Schimmack, U. (2019): "The Implicit Association Test: A Method in Search of A Construct,"
  Perspectives on Psychological Science.

Schindler, D. and M. Westcott (2020): "Shocking Racial Attitudes: Black G.I.s in Europe,"
  The Review of Economic Studies.

Sequeira, S., N. Nunn, and N. Qian (2020): "Immigrants and the Making of America," Review
  of Economic Studies, 87, 382­419.

Spolaore, E. and R. Wacziarg (2016): "War and Relatedness," Review of Economics and Statis-
  tics, 98, 925­939.

Steinmayr, A. (2016): "Exposure to Refugees And Voting for The Far-Right:(Unexpected) Results
  from Austria," Working Paper 9790, Institute for the Study of Labor.

Sun, L. (2018): "Implementing Valid Two-Step Identification-Robust Confidence Sets for Linear
  Instrumental-Variables Models," The Stata Journal, 18, 803­825.

Tabellini, M. (2020): "Gifts of the Immigrants, Woes of the Natives: Lessons from the Age of Mass
  Migration," The Review of Economic Studies, 87, 454­486.

      ¨ nder, N. and H. Voth (2012): "Persecution Perpetuated: The Medieval Origins of Anti-
Voigtla
  Semitic Violence in Nazi Germany," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127, 1339­1392.




                                               40
Tables and Figures

         Table 1: Effect of Arab Ancestry on Attitudes toward Arab-Muslims

                                    (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)           (7)
                                    OLS           IV            IV             IV             IV             IV            IV
  Panel A: Project Implicit                   Score on Arab-Muslim IAT (std., higher score = less prejudiced)

  IHS(Arab ancestry)              0.019         0.075        0.077          0.107          0.107          0.091         0.091
                                   (0.007)      (0.030)      (0.035)         (0.032)        (0.035)        (0.030)       (0.032)
  Age                                                       -0.015         -0.015         -0.015        -0.015         -0.015
                                                             (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.002)       (0.002)        (0.002)
  Age squared                                               0.0001         0.0001         0.0001         0.0001         0.0001
                                                            (0.00003)      (0.00003)      (0.00003)      (0.00003)      (0.00003)
  Male                                                      -0.128         -0.128         -0.128        -0.127         -0.127
                                                             (0.024)        (0.024)        (0.024)       (0.024)        (0.024)
  IHS(non-Euro ancestry)                                                                   -0.022
                                                                                           (0.021)
  Avg. race IAT score                                                                                     0.021
                                                                                                           (0.007)
  2012 Rep. vote share                                                                                                  -0.128
                                                                                                                         (0.054)
  AP F -statistic                    --          12.87         10.09          10.44          12.02         9.962          9.986
  Weak IV-robust p-value             --         < 0.05        < 0.05         < 0.01         < 0.01        < 0.01         < 0.01
  Observations                     58,987       58,987        58,247         58,220         58,220        58,220         58,220
  Panel B: Project Implicit                  Warmth toward Arab-Muslims (std., higher score = more favorable)

  IHS(Arab ancestry)              0.039        0.142         0.135          0.159          0.150          0.125         0.126
                                   (0.010)      (0.029)       (0.035)        (0.035)        (0.037)        (0.030)       (0.033)
  AP F -statistic                    --          13.09         10.14          10.53          12.06         10.05          10.06
  Weak IV-robust p-value             --         < 0.01        < 0.10         < 0.01         < 0.01        < 0.01         < 0.01
  Observations                     58,796       58,796        58,068         58,040         58,040        58,040         58,040
  Panel C: Nationscape                        Favorability toward Muslims (std., higher score = more favorable)

  IHS(Arab ancestry)              0.029        0.095         0.044          0.051          0.046          0.043          0.044
                                   (0.006)      (0.021)      (0.020)        (0.021)        (0.021)        (0.021)        (0.019)
  AP F -statistic                    --         49.46         20.42          19.32          18.90          18.00          19.42
  Weak IV-robust p-value             --        < 0.01        < 0.05         < 0.01         < 0.01         < 0.05         < 0.05
  Observations                     187,435     187,435       187,435        187,435        187,435        187,435        187,435
  State FE                           No           No            Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes
  County-level demographics          No           No            No             Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes
  Notes: The table presents coefficient estimates from regressions at the individual level. The dependent variable in Panel
 A is the score on the Arab-Muslim IAT (from Project Implicit); the dependent variable in Panel B is the stated warmth
 toward Arab-Muslims (also from Project Implicit); and the dependent variable in Panel C is the stated favorability toward
 Muslims (from Nationscape). All three measures are scaled to take mean zero and standard deviation one. In Panels A and
 B, only respondents who self-reported their reason for taking the Project Implicit test as "Assigned for work," "Assigned for
 school," or "Assigned for discussion group" are included. The main variable of interest is the 2010 IHS-transformed population
 with ancestry from Arab League countries. We include {If,     t       (I t      /I t    )}              and the first five principal
                                                                 -r (d) -c(f ),d -c(f ) t=1880,...,2010
 components of the higher-order interactions of push and pull factors as excluded instruments. All specifications control for
 log 2010 population. County-level demographic controls include the 2010 population density, the share of the 1970 prime-age
 population with a high school education, and the share of the 1970 prime-age population with a college education. Standard
 errors are given in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered at the county level in Panels A and B and are clustered at the
 congressional district level in Panel C. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                                 41
                                                Table 2: Effect of Arab Ancestry on Political Preferences

                                        (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)             (5)           (6)            (7)            (8)            (9)            (10)
                                        OLS            IV             IV              IV              IV            OLS            IV             IV             IV              IV
      Panel A:                                                                                  Support for the Muslim Ban
                                                                       CCES                                                                   Nationscape

      IHS(Arab ancestry)             -0.033        -0.097         -0.069          -0.074          -0.053         -0.007        -0.039         -0.044          -0.032          -0.030
                                      (0.005)       (0.034)        (0.023)         (0.025)         (0.019)        (0.003)       (0.012)        (0.013)         (0.014)         (0.014)
      Age                                                          0.016           0.016           0.016                                       0.017           0.017          0.017
                                                                    (0.001)         (0.001)         (0.001)                                     (0.001)         (0.001)        (0.001)
      Age squared                                                 -0.0001        -0.0001         -0.0001                                     -0.0001         -0.0001         -0.0001
                                                                   (0.00001)      (0.00001)       (0.00001)                                   (0.00001)       (0.00001)       (0.00001)
      Male                                                          0.026           0.030          0.031                                       0.138           0.135          0.136
                                                                    (0.015)         (0.015)        (0.015)                                      (0.013)         (0.013)        (0.013)
      2012 Rep. vote share                                                                         0.375                                                                      0.088
                                                                                                    (0.030)                                                                    (0.024)
      AP F -statistic                    --           14.98          10.15           8.674          8.805            --           49.18         20.52          19.95            20.23
42




      Weak IV-robust p-value             --          < 0.01         < 0.05          < 0.01          < 0.05           --          < 0.10         < 0.10         < 0.05          < 0.05
      Observations                     56,814        56,814         56,814          56,814          56,729         58,183        58,183         58,183         58,183          58,183
      Panel B:                                                                                    Voted for Trump in 2016
                                                                       CCES                                                                   Nationscape

      IHS(Arab ancestry)             -0.031        -0.110          -0.068         -0.092          -0.064         -0.019        -0.064           -0.017         -0.028          -0.022
                                      (0.005)       (0.037)         (0.029)        (0.030)         (0.021)        (0.004)       (0.015)         (0.015)        (0.016)         (0.014)
      AP F -statistic                    --           15.03          9.890           8.545          8.646           --           51.11          20.50           19.45           19.59
      Weak IV-robust p-value             --          < 0.01         < 0.05          < 0.01          < 0.01          --          < 0.01         > 0.10          < 0.10          > 0.10
      Observations                     77,800        77,800         77,800          77,800          77,679        170,190       170,190        170,190         170,190         170,190
      State FE                           No            No             Yes             Yes            Yes             No            No             Yes            Yes             Yes
      County-level demographics          No            No             No              Yes            Yes             No            No             No             Yes             Yes
      Notes: The table presents coefficient estimates from regressions at the individual level. The dependent variable in Panel A is stated support for the Muslim Ban, with Columns
     1­5 using data from the CCES and Columns 6­10 using data from Nationscape. The dependent variable in Panel B is self-reported Trump votership, with Columns 1­5 again using
     data from the CCES and Columns 6­10 data from Nationscape. The main variable of interest is the 2010 IHS-transformed population with ancestry from Arab League countries.
     We include {If,t       (I t     /I t   )}               and the first five principal components of the higher-order interactions of push and pull factors as excluded instruments. All
                      -r (d) -c(f ),d -c(f ) t=1880,...,2010
     specifications control for log 2010 population. County-level demographic controls include 2010 population density, share of 1970 prime-age population with high school education,
     and share of 1970 prime-age population with college education as controls. Standard errors are given in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered at the county level in Columns
     1­5 and at the congressional district level in Columns 6­10. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
Table 3: Effect of Ancestry on Donations, Pooling Arab Countries (European-
Ethnicity Donors Only)

                                              (1)              (2)             (3)               (4)
                                              OLS              IV              IV                IV
            Panel A: Charity 1                Donations (dummy)             (mean = 0.011, sd = 0.106)

            IHS(Arab ancestry)             0.005            0.076           0.078            0.085
                                           (0.0005)          (0.009)         (0.012)          (0.013)
            AP F -statistic          --                      11.99           7.424             5.539
            Weak IV-robust p-value   --                     < 0.01          < 0.01            < 0.01
            Observations           168,102                  168,102         168,102           168,102
            Panel B: Charity 1                  IHS(# donations)          (mean = 0.017, sd = 0.180)

            IHS(Arab ancestry)             0.008            0.122           0.122            0.134
                                            (0.001)          (0.017)         (0.021)          (0.023)
            Panel C: Charity 2                Donations (dummy)             (mean = 0.041, sd = 0.198)

            IHS(Arab ancestry)             0.021            0.249           0.248            0.290
                                            (0.001)          (0.023)         (0.028)          (0.034)
            AP F -statistic          --                      8.996           5.865             5.930
            Weak IV-robust p-value   --                      < 0.01          < 0.01            < 0.01
            Observations           99,616                    99,616          99,616            99,616
            Panel D: Charity 2                  IHS(# donations)          (mean = 0.053, sd = 0.296)

            IHS(Arab ancestry)             0.032            0.451           0.420            0.506
                                            (0.003)          (0.061)         (0.068)          (0.079)
            Panel E: Charity 2                  IHS($ donations)          (mean = 0.208, sd = 1.063)

            IHS(Arab ancestry)             0.116            1.420           1.362            1.606
                                            (0.009)          (0.152)         (0.175)          (0.203)
            Demographic controls              No               No              Yes              Yes
            State FE                          No               No              No               Yes
            Quarter FE                        Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes
             Notes: The table presents coefficient estimates from regressions at the county-quarter level.
           Only donations to Arab League countries from donors with European-ethnicity names are
           included. The dependent variable in Panels A and C is a dummy for the presence of at
           least one donation from the county to any Arab League country in a quarter. The de-
           pendent variable in Panels B and D is the IHS-transformed number of donations from the
           county to Arab League countries in a quarter. The dependent variable in Panel E is the
           IHS-transformed total value of donations from the county to Arab League countries in a
           quarter. The main variable of interest is the IHS-transformed population with ancestry
           from Arab countries: year 2000 for Charity 1 and year 2010 for Charity 2. In all columns,
           we include {If,t       (I t      /I t     )}             and the first five principal components
                            -r (d) -c(f ),d -c(f ) t=1880,...,2000
           of the higher-order interactions of push and pull factors as excluded instruments, addition-
           ally including {If,t        (I t     /I t    )}      for Charity 2. All specifications control for
                                -r (d) -c(f ),d -c(f ) t=2010
           log 2010 population. All specifications control for quarter fixed effects. Columns 3­4 include
           2010 population density, share of 1970 prime-age population with high school education,
           and share of 1970 prime-age population with college education. Column 4 includes state
           fixed effects. We suppress the first-stage F -statistic and the number of observations in Panel
           B because they are identical to those in Panel A; we likewise suppress these statistics in
           Panels D and E because they are identical to those in Panel C. Standard errors are given
           in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered at the county level. *, **, and *** denote
           statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                          43
        Table 4: Mechanisms: Contact with and Knowledge of Arab-Muslims

                                    (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)           (5)          (6)         (7)
 Panel A: Survey                                               Contact with Arab-Muslims
                                Restaurant       Friends    Workplace       Neighbors                  Any (2­4)

 IHS(Arab ancestry)              0.052            0.025       0.088          0.090          0.126       0.101        0.093
                                  (0.005)        (0.024)      (0.037)         (0.025)       (0.037)     (0.043)       (0.030)
 Dep. var. mean                   0.439          0.098        0.286           0.198          0.396       0.396       0.396
 Dep. var. std. dev               0.496          0.297        0.452           0.398          0.489       0.489       0.489
 AP F -statistic                  7.743          7.743        7.743           7.399          7.399       5.925       6.811
 Weak IV-robust p-value           < 0.05         < 0.05       < 0.05          < 0.05         < 0.01      < 0.10      < 0.10
 Observations                     5,189          5,189        5,189           5,189          5,189       5,189       5,189
 Panel B: Survey                                               Knowledge of Arab-Muslims
                              Subservice/war     Pillars     Ramadan      Pop. accuracy                Index (2­4)

 IHS(Arab ancestry)             -0.139          0.392         0.090          2.791          0.342       0.259         0.214
                                 (0.053)         (0.148)      (0.039)        (1.086)         (0.104)    (0.121)      (0.138)
 Dep. var. mean                   0.590          4.493        0.764           -15.057        0.000       0.000       0.000
 Dep. var. std. dev               0.758          1.558        0.425            13.612        1.000       1.000       1.000
 AP F -statistic                  7.743          7.743        7.743            7.399         7.399       5.925       6.811
 Weak IV-robust p-value           < 0.05         < 0.05       < 0.05          < 0.05         < 0.01      < 0.10      > 0.10
 Observations                     5,014          5,014        5,014            4,724         4,724       4,724       4,724
 Individual demographics            Yes            Yes            Yes          Yes            Yes         Yes          Yes
 County-level demographics          No             No             No           No             No          Yes          Yes
 Political controls                 No             No             No           No             No          No           Yes

 Notes: The table presents coefficient estimates from regressions at the individual level. In Panel A, the dependent
variable in Column 1 is an indicator for whether the respondent reports having ever eaten at a Middle Eastern
restaurant; the dependent variables in Columns 2­4 are indicators for whether the respondent has an Arab-
Muslim friend, workplace acquaintance, or neighbor, respectively; and the dependent variable in Columns 5­7 is
an indicator taking value one if any of the indicators in Columns 2­4 take value one. In Panel B, the dependent
variable in Column 1 takes value 0 if the respondent answered that neither "holy war against non-believers" and
"subservience of women and children to men" are among the Five Pillars of Islam, value 1 if the respondent
answered that one of these two are among the Five Pillars; and value 2 if the respondent answered that both
are among the Five Pillars. The dependent variable in Column 2 is the respondent's total score on the "pillars"
question (ranging from 0 to 7). The dependent variable in Column 3 is an indicator for whether the respondent
correctly answered the Ramadan question. The dependent variable in Column 4 is the negative absolute value
of the difference between the respondent's guess as to the size of the Muslim population in the US and the
actual size of the Muslim population in the US. Respondents with invalid guesses (< 0% or > 100%) were
dropped. The dependent variable in Columns 5­7 is constructed by scaling the dependent variables in Columns
2­4 to mean zero and standard deviation one, summing these three scaled values, and renormalizing. The main
variable of interest is the 2010 IHS-transformed population with ancestry from Arab League countries. We include
   t          t          t
{If, -r (d) (I-c(f ),d /I-c(f ) )}t=1880,...,2010 and the first five principal components of the higher-order interactions of
push and pull factors as excluded instruments. All specifications control for log 2010 population. Individual
demographics include age, male, age squared, and age × male. County-level demographics include the 2010
population density, the share of 1970 prime-age population with high school education, and the share of 1970
prime-age population with college education as controls. Political controls include both controls for individual
voting in 2012 and the 2012 county Republican vote share. Standard errors are given in parentheses. Standard
errors are clustered at the county level. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
levels, respectively.




                                                             44
                                          Table 5: White Flight

                                              (1)              (2)           (3)            (4)          (5)
                                          Pooled Arab        C1 Arab       C2 Arab          C1           C2
      Panel A: 1980 cross-section                             Selective white flight index

      IHS(Ancestry)                          2.079           3.910         4.205          0.384         0.007
                                              (0.082)         (0.659)       (0.775)      (0.284)       (0.136)
      Dep. var. mean                           8.665           8.662        8.717         8.148         7.980
      Dep. var. s.d.                           1.452           1.575         1.549        2.282         2.433
      Observations                             3,084          30,840        49,344       144,948       431,760
      Panel B: 1980-2000 panel                                Selective white flight index

      IHS(Ancestry)                          1.764           3.019         3.290          0.302         0.007
                                              (0.043)         (0.462)       (0.559)      (0.240)       (0.126)
      Dep. var. mean                           9.334           9.278         9.295        8.841        8.760
      Dep. var. s.d.                           1.529           1.676         1.646        2.198        2.241
      Observations                             9,333          93,340        149,344      401,138     1,225,360
45




      Domestic state FE                         Yes             Yes           Yes          No            No
      Domestic county FE                        No              No            No           Yes           Yes
      Foreign country FE                        No              Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes
      Notes: The table presents coefficient estimates from regressions at the country-county level (Panel
     A) and the country-county-decade level (Panel B). The dependent variable is the selective White
     flight index, defined in Section 3.3. Panel A presents a cross-sectional regression for the year 1980,
     while Panel B presents a panel regression for the years 1980, 1990, and 2000. The endogenous vari-
     able in Column 1 is the IHS-transformed population with ancestry from Arab League countries;
     the endogenous variable in Columns 2­5 is the IHS-transformed population with ancestry from
                                                       t          t          t
     country d. The excluded instruments include {If,    -r (d) (I-c(f ),d /I-c(f ) )}t=1880,...,1980 and the first
     five principal components of the higher-order interactions. Columns 2­3 limit the sample to do-
     mestic county­foreign country pairs in which the foreign country is in the Arab League, separately
     for Charity 1 (C1) and Charity 2 (C2). Columns 4­5 include the full samples of county-country
     pairs from Charity 1 (C1) and Charity 2 (C2). Standard errors are given in parentheses. Standard
     errors are robust in Columns 1­4 and are clustered at the destination country level in Columns
     5­8. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
Table 6: Effect of Ancestry on Donations, Arab Countries and European-Ethnicity
Donors Only

                                       (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)           (5)            (6)
                                       OLS             IV              IV             IV            IV             IV
     Panel A: Charity 1                            Donations (dummy)             (mean = 0.005, sd = 0.068)

     IHS(Ancestry)                   0.004          0.009           0.010          0.010         0.008          0.013
                                     (0.0001)       (0.0004)         (0.001)        (0.001)       (0.001)        (0.001)
     AP F -statistic                   --            587.3           343.8          246.6         243.7          115.1
     Observations                    719,289        719,289         718,602        714,022       714,022        714,022
     Panel B: Charity 1                             IHS(# donations)            (mean = 0.006, sd = 0.091)

     IHS(Ancestry)                   0.006          0.016           0.018          0.017         0.015          0.024
                                     (0.0002)        (0.001)         (0.001)        (0.001)       (0.001)        (0.003)

     Panel C: Charity 2                            Donations (dummy)             (mean = 0.006, sd = 0.076)

     IHS(Ancestry)                   0.007          0.015           0.012          0.009         0.008          0.023
                                     (0.0001)       (0.0004)        (0.0004)       (0.0004)      (0.0004)        (0.001)
     AP F -statistic                    --          1164.9            822.1         662.7         656.9          227.7
     Observations                   1,030,248      1,030,248        1,029,264     1,022,704     1,022,704      1,022,704
     Panel D: Charity 2                             IHS(# donations)            (mean = 0.006, sd = 0.095)

     IHS(Ancestry)                   0.008          0.019           0.016          0.011         0.010          0.031
                                     (0.0001)        (0.001)         (0.001)        (0.001)       (0.001)        (0.002)

     Panel E: Charity 2                              IHS($ donations)           (mean = 0.028, sd = 0.387)

     IHS(Ancestry)                   0.034          0.074           0.061          0.043         0.038          0.118
                                      (0.001)        (0.002)         (0.002)        (0.002)       (0.002)        (0.006)

     Distance controls                  No             No             Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
     Demographic controls               No             No             No             Yes            Yes            Yes
     Origin state FE                    No             No             No             No             Yes            Yes
     Destination country FE             No             No             No             No             No             Yes
     Quarter FE                         Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
      Notes: The table presents coefficient estimates from regressions at the county-country-quarter level. Only dona-
    tions to Arab League countries from donors with European-ethnicity names are included. The dependent variable
    in Panels A and C is a dummy for the presence of at least one donation from destination to origin in a quarter. The
    dependent variable in Panels B and D is the IHS-transformed number of donations from destination to origin in a
    quarter. The dependent variable in Panel E is the IHS-transformed total value of donations from destination to ori-
    gin in a quarter. The main variable of interest is the IHS-transformed population with ancestry from country d: year
    2000 for Charity 1 and year 2010 for Charity 2. In all columns, we include {If, t       (I t     /I t    )}
                                                                                      -r (d) -c(f ),d -c(f ) t=1880,...,2000
    and the first five principal components of the higher-order interactions of push and pull factors as excluded instru-
    ments, additionally including {If, t       (I t     /I t   )}       for Charity 2. All specifications control for quarter
                                         -r (d) -c(f ),d -c(f ) t=2010
    fixed effects. All specifications control for log 2010 population. Columns 3­6 include logged county-country distance
    and latitude difference. Columns 4­6 includes the 2010 population density, the share of 1970 prime-age population
    with high school education, and the share of 1970 prime-age population with college education. Columns 5­6
    include origin state fixed effects. Column 6 includes destination country fixed effects. We suppress the first-stage
    F -statistic and the number of observations in Panel B because they are identical to those in Panel A; we likewise
    suppress these statistics in Panels D and E because they are identical to those in Panel C. Standard errors are
    given in parentheses. Standard errors are robust. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and
    1% levels, respectively.




                                                               46
Table 7: Effect of Ancestry on Donations, All Countries, Different Populations of
Donors

                                                      (1)                      (2)                           (3)
                                                   Europeans             Other continents                    All
              Panel A: Charity 1                                       Donations (dummy)

              IHS(Ancestry)                          0.023                     0.023                     0.024
                                                      (0.007)                   (0.008)                   (0.008)
              Dep. var. mean                          0.007                      0.007                    0.008
              Dep. var. s.d.                          0.082                      0.086                    0.089
              First-stage F -statistic                119.0                      118.9                    118.8
              Observations                          2,195,559                  2,195,559                2,195,559
              Panel B: Charity 1                                         IHS(# donations)

              IHS(Ancestry)                          0.058                     0.059                     0.062
                                                      (0.015)                   (0.016)                   (0.016)
              Dep. var. mean                           0.009                      0.010                    0.011
              Dep. var. s.d.                           0.128                      0.137                    0.144
              Panel C: Charity 2                                       Donations (dummy)

              IHS(Ancestry)                          0.025                      0.026                     0.026
                                                     (0.011)                    (0.012)                   (0.012)
              Dep. var. mean                          0.010                      0.011                    0.012
              Dep. var. s.d.                           0.101                     0.105                    0.107
              First-stage F -statistic                1202.4                    1169.3                   1175.4
              Observations                          9,482,679                  9,482,679                9,482,679
              Panel D: Charity 2                                         IHS(# donations)

              IHS(Ancestry)                          0.052                      0.057                     0.058
                                                     (0.022)                    (0.024)                   (0.025)
              Dep. var. mean                           0.013                      0.014                    0.015
              Dep. var. s.d.                           0.145                      0.153                    0.158
              Panel E: Charity 2                                          IHS($ donations)

              IHS(Ancestry)                          0.153                      0.163                     0.163
                                                     (0.069)                    (0.073)                   (0.075)
              Dep. var. mean                           0.051                      0.055                    0.058
              Dep. var. s.d.                           0.526                      0.548                    0.564
              Origin county FE                          Yes                        Yes                       Yes
              Destination country FE                    Yes                        Yes                       Yes
              Quarter FE                                Yes                        Yes                       Yes
              Notes: The table presents coefficient estimates from regressions at the county-country-quarter level.
             Donations are dropped when the first-best or second-best classification of their name's ethnicity
             matches the receiving country. Column 1 additionally limits the sample to European donors, while
             Column 2 additionally limits the sample to donors whose name is matched to a country on a different
             continent than the receiving country. The dependent variable in Panels A and C is a dummy for
             the presence of at least one donation from destination to origin in a quarter. The dependent vari-
             able in Panels B and D is the IHS-transformed number of donations from destination to origin in
             a quarter. The dependent variable in Panel E is the IHS-transformed total value of donations from
             destination to origin in a quarter. The main variable of interest is the IHS-transformed population
             with ancestry from country d: year 2000 for Charity 1 and year 2010 for Charity 2. In all columns,
                             t           t         t
             we include {If,   -r (d) (I-c(f ),d /I-c(f ) )}t=1880,...,2000 and the first five principal components of the
             higher-order interactions of push and pull factors as excluded instruments, additionally including
                t          t           t
             {If, -r (d) (I-c(f ),d /I-c(f ) )}t=2010 for Charity 2. All specifications control for origin county, desti-
             nation country, and quarter fixed effects. We suppress the first-stage F -statistic and the number of
             observations in Panel B because they are identical to those in Panel A; we likewise suppress these
             statistics in Panels D and E because they are identical to those in Panel C. Standard errors are given
             in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered at the destination country level. *, **, and *** denote
             statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
                                                                 47
            Table 8: Heterogeneity by Physical and Cultural Distance

                                                    (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)
 Panel A: Charity 1                                                         IHS(# donations)

 IHS(Ancestry)                                   0.058            0.032         0.029          0.022           0.024
                                                  (0.015)         (0.013)        (0.005)        (0.008)         (0.007)
 IHS(Ancestry) × physical distance                                -0.001
                                                                  (0.002)
 IHS(Ancestry) × genetic distance                                               0.010
                                                                                (0.004)
 IHS(Ancestry) × linguistic distance                                                            -0.001
                                                                                                (0.003)
 IHS(Ancestry) × religious distance                                                                            -0.005
                                                                                                               (0.004)
 Observations                                   2,195,559        2,195,559     2,038,509      2,126,457       2,126,457
 Panel B: Charity 2                                                         IHS(# donations)

 IHS(Ancestry)                                    0.052           0.071         0.065          0.051           0.046
                                                  (0.022)         (0.031)       (0.026)         (0.018)        (0.025)
 IHS(Ancestry) × physical distance                                 0.006
                                                                  (0.004)
 IHS(Ancestry) × genetic distance                                               0.015
                                                                                (0.006)
 IHS(Ancestry) × linguistic distance                                                             0.010
                                                                                                (0.022)
 IHS(Ancestry) × religious distance                                                                             0.005
                                                                                                               (0.012)
 Observations                                   9,482,679        9,482,679     8,647,173      9,102,618       8,706,852
 Origin county FE                                   Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes
 Destination country FE                             Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes
 Quarter FE                                         Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes
 Notes: The table presents coefficient estimates from regressions at the county-country-quarter level.
Only donors with a European-ethnicity name are kept. The dependent variable in both panels is the
IHS-transformed number of donations. The main variable of interest is the IHS-transformed population
with ancestry from country d -- year 2000 for Charity 1 and year 2010 for Charity 2 -- and the inter-
action of this variable with a measure of distance: log physical distance in Column 2, genetic distance
in Column 3, linguistic distance in Column 4, and religious distance in Column 5 (all distance measures
                                                                t          t          t
are standardized). In all specifications, we include {If,         -r (d) (I-c(f ),d /I-c(f ) )}t=1880,...,2000 and the first
five principal components of the higher-order interactions of push and pull factors as excluded instru-
                                  t          t          t
ments, additionally including {If,  -r (d) (I-c(f ),d /I-c(f ) )}t=2010 for Charity 2; we also include as excluded
instruments the interaction of the corresponding distance measure with all of the excluded instruments
listed above. All specifications control for origin, destination, and quarter fixed effects. Standard errors
are given in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered at the origin county level. *, **, and *** denote
statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                            48
Figure 1: Charity 2 donations by origin (top) and destination (bottom)




                                  49
                                  Figure 2: Binned scatter plots: effects on attitudes and political preferences




                          (a) Score on Arab-Muslim IAT (Project Implicit)                         (b) Warmth toward Arab-Muslims (Project Im-
                                                                                                  plicit)
50




                                      (c) Muslim Ban support (CCES)                                           (d) Trump vote in 2016 (CCES)
     Notes: Figure 2 presents binned scatter plots displaying the relationship between the fitted values of IHS(Arab ancestry) and four outcomes: scores on the Arab-Muslim IAT,
     reported warmth toward Arab-Muslims, support for the Muslim Ban, and Trump voting in 2016. The main variable of interest is the 2010 IHS-transformed population with ancestry
     from Arab League countries. We include {If,  t       (I t     /I t    )}              and the first five principal components of the higher-order interactions of push and pull factors
                                                    -r (d) -c(f ),d -c(f ) t=1880,...,2010
     as excluded instruments. We residualize outcomes and instruments by the controls used in Column 3 of Table 1. Red triangles are used to indicate the top and bottom 2.5% of the
     data by fitted values; the red dotted line indicates the regression fit after dropping observations in the top and bottom 2.5% of fitted values. Standard errors are clustered at the
     county level. 95% confidence intervals are reported.
                                                    Figure 3: Binned scatter plots: contact and knowledge




                                 (a) Visited Middle Eastern restaurant                                        (b) Contact with Arab-Muslims
51




                                     (c) Negative beliefs about Islam                                            (d) Knowledge about Islam
     Notes: Figure 3 presents binned scatter plots displaying the relationship between the fitted values of IHS(Arab ancestry) and four outcomes: an indicator taking value one if the
     respondent reports ever visiting a Middle Eastern restaurant, an indicator taking value one if the respondent personally knows an Arab-Muslim friend, neighbor, or colleague; a
     measure of the respondent's negative beliefs about Islam; and an index measuring respondents' knowledge of Islam. The main variable of interest is the 2010 IHS-transformed
     population with ancestry from Arab League countries. We include {If,   t       (I t     /I t   )}               and the first five principal components of the higher-order interactions
                                                                              -r (d) -c(f ),d -c(f ) t=1880,...,2010
     of push and pull factors as excluded instruments. We residualize outcomes and instruments by the controls used in Columns 1­5 of Table 4. Red triangles are used to indicate the
     top and bottom 2.5% of the data by fitted values; the red dotted line indicates the regression fit after dropping observations in the top and bottom 2.5% of fitted values. Standard
     errors are clustered at the county level. 95% confidence intervals are reported.
                                       Figure 4: Binned scatter plots: IHS(# donations), Arab countries only




                                         (a) Charity 1, full sample                               (b) Charity 1, dropping tails of fitted values
52




                                         (c) Charity 2, full sample                               (d) Charity 2, dropping tails of fitted values
     Notes: Figure 4 presents binned scatter plots displaying the relationship between the fitted values of county's population from a given Arab country and the county's IHS-
     transformed number of donations to that country in a given quarter. Panels A and B consider Charity 1 (C1) dataset; Panels C and D consider the Charity 2 (C2) dataset.
     The main variable of interest is the IHS-transformed population with ancestry from country d: year 2000 for Charity 1 (C1) and year 2010 for Charity 2 (C2). We include
       t
     {If,      (I t     /I t   )}               and the first five principal components of the higher-order interactions of push and pull factors as excluded instruments. We residualize
         -r (d) -c(f ),d -c(f ) t=1880,...,2010
     outcomes and instruments by the controls used in Column 6 of Table 6. Panels B and D present regression lines dropping the top and bottom 2.5% of fitted values for each country.
     Standard errors are clustered at the foreign country level. 95% confidence intervals are reported.
                                             Figure 5: Binned scatter plots: IHS(# donations), all countries




                                         (a) Charity 1, full sample                               (b) Charity 1, dropping tails of fitted values
53




                                         (c) Charity 2, full sample                               (d) Charity 2, dropping tails of fitted values
     Notes: Figure 5 presents binned scatter plots displaying the relationship between the fitted values of county's population from a given country and the county's IHS-transformed
     number of donations to that country in a given quarter. Panels A and B consider Charity 1 (C1) dataset; Panels C and D consider the Charity 2 (C2) dataset. The main variable
     of interest is the IHS-transformed population with ancestry from country d: year 2000 for C1 and year 2010 for C2. We include {If,   t       (I t     /I t   )}               and the
                                                                                                                                            -r (d) -c(f ),d -c(f ) t=1880,...,2010
     first five principal components of the higher-order interactions of push and pull factors as excluded instruments. We residualize outcomes and instruments by the controls used in
     Table 7. Panels B and D present regression lines dropping the top and bottom 2.5% of fitted values for each country. Standard errors are clustered at the foreign country level.
     95% confidence intervals are reported.
       Figure 6: Effect of ancestry on donations, by destination country




Notes: Figure 6 presents estimates from split-sample regressions of the IHS-transformed number of donations flowing
from each county to the country in each row, separately by receiving country. The main variable of interest in each row
is the county's IHS-transformed 2010 ancestry from that country. We include {If,  t       (I t     /I t    )}
                                                                                    -r (d) -c(f ),d -c(f ) t=1880,...,2010
and the first five principal components of the higher-order interactions of push and pull factors as excluded instruments.
All specifications control for IHS-transformed 2010 population and time fixed effects. Standard errors are robust. We
report 95% confidence intervals.




                                                           54
     Online Appendix

"The Immigrant Next Door"

    Leonardo Bursztyn

      Thomas Chaney

     Tarek A. Hassan

       Aakaash Rao




            55
A   Additional Tables and Figures

Appendix Figure A1: Charity 1 donations by origin (top) and destination (bottom)




                                       56
                               Appendix Table A1: Summary Statistics

                                                           Obs.       Mean     Std. dev.    Median      Min        Max
 Panel A: County level
 A.1: Ancestry
   2000 Arab ancestry                                      3,112      345.67    2165.36      15.84      0.00    60,834.34
   2000 IHS-transformed Arab ancestry                      3,112       3.67      2.19         3.46      0.00      11.71
   2010 Arab ancestry                                      3,112      446.33    2636.79      21.12      0.00    72,415.13
   2010 IHS-transformed Arab ancestry                      3,112       4.00      2.13         3.74      0.00      11.88
 Panel B: Individual level
 B.1: Project Implicit
   Arab-Muslim IAT score                                  59,862      0.012      0.991       -0.014    -4.123     4.426
   Warmth toward Arab-Muslims                             59,862      0.007      1.002       -0.154    -2.413     2.106
 B.2: Nationscape
   Support for the Muslim Ban                             127,779     0.529      0.499       1.000     0.000        1
   Voted for Trump in 2016                                127,779     0.582      0.493       1.000     0.000        1
   Favorability toward Arab-Muslims                       228,629     -0.126     1.006       0.316     -1.667     1.308
 B.3: CCES
   Support for the Muslim Ban                             228,629     0.306      0.461       0.000     0.000        1
   Voted for Trump in 2016                                228,629     0.532      0.499       1.000     0.000        1
 Panel C: County-quarter level
 C.1: Donations to Arab countries, Charity 1
   Number of donations                                    168,102     0.058      1.557       0.000     0.000       428
 C.2: Donations to Arab countries, Charity 2
   Number of donations                                    99,616      0.144       1.388      0.000     0.000        85
   Dollar value of donations                              99,616      17.41      235.83      0.00      0.00       20,000
 Panel D: County-country-quarter level
 D.1: Ancestry, Charity 1 countries
  2000 population from country d (thousands)     2,195,594            0.052      2.405       0.000     0.000    2,483.578
  2000 IHS-transformed population from country d 2,195,594            0.764      1.629       0.000     0.000     15.418
 D.2: Ancestry, Charity 2 countries
  2010 population from country d (thousands)     9,482,714            0.183      7.009       0.000     0.000    2,629.375
  2010 IHS-transformed population from country d 9,482,714            1.257      2.073       0.013     0.000     15.475
 D.3: Donations, Charity 1
  Number of donations to country d                       2,195,594    0.030      1.575       0.000     0.000       947
 D.4: Donations, Charity 2
  Number of donations to country d                       9,482,714    0.034      1.525       0.000     0.000      1,305
  Dollar value of donations to country d                 9,482,714     4.02      227.65       0.00      0.00     184,327
 Notes: The table presents summary statistics for all datasets used in the main analyses except the custom survey (summary
statistics for which are presented in Appendix Table A4). Donations statistics are calculated from the full set of Charity 1
and Charity 2 donors which we can match to a county (that is, no donors are dropped on the basis of their name's predicted
ancestry).




                                                         57
            Appendix Figure A2: Arab-ancestry population across counties




Notes: Figure A2 plots US counties, with logged 2010 population on the x-axis and the IHS-transformed population of Arab
ancestry in 2010 on the y -axis.




                                                          58
            Appendix Figure A3: Fitted vs. actual values of population




                             (a) Total population from Arab countries




                                  (b) Population across all countries
Notes: Appendix Figure A3 presents binned scatter plots of the fitted against the actual values of ancestry.
Panel A considers total Arab ancestry; Panel B considers all countries in our donations data. We instrument
                  t          t          t
ancestry using {If, -r (d) (I-c(f ),d /I-c(f ) )}t=1880,...,2010 and the first five principal components of the higher-
order interactions of push and pull factors as excluded instruments.




                                                          59
Appendix Table A2: Effect of Arab Ancestry on Attitudes toward Arab-Muslims
(forced and unforced respondents)

                                   (1)          (2)           (3)             (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)
                                   OLS          IV            IV              IV             IV             IV             IV
 Panel A: Project Implicit                    Score on Arab-Muslim IAT (std., higher score = less prejudiced)

 IHS(Arab ancestry)              0.014       0.061         0.055           0.083          0.087          0.061          0.067
                                  (0.005)     (0.016)       (0.019)         (0.018)        (0.019)        (0.016)        (0.017)
 Age                                                      -0.012          -0.012         -0.012         -0.013         -0.013
                                                           (0.001)         (0.001)        (0.001)        (0.001)        (0.001)
 Age squared                                              0.00004        0.00005         0.00005        0.00005        0.00005
                                                           (0.00002)      (0.00002)       (0.00002)      (0.00002)      (0.00002)
 Male                                                     -0.165          -0.166         -0.165         -0.165         -0.165
                                                           (0.014)         (0.014)        (0.014)        (0.014)        (0.014)
 IHS(non-Euro ancestry)                                                                  -0.030
                                                                                          (0.013)
 Avg. race IAT score                                                                                     0.027
                                                                                                          (0.005)
 2012 Rep. vote share                                                                                                  -0.159
                                                                                                                        (0.041)
 AP F -statistic                   --          12.91         11.54          11.47          13.09          10.92           10.55
 Weak IV-robust p-value            --         < 0.01        < 0.01         < 0.01         < 0.01         < 0.01          < 0.01
 Observations                    139,166      139,166       137,277        137,182        137,182        137,182         137,182
 Panel B: Project Implicit                  Warmth toward Arab-Muslims (std., higher score = more favorable)

 IHS(Arab ancestry)              0.030       0.109         0.101           0.128          0.119          0.091          0.091
                                  (0.008)     (0.018)       (0.030)         (0.025)        (0.027)        (0.022)        (0.024)
 AP F -statistic                   --          12.91         11.58          11.53          13.14          10.96           10.58
 Weak IV-robust p-value            --         < 0.01        < 0.01         < 0.01         < 0.01         < 0.01          < 0.01
 Observations                    139,600      139,600       137,738        137,635        137,635        137,635         137,635
 State FE                           No          No            Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
 County-level demographics          No          No            No             Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
 Notes: The table presents coefficient estimates from regressions at the individual level. The dependent variable in Panel
A is the score on the Arab-Muslim IAT (from Project Implicit); the dependent variable in Panel B is the stated warmth
toward Arab-Muslims (also from Project Implicit). Both measures are scaled to take mean zero and standard deviation one.
The main variable of interest is the 2010 IHS-transformed population with ancestry from Arab League countries. We include
   t
{If,       (I t     /I t   )}               and the first five principal components of the higher-order interactions of push and pull
     -r (d) -c(f ),d -c(f ) t=1880,...,2010
factors as excluded instruments. All specifications control for log 2010 population. County-level demographic controls include
the 2010 population density, the share of the 1970 prime-age population with a high school education, and the share of the 1970
prime-age population with a college education. Standard errors are clustered at the county level. *, **, and *** denote statistical
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                                60
Appendix Table A3: Effect of Arab Ancestry on Auxiliary Measures of Prejudice and
Social Norms

                                         (1)           (2)           (3)       (4)         (5)         (6)        (7)
                                         OLS           IV            IV        IV          IV          IV         IV
       Panel A: Project Implicit                      Avoid prejudice due to social standards (std.)

       IHS(Arab ancestry)              0.024         0.080        0.033       0.027      0.022       0.022       0.022
                                        (0.006)      (0.032)     (0.030)     (0.032)    (0.030)     (0.031)     (0.030)
       AP F -statistic                    --          13.01          10.19    10.55       12.04     10.05        10.07
       Weak IV-robust p-value             --         < 0.05         > 0.10   > 0.10      > 0.10     > 0.10      > 0.10
       Observations                     59,570       59,570         58,826   58,798      58,798     58,798      58,798
       Panel B: Project Implicit                    Avoid prejudice to avoid social disapproval (std.)

       IHS(Arab ancestry)              0.031         0.096        0.019      -0.005     -0.005      -0.004      -0.005
                                        (0.008)      (0.041)     (0.032)     (0.029)    (0.030)     (0.029)     (0.030)
       Weak IV-robust p-value              --        < 0.05         > 0.10   > 0.10      > 0.10     > 0.10      > 0.10
       Panel C: Project Implicit                      Personally motivated to avoid prejudice (std.)

       IHS(Arab ancestry)              0.025        0.093        0.070       0.087      0.072       0.065       0.055
                                        (0.009)      (0.031)     (0.036)     (0.035)    (0.033)     (0.032)     (0.033)
       Weak IV-robust p-value              --        < 0.01         < 0.05   < 0.05      < 0.05     < 0.05      < 0.10
       Panel D: Project Implicit                    Personally motivated to avoid stereotyping (std.)

       IHS(Arab ancestry)              0.022        0.093        0.081       0.097      0.092       0.074        0.064
                                        (0.009)      (0.034)     (0.041)     (0.042)    (0.043)     (0.041)     (0.042)
       Weak IV-robust p-value              --        < 0.01         < 0.05   < 0.05      < 0.05     < 0.10      < 0.10
       State FE                           No           No            Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes
       County-level demographics          No           No            No        Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes
       Non-European population            No           No            No        No         Yes         No          No
       Avg. race IAT score                No           No            No        No         No          Yes         No
       2012 Rep. vote share               No           No            No        No         No          No          Yes
       Notes: The table presents coefficient estimates from regressions at the individual level. The dependent vari-
      ables represent agreement with the statements "Because of today's standards I try to appear nonprejudiced
      toward Arab Muslims" (Panel A), "I attempt to appear nonprejudiced toward Arab Muslims in order to avoid
      disapproval from others" (Panel B), "I am personally motivated by my beliefs to be nonprejudiced toward Arab
      Muslims" (Panel C), "Because of my personal values, I believe that using stereotypes about Arab Muslims is
      wrong" (Panel D). All outcomes are scaled to mean zero and standard deviation one such that higher values
      indicate greater agreement with the statement. Only respondents who self-reported their reason for taking
      the Project Implicit test as "Assigned for work," "Assigned for school," or "Assigned for discussion group"
      are included. The main variable of interest is the 2010 IHS-transformed population with ancestry from Arab
      League countries. We include {If, t       (I t     /I t    )}              and the first five principal components
                                          -r (d) -c(f ),d -c(f ) t=1880,...,2010
      of the higher-order interactions of push and pull factors as excluded instruments. All specifications control for
      log 2010 population. County-level demographic controls include 2010 population density, share of 1970 prime-
      age population with high school education, and share of 1970 prime-age population with college education as
      controls. Standard errors are given in parentheses. Standard errors are robust in Panels A and B and are
      clustered at the congressional district level in Panel C. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%,
      5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                               61
Appendix Figure A4: Quantile regressions: effects on attitudes and political pref-
erences




    Notes: Figure A4 presents estimates from quantile regressions at the county level. The main vari-
    able of interest is the county's IHS-transformed 2010 ancestry from Arab League countries. We include
       t          t          t
    {If, -r (d) (I-c(f ),d /I-c(f ) )}t=1880,...,2010 and the first five principal components of the higher-order interac-
    tions of push and pull factors as excluded instruments. All specifications control for log 2010 population and
    state fixed effects. Standard errors are robust. We report 95% confidence intervals.




                                                             62
Appendix Table A4: Survey Representativeness

                                Survey mean    CCES mean
 Age                               52.389          50.344
 Male                              0.458           0.460
 Hispanic                          0.049           0.027
 High school degree or higher      0.984           0.967
 Family income
  under $20,000                    0.071           0.121
  $20,000 - 39,999                 0.197           0.220
  $40,000 - 59,999                 0.197           0.197
  $60,000 - 79,999                 0.165           0.159
  $80,000 - 99,999                 0.108           0.100
  $100,000 - 120,000               0.117           0.071
  over $20,000                     0.145           0.131
 Census region
 Midwest                           0.245           0.253
 Northeast                         0.169           0.199
 South                             0.385           0.349
 West                              0.201           0.200

 Observations                       5026          115930
 Notes: Column 1 presents means of respondent characteristics
from our survey. Column 2 presents means of respondent charac-
teristics from the 2016-2019 waves of the CCES.




                             63
Appendix Figure A5: Coefficient stability: effects on attitudes and political pref-
erences




  Notes: Figure A5 presents coefficient estimates from regressions at the test-taker level. Only white test-takers are included.
  The dependent variables in Panel is the score on the Arab-Muslim IAT (from Project Implicit); the dependent variable
  in Panel B is the stated warmth toward Arab-Muslims (also from Project Implicit); the dependent variable in Panel C is
  support for the Muslim Ban (from CCES); the dependent variable in Panel D is self-reported Trump votership in 2016 (also
  from CCES). The main variable of interest is the county's IHS-transformed 2010 ancestry from Arab League countries. We
             t
  include {If,       (I t     /I t   )}               and the first five principal components of the higher-order interactions of
               -r (d) -c(f ),d -c(f ) t=1880,...,2010
  push and pull factors as excluded instruments. All specifications control for log 2010 population. Individual demographic
  covariates include age, age squared, age × male, and a male indicator. Individual education include high school and college
  diploma indicators. County age and gender in 2018 include the share of the population below 18, the share of the population
  below 65, the median age, and the sex ratio. County education and economy in 2018 include the share of prime-age men
  and women with a high school education, the share of prime-age men and women with a college education, the share of
  the population below the poverty line, and the log median income. County non-European population in 2018 includes the
  IHS-transformed population of non-European ancestry. Standard errors are clustered at the county level. We report 95%
  confidence intervals. Red points, green points, and blue points are statistically significant at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels,
  respectively; black points are insignificant at the 10% level.




                                                               64
Appendix Figure A6: Coefficient stability: effects on IHS(# donations to Arab coun-
tries)




  Notes: Figure A6 presents coefficient estimates from regressions at the origin county-destination country-quarter level. Only
  donations to Arab League countries from donors with European-ethnicity names are included. The dependent variables in
  Panels A and B are the IHS-transformed number of donations from destination to origin in a quarter. The main variable of
  interest is county d's IHS-transformed 2010 ancestry from country f . We include {If,  t       (I t     /I t   )}
                                                                                           -r (d) -c(f ),d -c(f ) t=1880,...,2000
  and the first five principal components of the higher-order interactions of push and pull factors as excluded instruments,
                            t
  additionally including {If,       (I t     /I t   )}      for Charity 2. Standard errors are clustered at the foreign country
                              -r (d) -c(f ),d -c(f ) t=2010
  level. We report 95% confidence intervals. Red points, green points, and blue points are statistically significant at the 1%,
  5%, and 10% levels, respectively; black points are insignificant at the 10% level.




                                                               65
Appendix Table A5: Effect of Ancestry on Donations, Alternative Instruments

                                              (1)                  (2)                     (3)
                                           Standard        Excl. corr. origins        Eur. only pull
           Panel A: Charity 1                                Donations (dummy)

           IHS(Ancestry)                    0.023                0.021                   0.018
                                             (0.007)              (0.006)                 (0.005)
           AP F -statistic                   119.0                141.3                    135.0
           Observations                    2,195,559            2,195,559                2,195,559
           Panel B: Charity 1                                  IHS(# donations)

           IHS(Ancestry)                    0.058                0.059                   0.047
                                             (0.015)              (0.016)                 (0.012)

           Panel C: Charity 2                                Donations (dummy)

           IHS(Ancestry)                     0.025                0.034                   0.022
                                             (0.011)              (0.014)                 (0.009)
           AP F -statistic                   1202.4               176.5                    803.2
           Observations                    9,482,679            9,482,679                9,482,679
           Panel D: Charity 2                                  IHS(# donations)

           IHS(Ancestry)                     0.052                0.073                  0.048
                                             (0.022)              (0.029)                 (0.018)

           Panel E: Charity 2                                  IHS($ donations)

           IHS(Ancestry)                     0.153                0.209                   0.136
                                             (0.069)              (0.086)                 (0.055)

           Quarter FE                          Yes                  Yes                     Yes
           Origin county FE                    Yes                  Yes                     Yes
           Destination country FE              Yes                  Yes                     Yes
           Notes: The table presents coefficient estimates from regressions at the county-
          country-quarter level. Only donations from donors for whom the first-best or
          second-best classification of their name's ethnicity is not European and does not
          match the receiving country are included. The dependent variable in Panels
          A and C is a dummy for the presence of at least one donation from destina-
          tion to origin in a quarter. The dependent variable in Panels B and D is the
          IHS-transformed number of donations from destination to origin in a quarter.
          The dependent variable in Panel E is the IHS-transformed total value of do-
          nations from destination to origin in a quarter. Column 2 uses an alternative
          construction of the instrument that excludes countries with correlated migrant
          flows. Column 3 uses an alternative construction of the instrument that calcu-
          lates the pull factor based only on European emmigrants. The main variable of
          interest is the IHS-transformed population with ancestry from country d: year
          2000 for Charity 1 and year 2010 for Charity 2. In all columns, we include
             t          t          t
          {If, -r (d) (I-c(f ),d /I-c(f ) )}t=1880,...,2000 and the first five principal components of
          the higher-order interactions of push and pull factors as excluded instruments,
                                           t          t          t
          additionally including {If,        -r (d) (I-c(f ),d /I-c(f ) )}t=2010 for Charity 2. All speci-
          fications control for origin county, destination country, and quarter fixed effects.
          We suppress the first-stage F -statistic and the number of observations in Panel B
          because they are identical to those in Panel A; we likewise suppress these statis-
          tics in Panels D and E because they are identical to those in Panel C. Standard
          errors are given in parentheses. Standard errors are robust. *, **, and *** denote
          statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                                        66
Appendix Table A6: Effect of Ancestry on Donations, Excluding Different Countries

                                          (1)           (2)           (3)              (4)                 (5)
        Countries excluded:              None          Arab          Latino       Arab & Latino          African
        Panel A: Charity 1                                       Donations (dummy)

        IHS(Ancestry)                  0.023          0.017         0.011             0.010             0.038
                                        (0.007)        (0.006)       (0.002)           (0.002)           (0.009)
        Dep. var. mean                  0.007          0.008         0.007              0.008             0.009
        Dep. var. s.d.                  0.082          0.088         0.082              0.088             0.093
        First-stage F -statistic        807.7          588.9         109.7              463.7            1403.9
        Observations                  2,195,559      1,476,270     2,167,290          1,448,001          986,274
        Panel B: Charity 1                                        IHS(# donations)

        IHS(Ancestry)                  0.058          0.042         0.025             0.024             0.079
                                        (0.015)        (0.012)       (0.006)           (0.006)           (0.027)
        Dep. var. mean                   0.009         0.011          0.009             0.011             0.012
        Dep. var. s.d.                   0.128         0.142          0.127             0.142             0.153
        Panel C: Charity 2                                       Donations (dummy)

        IHS(Ancestry)                  0.025          0.023          0.030             0.027              0.018
                                       (0.011)        (0.011)        (0.017)           (0.016)           (0.011)
        Dep. var. mean                  0.010          0.011         0.010              0.011             0.011
        Dep. var. s.d.                   0.101         0.103         0.102              0.105             0.102
        First-stage F -statistic        1027.3        1019.1         385.4              348.6             502.8
        Observations                  9,482,679      8,452,431     7,645,194          6,614,946         5,707,197
        Panel D: Charity 2                                        IHS(# donations)

        IHS(Ancestry)                  0.052          0.047          0.062             0.056              0.035
                                       (0.022)        (0.021)        (0.034)           (0.032)           (0.021)
        Dep. var. mean                   0.013         0.013          0.013             0.014             0.013
        Dep. var. s.d.                   0.145         0.150          0.147             0.154             0.151
        Panel E: Charity 2                                         IHS($ donations)

        IHS(Ancestry)                  0.153          0.138          0.183             0.164              0.109
                                       (0.069)        (0.066)        (0.103)           (0.095)           (0.066)
        Dep. var. mean                   0.051         0.054          0.052             0.055             0.052
        Dep. var. s.d.                   0.526         0.541          0.532             0.551             0.536
        Quarter FE                        Yes           Yes            Yes               Yes               Yes
        Origin county FE                  Yes           Yes            Yes               Yes               Yes
        Destination country FE            Yes           Yes            Yes               Yes               Yes
        Notes: The table presents coefficient estimates from regressions at the county-country-quarter level. Only
       donations from donors whose first-best or second-best classification of their name's ethnicity is not Euro-
       pean and does not match the receiving country are included. The main variable of interest is the IHS-
       transformed population with ancestry from country d: year 2000 for Charity 1 and year 2010 for Charity 2.
                                     t
       In all columns, we include {If,       (I t     /I t   )}               and the first five principal components
                                       -r (d) -c(f ),d -c(f ) t=1880,...,2000
       of the higher-order interactions of push and pull factors as excluded instruments, additionally including
          t
       {If,       (I t     /I t   )}        for Charity 2. Column 1 includes all countries; Column 2 excludes Arab
            -r (d) -c(f ),d -c(f ) t=2010
       League countries; Column 3 excludes Latino countries; Column 4 excludes both Arab League and Latino
       countries; Column 5 excludes African countries. All specifications control for origin county, destination
       country, and quarter fixed effects. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
       levels, respectively.



                                                            67
Appendix Table A7: Effect of Ancestry on Donations, Different Choices of Cluster-
ing

                                                    (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)                (5)
 Sample:                                            C1                 C1                 C2                 C2                 C2
 Outcome:                                       1(donations)       # donations        1(donations)       # donations        $ donations

 IHS(Ancestry)                                      0.023               0.058              0.025              0.052             0.153
   Robust SE                                       (0.003)             (0.008)            (0.001)            (0.002)           (0.006)
   Clustering: Destination country                 (0.007)             (0.015)            (0.011)            (0.022)           (0.069)
   Clustering: Origin county                       (0.002)             (0.006)            (0.003)            (0.008)           (0.020)
   Clustering: Origin state                        (0.002)             (0.006)            (0.004)            (0.011)           (0.028)
   2-way clustering: Country/county                (0.006)             (0.014)            (0.011)            (0.023)           (0.069)
   2-way clustering: Country/state                 (0.006)             (0.013)            (0.011)            (0.022)           (0.068)
 Observations                                     2,195,559          2,195,559          9,482,679          9,482,679          9,482,679
 Quarter FE                                          Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes
 Origin county FE                                    Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes
 Destination country FE                              Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes
 Notes: The table presents coefficient estimates from regressions at the county-country-quarter level. We present standard
errors associated with different choices of clustering. Only donations from donors whose first-best or second-best classifi-
cation of their name's ethnicity is not European and does not match the receiving country are included. The dependent
variable in Columns 1 and 3 are dummies for the presence of at least one donation from destination to origin in a quarter
in Charity 1 (C1) data and in the Charity 2 (C2) data, respectively. The dependent variable in Columns 2 and 4 are the
IHS-transformed number of donations from destination to origin in a quarter in the Charity 1 and Charity 2 data, respec-
tively. The dependent variable in Column 5 is the IHS-transformed total value of donations from destination to origin in a
quarter in the Charity 2 data. The main variable of interest is the IHS-transformed population with ancestry from country
                                                                                               t          t          t
d: year 2000 for Charity 1 and year 2010 for Charity 2. In all columns, we include {If,          -r (d) (I-c(f ),d /I-c(f ) )}t=1880,...,2000
and the first five principal components of the higher-order interactions of push and pull factors as excluded instruments,
                           t          t          t
additionally including {If,  -r (d) (I-c(f ),d /I-c(f ) )}t=2010 for Charity 2. All specifications control for origin county, desti-
nation country, and quarter fixed effects. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels,
respectively.




                                                                   68
B     Data Appendix
B.1    Details on the construction of migration and ethnicity data

County residence is defined at the level of historic counties, and at the level of historic county groups
or PUMAs starting in 1970. Whenever necessary, we use contemporaneous population weights to
transition data from the historic county group or PUMA to historic county, and then area weights to
transition data from the historic county to 1990 counties. Stated ancestry often corresponds to foreign
countries in their 1990 borders (e.g. "Syrian"), though not always. In cases with ambiguous corre-
spondence (e.g. "Kurdish"), we construct transition matrices that map into 1990 national boundaries
using approximate population weights when feasible and approximate area weights otherwise.

Calculation of post-1880 flow of immigrants

For each census wave after 1880, we count the number of individuals in each historic US domestic
county d who were born in historic foreign country f (as identified by birthplace variable "bpld" in
the raw data) that had immigrated to the United States since the last census wave that contains the
immigration variable (not always 10 years earlier). Then we transform these data

    · from the non-1990 foreign-country ("bpld") level to the 1990 foreign-country level using bpld-
      to-country transition matrices.

    · from the US-county group/puma level to the US-county level using group/puma-to-county tran-
      sition matrices.

    · from the non-1990 US-county level to the 1990 US-county level using county-to-county transition
      matrices.

    · from the post-1990 US-county level to the 1990 US county level. Based on the information
      from https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/geography/technical-documentation/
      county-changes.html, a new county is either created from part of ONE 1990 county or as-
      signed a new FIPS code after 1990, so we manually change that county's FIPS code to what it
      was in 1990. A few counties' boundaries have been changed after 1990 but that only involved a
      tiny change in population, so we ignore these differences.

Calculation of pre-1880 stock of immigrants

For the year 1880, we calculate for each historic US county d the number of individuals who were born
in a historic foreign country f (no matter when they immigrated). We add to those calculations the


                                                   69
number of individuals in county d who were born in the United States, but whose parents were born
in historic foreign country f . (If the parents were born in different countries, we count the person as
half a person from the mother's place of birth, and half a person from the father's place of birth).
Then we transform these data

   · from the pre-1880 foreign-country ("bpld") level to the 1990 foreign-country level using the
     pre-1880 country-to-country transition matrix.

   · from the pre-1880 US-county level to the 1990 US-county level using the pre-1880 county-to-
     county transition matrix.

Calculation of stock of ancestry (1980, 1990, 2000, and 2010)

For the years 1980, 1990, 2000, and 2010, we calculate for each US county group the number of
individuals who state as primary ancestry ("ancestr1" variable) some nationality/area. We transform
the data

   · from the ancestry-answer ("ancestr1") level to the 1990 foreign-country level using ancestry-to-
     country transition matrices.

   · from the US-county group/puma level to the US county-level using group/puma-to-county tran-
     sition matrices.

   · from the non-1990 US-county level to the 1990 US-county level using county-to-county transition
     matrices.

   · from the post-1990 US-county to the 1990 US-county level.             Based on the information
     from https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/geography/technical-documentation/
     county-changes.html, a new county is either created from part of ONE 1990 county or as-
     signed a new FIPS code after 1990, so we manually change that county's FIPS code to what it
     was in 1990. A few counties' boundaries have been changed after 1990 but that only involved a
     tiny change in population, so we ignore the difference.




                                                  70
         Appendix Table B1: Description of each IPUMS wave
Wave   Description

1880   We use the 10% sample with oversamples; the sample is weighted, so we use the provided
       person weights to get to a representative sample; we use the region identifiers statefip and
       county.
1900   We use the 5% sample; the sample is weighted, so we use the provided person weights to
       get to a representative sample; we use the region identifiers statefip and county.
1910   We use the 1% sample; the sample is unweighted; we use the region identifiers statefip and
       county.
1920   We use the 1% sample; the sample is weighted, so we use the provided person weights to
       get to a representative sample; we use the region identifiers statefip and county.
1930   We use the 5% sample; the sample is weighted, so we use the provided person weights to
       get to a representative sample; we use the region identifiers statefip and county.
1970   We use the 1% Form 1 Metro sample; the sample is unweighted; we use the region identifiers
       statefip and cntygp97 (county group 1970); note that only four states can be completely
       identified because metropolitan areas that straddle state boundaries are not assigned to
       states; identifies every metropolitan area of 250,000 or more.
1980   We use the 5% State sample; the sample is unweighted; we use the region identifiers statefip
       and cntygp98 (county group 1980); the sample identifies all states, larger metropolitan areas,
       and most counties over 100,000 population.
1990   We use the 5% State sample; the sample is weighted, so we use the provided person weights
       to get to a representative sample; we use the region identifiers statefip and puma; the sample
       identifies all states, and within states, most counties or parts of counties with 100,000 or
       more population.
2000   We use the 5% Census sample; the sample is weighted, so we use the provided person weights
       to get to a representative sample; we use region identifiers statefip and puma; the sample
       identifies all states, and within states, most counties or parts of counties with 100,000 or
       more population.
2010   We use the American Community Service (ACS) 5-Year sample; the sample is weighted,
       so we use the provided person weights to get to a representative sample; we use region
       identifiers statefip and puma, which contain at least 100,000 persons; the 2006-2010 data
       contains all households and persons from the 1% ACS samples for 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009
       and 2010, identifiable by year.




                                                71
C   Percent Functional Form




                              72
                                  Appendix Table C1: White Flight

                                              (1)              (2)           (3)             (4)          (5)
                                          Pooled Arab        C1 Arab       C2 Arab           C1           C2
      Panel A: 1980 cross-section                             Selective white flight index

      Percent country ancestry              13.765          44.831         43.696        0.239           0.087
                                             (0.850)         (8.781)        (8.194)       (0.013)       (0.059)
      Dep. var. mean                          8.665            8.662         8.717         8.148         7.980
      Dep. var. s.d.                          1.452            1.575          1.549        2.282         2.433
      Observations                            3,084           30,840         49,344       144,948       431,760
      Panel B: 1980-2000 panel                                Selective white flight index

      Percent country ancestry              9.688           33.646         33.945        0.173          0.088
                                            (0.347)          (5.700)        (5.532)       (0.009)       (0.042)
      Dep. var. mean                          9.334            9.278         9.295         8.841         8.760
      Dep. var. s.d.                          1.529            1.676         1.646         2.198         2.241
      Observations                            9,333           93,340        149,344       401,138      1,225,360
73




      Domestic state FE                        Yes              Yes           Yes           No            No
      Domestic county FE                       No               No            No            Yes           Yes
      Foreign country FE                       No               Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
      Notes: The table presents coefficient estimates from regressions at the country-county level (Panel
     A) and the country-county-decade level (Panel B). The dependent variable is the selective White
     flight index, defined in Section 3.3. Panel A presents a cross-sectional regression for the year 1980,
     while Panel B presents a panel regression for the years 1980, 1990, and 2000. The endogenous
     variable in Column 1 is the percentage of the population with ancestry from Arab League countries;
     the endogenous variable in Columns 2­5 is the percentage of the population with ancestry from
                                                        t          t          t
     country d. The excluded instruments include {If,     -r (d) (I-c(f ),d /I-c(f ) )}t=1880,...,1980 and the first
     five principal components of the higher-order interactions. Columns 2­3 limit the sample to domestic
     county­foreign country pairs in which the foreign country is in the Arab League, separately for
     Charity 1 (C1) and Charity 2 (C2). Columns 4­5 include the full samples of county-country pairs
     from Charity 1 (C1) and Charity 2 (C2). Standard errors are given in parentheses. Standard errors
     are robust in Columns 1­4 and are clustered at the destination country level in Columns 5­8. *, **,
     and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
Appendix Table C2: Effect of Arab Ancestry on Attitudes toward Arab-Muslims

                                   (1)          (2)           (3)            (4)           (5)            (6)            (7)
                                   OLS          IV            IV             IV            IV             IV             IV
 Panel A: Project Implicit                   Score on Arab-Muslim IAT (std., higher score = less prejudiced)

 Percent Arab ancestry           0.051        0.076        0.089          0.099         0.107          0.079          0.081
                                  (0.015)      (0.016)      (0.017)        (0.018)       (0.021)        (0.019)        (0.018)
 Age                                                      -0.015         -0.015        -0.015         -0.015         -0.015
                                                           (0.002)        (0.002)       (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.002)
 Age squared                                              0.0001         0.0001         0.0001        0.0001         0.0001
                                                          (0.00003)      (0.00003)      (0.00003)     (0.00003)      (0.00003)
 Male                                                     -0.129         -0.130        -0.130         -0.129         -0.129
                                                           (0.024)        (0.024)       (0.024)        (0.024)        (0.024)
 Percent non-Euro ancestry                                                               -0.001
                                                                                         (0.001)
 Avg. race IAT score                                                                                   0.017
                                                                                                        (0.006)
 2012 Rep. vote share                                                                                                -0.120
                                                                                                                      (0.048)
 AP F -statistic                    --          13.50        14.06          13.80         8.638          10.79          9.706
 Weak IV-robust p-value             --         < 0.01       < 0.01         < 0.01        < 0.01         < 0.01         < 0.01
 Observations                     58,987       58,987       58,247         58,220        58,220         58,220         58,220
 Panel B: Project Implicit                  Warmth toward Arab-Muslims (std., higher score = more favorable)

 Percent Arab ancestry           0.128        0.168        0.175          0.156         0.149          0.096          0.086
                                  (0.016)      (0.031)      (0.032)        (0.024)       (0.024)        (0.017)        (0.017)
 AP F -statistic                    --          13.69        14.14          13.93         8.678          10.86          9.787
 Weak IV-robust p-value             --         < 0.01       < 0.01         < 0.01        < 0.01         < 0.01         < 0.01
 Observations                     58,796       58,796       58,068         58,040        58,040         58,040         58,040
 Panel C: Nationscape                       Favorability toward Muslims (std., higher score = more favorable)

 Percent Arab ancestry           0.147        0.248        0.190          0.153         0.108          0.115          0.080
                                  (0.024)      (0.058)      (0.038)        (0.033)       (0.028)        (0.031)        (0.026)
 AP F -statistic                   --          56.94        32.12          32.81          21.49         26.26          23.24
 Weak IV-robust p-value            --         < 0.01       < 0.01         < 0.01         < 0.01        < 0.01         < 0.01
 Observations                    187,435      187,435      187,435        187,435        187,435       187,435        187,435
 State FE                           No          No            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes
 County-level demographics          No          No            No            Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes
 Notes: The table presents coefficient estimates from regressions at the individual level. The dependent variable in Panel A
is the score on the Arab-Muslim IAT (from Project Implicit); the dependent variable in Panel B is the stated warmth toward
Arab-Muslims (also from Project Implicit); and the dependent variable in Panel C is the stated favorability toward Muslims
(from Nationscape). All three measures are scaled to take mean zero and standard deviation one. In Panels A and B, only
respondents who self-reported their reason for taking the Project Implicit test as "Assigned for work," "Assigned for school,"
or "Assigned for discussion group" are included. The main variable of interest is the 2010 percentage of the population
with ancestry from Arab League countries. We include {If,    t       (I t     /I t   )}               and the first five principal
                                                               -r (d) -c(f ),d -c(f ) t=1880,...,2010
components of the higher-order interactions of push and pull factors as excluded instruments. County-level demographic
controls include the 2010 population density, the share of the 1970 prime-age population with a high school education, and the
share of the 1970 prime-age population with a college education. Standard errors are given in parentheses. Standard errors
are clustered at the county level in Panels A and B and are clustered at the congressional district level in Panel C. *, **, and
*** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                               74
                                       Appendix Table C3: Effect of Arab Ancestry on Political Preferences

                                        (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)           (6)            (7)            (8)             (9)            (10)
                                        OLS            IV             IV             IV             IV            OLS            IV             IV              IV              IV
      Panel A:                                                                                 Support for the Muslim Ban
                                                                      CCES                                                                  Nationscape

      Percent Arab ancestry          -0.106        -0.160         -0.131          -0.078           0.002       -0.034         -0.036          -0.010         -0.020           0.006
                                      (0.027)       (0.069)        (0.048)         (0.031)        (0.012)       (0.008)        (0.015)        (0.014)        (0.013)         (0.014)
      Age                                                          0.016          0.016           0.016                                      0.017           0.017          0.017
                                                                    (0.001)        (0.001)         (0.001)                                    (0.001)         (0.001)        (0.001)
      Age squared                                                -0.0001         -0.0001        -0.0001                                     -0.0001        -0.0001         -0.0001
                                                                  (0.00001)       (0.00001)      (0.00001)                                   (0.00001)      (0.00001)       (0.00001)
      Male                                                          0.022          0.029          0.031                                      0.137           0.135          0.135
                                                                   (0.016)         (0.015)        (0.015)                                     (0.013)         (0.013)        (0.013)
      2012 Rep. vote share                                                                        0.437                                                                     0.139
                                                                                                   (0.030)                                                                   (0.024)
      AP F -statistic                    --           14.12          12.42          10.19          7.812           --            56.28        31.09           32.29           22.68
75




      Weak IV-robust p-value             --          < 0.05         < 0.01         < 0.01          > 0.10          --           > 0.10        > 0.10          > 0.10         > 0.10
      Observations                     56,814        56,814         56,814         56,814          56,729        58,183         58,183        58,183          58,183         58,183
      Panel B:                                                                                   Voted for Trump in 2016
                                                                      CCES                                                                  Nationscape

      Percent Arab ancestry          -0.116        -0.188         -0.153         -0.105           -0.004       -0.084         -0.124        -0.092          -0.091         -0.034
                                      (0.026)       (0.072)        (0.048)        (0.036)         (0.011)       (0.011)        (0.024)       (0.016)         (0.016)        (0.011)
      AP F -statistic                    --           12.98          11.79          9.865          7.413           --           55.83          31.87          32.82           23.02
      Weak IV-robust p-value             --          < 0.01         < 0.01         < 0.01          > 0.10          --          < 0.01         < 0.01         < 0.01          < 0.05
      Observations                     77,800        77,800         77,800         77,800          77,679        170,190       170,190        170,190        170,190         170,190
      State FE                           No            No            Yes             Yes            Yes            No             No            Yes            Yes             Yes
      County-level demographics          No            No            No              Yes            Yes            No             No            No             Yes             Yes
      Notes: The table presents coefficient estimates from regressions at the individual level. The dependent variable in Panel A is stated support for the Muslim Ban, with Columns
     1­5 using data from the CCES and Columns 6­10 using data from Nationscape. The dependent variable in Panel B is self-reported Trump votership, with Columns 1­5 again using
     data from the CCES and Columns 6­10 data from Nationscape. The main variable of interest is the 2010 percentage of the population with ancestry from Arab League countries.
     We include {If,t       (I t     /I t   )}               and the first five principal components of the higher-order interactions of push and pull factors as excluded instruments.
                      -r (d) -c(f ),d -c(f ) t=1880,...,2010
     County-level demographic controls include 2010 population density, share of 1970 prime-age population with high school education, and share of 1970 prime-age population with
     college education as controls. Standard errors are given in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered at the county level in Columns 1­5 and at the congressional district level in
     Columns 6­10. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
Appendix Table C4: Effect of Ancestry on Donations, Pooling Arab Countries
(European-Ethnicity Donors Only)

                                             (1)              (2)            (3)               (4)
                                             OLS              IV             IV                IV
            Panel A: Charity 1                Donations (dummy)           (mean = 0.011, sd = 0.106)

            Percent Arab ancestry          0.086           0.303          0.310             0.328
                                            (0.011)         (0.045)        (0.072)           (0.098)
            AP F -statistic          --                     16.24           6.591            6.057
            Weak IV-robust p-value   --                    < 0.01          < 0.01           < 0.01
            Observations           168,102                 168,102         168,102          168,102
            Panel B: Charity 1                 IHS(# donations)          (mean = 0.017, sd = 0.180)

            Percent Arab ancestry          0.133           0.488          0.491             0.536
                                            (0.018)         (0.081)        (0.121)           (0.167)
            Panel C: Charity 2                Donations (dummy)           (mean = 0.041, sd = 0.198)

            Percent Arab ancestry          0.232           0.685          0.608             0.596
                                            (0.023)         (0.135)        (0.183)           (0.216)
            AP F -statistic          --                     13.89          6.465             7.357
            Weak IV-robust p-value   --                     < 0.01         < 0.01            < 0.01
            Observations           99,616                   99,616         99,616            99,616
            Panel D: Charity 2                 IHS(# donations)          (mean = 0.053, sd = 0.296)

            Percent Arab ancestry          0.365           1.182          1.019             1.029
                                            (0.044)         (0.258)        (0.327)           (0.398)
            Panel E: Charity 2                 IHS($ donations)          (mean = 0.208, sd = 1.063)

            Percent Arab ancestry          1.297           3.871          3.362             3.315
                                            (0.140)         (0.785)        (1.020)           (1.213)
            Demographic controls              No              No             Yes               Yes
            State FE                          No              No             No                Yes
            Quarter FE                        Yes             Yes            Yes               Yes
            Notes: The table presents coefficient estimates from regressions at the county-quarter level.
           Only donations to Arab League countries from donors with European-ethnicity names are
           included. The dependent variable in Panels A and C is a dummy for the presence of at
           least one donation from the county to any Arab League country in a quarter. The de-
           pendent variable in Panels B and D is the IHS-transformed number of donations from the
           county to Arab League countries in a quarter. The dependent variable in Panel E is the
           IHS-transformed total value of donations from the county to Arab League countries in a
           quarter. The main variable of interest is the percentage of the population with ancestry
           from Arab countries: year 2000 for Charity 1 and year 2010 for Charity 2. In all columns,
                         t
           we include {If,       (I t      /I t     )}            and the first five principal components
                           -r (d) -c(f ),d -c(f ) t=1880,...,2000
           of the higher-order interactions of push and pull factors as excluded instruments, addition-
                             t
           ally including {If,        (I t     /I t    )}     for Charity 2. All specifications control for
                               -r (d) -c(f ),d -c(f ) t=2010
           quarter fixed effects. Columns 3­4 include 2010 population density, share of 1970 prime-age
           population with high school education, and share of 1970 prime-age population with college
           education. Column 4 includes state fixed effects. We suppress the first-stage F -statistic
           and the number of observations in Panel B because they are identical to those in Panel A;
           we likewise suppress these statistics in Panels D and E because they are identical to those
           in Panel C. Standard errors are given in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered at the
           county level. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels,
           respectively.




                                                         76
Appendix Table C5: Mechanisms: Contact with and Knowledge of Arab-Muslims

                                   (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)         (6)         (7)
 Panel A: Survey                                             Contact with Arab-Muslims
                               Restaurant       Friends   Workplace       Neighbors                 Any (2­4)

 Percent Arab ancestry           0.320          0.069      0.175           0.242         0.252        0.157       0.142
                                  (0.094)       (0.035)     (0.051)         (0.060)       (0.098)     (0.087)      (0.049)
 Dep. var. mean                   0.439         0.098       0.286           0.198         0.396       0.396       0.396
 Dep. var. std. dev               0.496         0.297       0.452           0.398         0.489       0.489       0.489
 AP F -statistic                  11.59         11.59       11.59           11.24         11.24       5.643       3.942
 Weak IV-robust p-value           < 0.05        < 0.05      < 0.05          > 0.10        < 0.05      > 0.10      > 0.10
 Observations                     5,189         5,189       5,189           5,189         5,189       5,189       5,189
 Panel B: Survey                                             Knowledge of Arab-Muslims
                             Subservice/war     Pillars    Ramadan      Pop. accuracy               Index (2­4)

 Percent Arab ancestry          -0.265          0.824       0.178          2.181         0.557        0.284        0.065
                                 (0.112)        (0.339)     (0.079)         (1.003)       (0.209)     (0.158)     (0.097)
 Dep. var. mean                   0.590         4.493       0.764           -15.057       0.000       0.000       0.000
 Dep. var. std. dev               0.758         1.558       0.425            13.612       1.000       1.000       1.000
 AP F -statistic                  11.59         11.59       11.59            11.24        11.24       5.643       3.942
 Weak IV-robust p-value           < 0.05        < 0.05      < 0.05          > 0.10        < 0.05      > 0.10      > 0.10
 Observations                     5,014         5,014       5,014            4,724        4,724       4,724       4,724
 Individual demographics           Yes            Yes         Yes            Yes            Yes        Yes          Yes
 County-level demographics         No             No          No             No             No         Yes          Yes
 Political controls                No             No          No             No             No         No           Yes

 Notes: The table presents coefficient estimates from regressions at the individual level. In Panel A, the dependent
variable in Column 1 is an indicator for whether the respondent reports having ever eaten at a Middle Eastern
restaurant; the dependent variables in Columns 2­4 are indicators for whether the respondent has an Arab-
Muslim friend, workplace acquaintance, or neighbor, respectively; and the dependent variable in Columns 5­7 is
an indicator taking value one if any of the indicators in Columns 2­4 take value one. In Panel B, the dependent
variable in Column 1 takes value 0 if the respondent answered that neither "holy war against non-believers" and
"subservience of women and children to men" are among the Five Pillars of Islam, value 1 if the respondent
answered that one of these two are among the Five Pillars; and value 2 if the respondent answered that both
are among the Five Pillars. The dependent variable in Column 2 is the respondent's total score on the "pillars"
question (ranging from 0 to 7). The dependent variable in Column 3 is an indicator for whether the respondent
correctly answered the Ramadan question. The dependent variable in Column 4 is the negative absolute value of
the difference between the respondent's guess as to the size of the Muslim population in the US and the actual
size of the Muslim population in the US. Respondents with invalid guesses (< 0% or > 100%) were dropped.
The dependent variable in Columns 5­7 is constructed by scaling the dependent variables in Columns 2­4 to
mean zero and standard deviation one, summing these three scaled values, and renormalizing. The main variable
of interest is the 2010 percentage of the population with ancestry from Arab League countries. We include
   t          t          t
{If, -r (d) (I-c(f ),d /I-c(f ) )}t=1880,...,2010 and the first five principal components of the higher-order interactions
of push and pull factors as excluded instruments. Individual demographics include age, male, age squared,
and age × male. County-level demographics include the 2010 population density, the share of 1970 prime-age
population with high school education, and the share of 1970 prime-age population with college education as
controls. Political controls include both controls for individual voting in 2012 and the 2012 county Republican
vote share. Standard errors are given in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered at the county level. *, **,
and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                           77
Appendix Table C6: Effect of Ancestry on Donations, Arab Countries and European-
Ethnicity Donors Only

                                        (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)           (6)
                                        OLS             IV             IV             IV            IV            IV
     Panel A: Charity 1                             Donations (dummy)            (mean = 0.005, sd = 0.068)

     Percent country ancestry 0.047                 0.337           0.472          0.265        0.213          0.295
                              (0.004)                (0.026)         (0.032)        (0.034)      (0.030)        (0.059)
     AP F -statistic                    --            171.4          141.5          98.84         97.81          48.97
     Observations                     716,770        716,770        716,770        712,877       712,877        712,877
     Panel B: Charity 1                              IHS(# donations)           (mean = 0.006, sd = 0.091)

     Percent country ancestry 0.060                 0.529           0.739          0.420        0.316          0.462
                              (0.005)                (0.044)         (0.055)        (0.055)      (0.047)        (0.092)

     Panel C: Charity 2                             Donations (dummy)            (mean = 0.006, sd = 0.076)

     Percent country ancestry 0.078                 0.731           0.639          0.343        0.286          0.665
                              (0.003)                (0.024)         (0.020)        (0.018)      (0.018)        (0.034)
     AP F -statistic                     --           262.6           257.3         204.3         193.7         83.26
     Observations                    1,029,264      1,029,264       1,029,264     1,022,704     1,022,704     1,022,704
     Panel D: Charity 2                              IHS(# donations)           (mean = 0.006, sd = 0.095)

     Percent country ancestry 0.096                 0.958           0.829          0.446        0.383          0.870
                              (0.004)                (0.039)         (0.033)        (0.027)      (0.027)        (0.051)

     Panel E: Charity 2                              IHS($ donations)           (mean = 0.028, sd = 0.387)

     Percent country ancestry 0.398                 3.717           3.237          1.718        1.448          3.380
                              (0.015)                (0.134)         (0.113)        (0.095)      (0.095)        (0.180)

     Distance controls                  No             No             Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes
     Demographic controls               No             No             No             Yes           Yes            Yes
     Origin state FE                    No             No             No             No            Yes            Yes
     Destination country FE             No             No             No             No            No             Yes
     Quarter FE                         Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes
     Notes: The table presents coefficient estimates from regressions at the county-country-quarter level. Only donations
    to Arab League countries from donors with European-ethnicity names are included. The dependent variable in Panels
    A and C is a dummy for the presence of at least one donation from destination to origin in a quarter. The dependent
    variable in Panels B and D is the IHS-transformed number of donations from destination to origin in a quarter.
    The dependent variable in Panel E is the IHS-transformed total value of donations from destination to origin in a
    quarter. The main variable of interest is the percentage of the population with ancestry from country d: year 2000
    for Charity 1 and year 2010 for Charity 2. In all columns, we include {If,  t       (I t     /I t   )}               and
                                                                                  -r (d) -c(f ),d -c(f ) t=1880,...,2000
    the first five principal components of the higher-order interactions of push and pull factors as excluded instruments,
    additionally including {If,t       (I t     /I t   )}       for Charity 2. All specifications control for quarter fixed
                                 -r (d) -c(f ),d -c(f ) t=2010
    effects. Columns 3­6 include logged county-country distance and latitude difference. Columns 4­6 includes the
    2010 population density, the share of 1970 prime-age population with high school education, and the share of 1970
    prime-age population with college education. Columns 5­6 include origin state fixed effects. Column 6 includes
    destination country fixed effects. We suppress the first-stage F -statistic and the number of observations in Panel B
    because they are identical to those in Panel A; we likewise suppress these statistics in Panels D and E because they
    are identical to those in Panel C. Standard errors are given in parentheses. Standard errors are robust. *, **, and
    *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                               78
Appendix Table C7: Effect of Ancestry on Donations, All Countries, Different Pop-
ulations of Donors

                                                       (1)                      (2)                            (3)
                                                    Europeans             Other continents                     All
             Panel A: Charity 1                                          Donations (dummy)

             Percent country ancestry                 0.004                      0.005                      0.005
                                                      (0.002)                     (0.002)                   (0.002)
             Dep. var. mean                           0.007                       0.007                     0.008
             Dep. var. s.d.                           0.082                       0.086                     0.089
             First-stage F -statistic               1004540.9                   997219.4                  1006415.4
             Observations                           2,187,870                   2,187,870                 2,187,870
             Panel B: Charity 1                                           IHS(# donations)

             Percent country ancestry                  0.008                      0.009                      0.010
                                                      (0.006)                    (0.006)                    (0.006)
             Dep. var. mean                             0.009                      0.010                     0.011
             Dep. var. s.d.                             0.128                      0.137                     0.144
             Panel C: Charity 2                                          Donations (dummy)

             Percent country ancestry                 0.003                      0.003                      0.003
                                                      (0.001)                    (0.001)                    (0.001)
             Dep. var. mean                            0.010                      0.011                     0.012
             Dep. var. s.d.                            0.101                      0.105                     0.107
             First-stage F -statistic                550587.2                   574420.4                  582320.6
             Observations                            9,473,622                  9,473,622                 9,473,622
             Panel D: Charity 2                                           IHS(# donations)

             Percent country ancestry                 0.005                      0.005                      0.005
                                                      (0.002)                    (0.002)                    (0.002)
             Dep. var. mean                             0.013                      0.014                     0.015
             Dep. var. s.d.                             0.145                      0.153                     0.158
             Panel E: Charity 2                                            IHS($ donations)

             Percent country ancestry                 0.015                      0.016                      0.016
                                                      (0.006)                    (0.007)                    (0.007)
             Dep. var. mean                             0.051                      0.055                     0.058
             Dep. var. s.d.                             0.526                      0.548                     0.564
             Origin county FE                            Yes                        Yes                       Yes
             Destination country FE                      Yes                        Yes                       Yes
             Quarter FE                                  Yes                        Yes                       Yes
              Notes: The table presents coefficient estimates from regressions at the county-country-quarter level.
            Donations are dropped when the first-best or second-best classification of their name's ethnicity matches
            the receiving country. Column 1 additionally limits the sample to European donors, while Column 2 ad-
            ditionally limits the sample to donors whose name is matched to a country on a different continent than
            the receiving country. The dependent variable in Panels A and C is a dummy for the presence of at least
            one donation from destination to origin in a quarter. The dependent variable in Panels B and D is the
            IHS-transformed number of donations from destination to origin in a quarter. The dependent variable in
            Panel E is the IHS-transformed total value of donations from destination to origin in a quarter. The main
            variable of interest is the percentage of the population with ancestry from country d: year 2000 for Char-
                                                                             t           t          t
            ity 1 and year 2010 for Charity 2. In all columns, we include {If,  -r (d) (I-c(f ),d /I-c(f ) )}t=1880,...,2000
            and the first five principal components of the higher-order interactions of push and pull factors as
                                                                t          t          t
            excluded instruments, additionally including {If,     -r (d) (I-c(f ),d /I-c(f ) )}t=2010 for Charity 2. All
            specifications control for origin county, destination country, and quarter fixed effects. We suppress the
            first-stage F -statistic and the number of observations in Panel B because they are identical to those
            in Panel A; we likewise suppress these statistics in Panels D and E because they are identical to those
            in Panel C. Standard errors are given in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered at the destination
            country level. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                                                  79
         Appendix Table C8: Heterogeneity by Physical and Cultural Distance

                                                                 (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)
 Panel A: Charity 1                                                                    IHS(# donations)

 Percent country ancestry                                      0.008         0.112          0.070          0.069          0.052
                                                              (0.006)        (0.050)         (0.012)        (0.011)        (0.007)
 Percent country ancestry × physical distance                                0.018
                                                                             (0.008)
 Percent country ancestry × genetic distance                                                0.109
                                                                                             (0.021)
 Percent country ancestry × linguistic distance                                                            0.013
                                                                                                            (0.002)
 Percent country ancestry × religious distance                                                                            0.023
                                                                                                                          (0.004)
 Observations                                                2,187,870      2,187,870      2,031,370      2,119,010      2,119,010
 Panel B: Charity 2                                                                    IHS(# donations)

 Percent country ancestry                                     0.005          0.147           0.013          0.010           0.111
                                                              (0.002)        (0.063)        (0.008)        (0.022)         (0.106)
 Percent country ancestry × physical distance                                0.051
                                                                             (0.022)
 Percent country ancestry × genetic distance                                                 0.017
                                                                                            (0.014)
 Percent country ancestry × linguistic distance                                                             0.010
                                                                                                           (0.041)
 Percent country ancestry × religious distance                                                                              0.070
                                                                                                                           (0.069)
 Observations                                                9,473,622      9,473,622      8,638,914      9,093,924      8,698,536
 Origin county FE                                               Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes
 Destination country FE                                         Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes
 Quarter FE                                                     Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes
 Notes: The table presents coefficient estimates from regressions at the county-country-quarter level. Only donors
with a European-ethnicity name are kept. The dependent variable in both panels is the IHS-transformed number of
donations. The main variable of interest is the percentage of the population with ancestry from country d -- year 2000
for Charity 1 and year 2010 for Charity 2 -- and the interaction of this variable with a measure of distance: log physical
distance in Column 2, genetic distance in Column 3, linguistic distance in Column 4, and religious distance in Column
                                                                                     t          t          t
5 (all distance measures are standardized). In all specifications, we include {If,     -r (d) (I-c(f ),d /I-c(f ) )}t=1880,...,2000 and
the first five principal components of the higher-order interactions of push and pull factors as excluded instruments,
                           t          t          t
additionally including {If,  -r (d) (I-c(f ),d /I-c(f ) )}t=2010 for Charity 2; we also include as excluded instruments the
interaction of the corresponding distance measure with all of the excluded instruments listed above. All specifications
control for origin, destination, and quarter fixed effects. Standard errors are given in parentheses. Standard errors
are clustered at the origin county level. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels,
respectively.




                                                                 80
D       Data Privacy

Privacy for individual microdata was maintained at all stages of the data process, with no organization
receiving more information than necessary. A 3-way Non Disclosure Agreement was signed by relevant
parties to ensure that the following data privacy procedure was adhered to:

    1. The charitable organization sends the research team the donation data, stripped of identifying
        information including names and addresses, with each donation containing a unique anonymized
        identifier (ID)

    2. The charitable organization sends the third party NAMSOR a list containing only the ID of the
        donations and the name associated with each donation

    3. Based on these names, NAMSOR determines the most likely origin country of the name

    4. NAMSOR sends the research team a list containing only the ID of the donations and the origin
        country associated with each donation

    5. The research team uses the donation ID to match up the donation data from the charitable
        organization and the origin country data from NAMSOR

    A summary of the process is displayed below in Appendix Figure D1.
    In this way, the organizations only receive the information that they need, and no more. The
charitable organization does not receive NAMSOR data regarding origin countries for donor names,
NAMSOR does not receive any variables regarding donations except for the donor's name, and the
research team does not receive any personally identifying information for any donation. Finally, data
was shared using a number of secured Dropbox folders only shared with the intended recipients of the
data.




                                                  81
Appendix Figure D1: Data Flow for Privacy




                   82
E   Contact Survey Questionnaire




                               83
1/5/2021                                                                Qualtrics Survey Software




   Demographics


   Please indicate your gender.

           Male
           Female
           Other/prefer not to answer




   In what year were you born?




   Were you born in the US?

           Yes
           No




   What was your family's gross household income in 2019 in US dollars?




   Do you have any children?

           Yes
           No




   How many people are in your household? 

https://harvard.az1.qualtrics.com/Q/EditSection/Blocks/Ajax/GetSurveyPrintPreview?ContextSurveyID=SV_9EUCFXZsgS6Nl2d&ContextLibraryID=UR_cXQLO...   1/8
1/5/2021                                                                Qualtrics Survey Software




   Which of the following best describes your race or ethnicity?

           African American/Black
           Asian/Asian American
           Caucasian/White
           Native American, Inuit or Aleut
           Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander
           Other




   Are you of Hispanic, Latino, or Spanish origin?

           Yes
           No




   Are you of Arab or Middle Eastern origin?

           Yes
           No




   Which category best describes the highest level of education you have completed?

           12th grade or less, but no high school diploma
           Graduated high school or equivalent
           Some college, no degree
           Associate degree
           Bachelor's degree
           Post-graduate degree




   Are you married or in a long-term domestic partnership?

https://harvard.az1.qualtrics.com/Q/EditSection/Blocks/Ajax/GetSurveyPrintPreview?ContextSurveyID=SV_9EUCFXZsgS6Nl2d&ContextLibraryID=UR_cXQLO...   2/8
1/5/2021                                                                Qualtrics Survey Software

           Yes
           No




   In general, how would you describe your physical health?

           Excellent
           Very good
           Good
           Only fair
           Poor




   What is your present religion, if any?




   County


   What is the FIPS code of your current county of residence? If you are unsure, here is one
   way to look up your FIPS code:

       1. Enter your address into https://www.whatcountyamiin.com/ to find your county
          name
       2. Use your state name and the county name to look up the FIPS code on this
          page: https://www.nrcs.usda.gov/wps/portal/nrcs/detail/ma/home/?
          cid=nrcs143_01369


   Your FIPS code will be a 5-digit number, possibly starting with 0. Please note that your
   FIPS code is not your ZIP code!


   Please ensure that your FIPS code is correct. If it does not match your device
   location, we may be forced to terminate your survey.


https://harvard.az1.qualtrics.com/Q/EditSection/Blocks/Ajax/GetSurveyPrintPreview?ContextSurveyID=SV_9EUCFXZsgS6Nl2d&ContextLibraryID=UR_cXQLO...   3/8
1/5/2021                                                                Qualtrics Survey Software




   For how many years have you lived in this county?

           Just moved in the last year
           1-5 years
           5-10 years
           10-20 years
           20-30 years
           30+ years




   Politics


   In politics, as of today, do you consider yourself a Republican, a Democrat, or an
   Independent?

           Republican
           Democrat
           Independent




   In politics, as of today, do you lean towards the Republican Party or lean towards the
   Democratic Party?

           The Republican Party
           The Democratic Party
           Do not lean toward either party




   In politics, as of today, would you call yourself a strong Democrat or not a very strong
   Democrat?

           Strong
           Not very strong




https://harvard.az1.qualtrics.com/Q/EditSection/Blocks/Ajax/GetSurveyPrintPreview?ContextSurveyID=SV_9EUCFXZsgS6Nl2d&ContextLibraryID=UR_cXQLO...   4/8
1/5/2021                                                                Qualtrics Survey Software



   In politics, as of today, would you call yourself a strong Republican or not a very strong
   Republican?

           Strong
           Not very strong




   Who did you vote for in the 2012 Presidential election?

           Mitt Romney
           Barack Obama
           Other
           I did not vote




   Who did you vote for in the 2016 Presidential election?

           Donald Trump
           Hillary Clinton
           Other
           I did not vote




   Who did you vote for in the 2020 Presidential election?

           Donald Trump
           Joe Biden
           Other
           I did not vote




   So far as you and your family are concerned, how worried are you about your current
   financial situations?

           Extremely worried
           Very worried


https://harvard.az1.qualtrics.com/Q/EditSection/Blocks/Ajax/GetSurveyPrintPreview?ContextSurveyID=SV_9EUCFXZsgS6Nl2d&ContextLibraryID=UR_cXQLO...   5/8
1/5/2021                                                                Qualtrics Survey Software

           Moderately worried
           A little worried
           Not at all worried




   Which of the following networks do you watch at least once a week? If you watch
   multiple networks, please choose the one you watch most often.

           Fox News
           CNN
           MSNBC
           None of the above




   Contact


   We would now like to ask about your close friends and family members, neighbors,
   workplace acquaintances, and others with whom you regularly interact (i.e. speak with
   at least once a month).
    
   For each of the groups below, please check the box if a member of that group is
   among each group.

                                                                                                           Others with
                                        Close friends                                                        whom I               Service or
                                         and family                                   Workplace             regularly             hospitality
                                        members                 Neighbors           acquaintances            interact              workers
    African-Americans                  
    Arabs and/or Muslims   



   Knowledge


   We'd now like to ask you some questions about various religions.


   What is Ramadan?
https://harvard.az1.qualtrics.com/Q/EditSection/Blocks/Ajax/GetSurveyPrintPreview?ContextSurveyID=SV_9EUCFXZsgS6Nl2d&ContextLibraryID=UR_cXQLO...   6/8
1/5/2021                                                                Qualtrics Survey Software

           Hindu festival of lights
           Jewish prayer for the dead
           An Islamic holy month
           Festival celebrating Buddha's birth




   Which text is most closely associated with Hinduism?

           Tao Te Ching
           Vedas
           Quran
           Mahayana sutras




   Which of the following are among the Five Pillars of Islam?


   (You can select multiple options.)

           Fasting (sawm)
           Profession of faith (shahada)
           Charity to community members in need (zakat)
           Maintaining physical and mental health (sahi)
           Holy war against non-believers (jihad)
           Pilgrimage (hajj)
           Subservience of women and children to men (alnisa)




   What percentage of the US population is Muslim? Please write your answer as a
   number, with 0 meaning that none of the US population is Muslim and 100 meaning that
   the entire US population is Muslim.




   Restaurant



https://harvard.az1.qualtrics.com/Q/EditSection/Blocks/Ajax/GetSurveyPrintPreview?ContextSurveyID=SV_9EUCFXZsgS6Nl2d&ContextLibraryID=UR_cXQLO...   7/8
1/5/2021                                                                Qualtrics Survey Software



   Have you ever eaten at a Middle Eastern restaurant? (For example, Iranian/Persian,
   Turkish, Egyptian, or Afghani restaurants)

           Yes
           No




   End


   Thank you for participating in our survey!



                                                              Powered by Qualtrics




https://harvard.az1.qualtrics.com/Q/EditSection/Blocks/Ajax/GetSurveyPrintPreview?ContextSurveyID=SV_9EUCFXZsgS6Nl2d&ContextLibraryID=UR_cXQLO...   8/8
