                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 THE PRICE AND QUANTITY OF INTEREST RATE RISK

                                     Jennifer N. Carpenter
                                         Fangzhou Lu
                                      Robert F. Whitelaw

                                      Working Paper 28444
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28444


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   February 2021




Many thanks for helpful comments and suggestions from Rob Engle, Matt Richardson, Alexi
Savov, Yu Xu, and seminar participants at New York University. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Jennifer N. Carpenter, Fangzhou Lu, and Robert F. Whitelaw. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Price and Quantity of Interest Rate Risk
Jennifer N. Carpenter, Fangzhou Lu, and Robert F. Whitelaw
NBER Working Paper No. 28444
February 2021
JEL No. G12,G15

                                           ABSTRACT

Studies of the dynamics of bond risk premia that do not account for the corresponding dynamics
of bond risk are hard to interpret. We propose a new approach to modeling bond risk and risk
premia. For each of the US and China, we reduce the government bond market to its first two
principal-component bond-factor portfolios. For each bond-factor portfolio, we estimate the joint
dynamics of its volatility and Sharpe ratio as functions of yield curve variables, and of VIX in the
US. We have three main findings.(1) There is an important second factor in bond risk premia. (2)
Time variation in bond return volatility is as important as time variation in bond Sharpe ratios. (3)
Bond risk premia are solely compensation for bond risk, as no-arbitrage theory predicts. Our
approach also allows us to document interesting cyclical and secular time-variation in the term
structure of bond risk premia in both the US and China.

Jennifer N. Carpenter                             Robert F. Whitelaw
New York University                               New York University
Stern School of Business                          Stern School of Business
44 W 4th St Ste 9-190                             44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-190
New York, NY 10012-1126                           New York, NY 10012-1126
jcarpen0@stern.nyu.edu                            and NBER
                                                  rwhitela@stern.nyu.edu
Fangzhou Lu
Faculty of Business and Economics
The University of Hong Kong
Pokfulam Road
Hong Kong
lufz@hku.hk
1         Introduction
Understanding the risk and return of major asset classes is essential for optimal portfolio
choice and the calibration of reasonable equilibrium models. A vast literature studies the
relation between risk and return in the equity markets. The fixed income markets are even
bigger than the equity markets, but the literature on bond risk and return is still developing.
In particular, existing models do not adequately describe the data or the relation between
bond risk and bond risk premia. This paper proposes a new approach to the modeling and
estimation of the joint dynamics of the price and quantity of interest rate risk, which delivers
a number of new insights.
    A key question that the existing term structure literature does not adequately address
is whether time variations in bond risk premia are attributable primarily to variation in
volatility or to variation in Sharpe ratios. But the portfolio and equilibrium implications of
these two alternatives are quite different. One strand of the literature, which includes Fama
and Bliss (1987), Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005), and Ludvigson and Ng (2009), focuses on
uncovering violations of the Expectations Hypothesis, documenting time variation in bond
risk premia, and identifying key predictor variables such as forward rates and macro factors.1
This literature is largely silent on the corresponding dynamics of bond risk. Since risk premia
can be levered arbitrarily, they are not very informative without an understanding of their
corresponding risk. Leverage-invariant Sharpe ratios are arguably more informative.
    Another strand of the literature, which includes Ang and Piazzesi (2003), Duffee (2011),
Wright (2011), Lettau and Wachter (2011), Adrian, Crump, and Moench (2013), Joslin,
Priebsch, and Singleton (2014), Greenwood and Vayanos (2014), and Cieslak and Povala
(2015), works with Gaussian term structure models that imply bond prices have deter-
ministic volatility. Implicitly, these models force bond Sharpe ratios to do all the work of
accommodating stochastic variation in risk premia. However, a large literature inspired by
Engle, Lilien, and Robins (1987) provides evidence of systematic time variation in interest
rate volatility.2
    More broadly, the class of affine term structure models (Duffie and Kan, 1996) has been a
popular framework for modeling the dynamics of bond returns. Unfortunately, affine models
of bond risk premia can only incorporate stochastic volatility in bond returns by imposing a
tight link between the functional forms of the price and quantity of risk (Dai and Singleton,
2000; Duffee, 2002; Cieslak and Povala, 2016). This link is too tight to accommodate essential
features of the data such as a price of risk that changes sign (Duffee, 2011). In addition,
    1
        See also Campbell and Shiller (1991).
    2
        See, e.g., Boudoukh, Downing, Richardson, Stanton, and Whitelaw (2010) and references cited therein.



                                                       1
affine models imply that bond yields span all relevant information about bond risk premia,
except in knife-edge cases (Duffee, 2011; Joslin et al., 2014). Thus they generically rule out
unspanned stochastic volatility, such as that documented by Collin-Dufresne and Goldstein
(2002), and unspanned macro predictors of bond risk and return.3
    This paper goes beyond the confines of affine term structure models and extends the
existing empirical literature on forecasting bond risk premia to develop and estimate a more
flexible model of the price and quantity of bond risk. We study bond markets in both the
US and China, which are, respectively, the largest and second largest bond markets in the
world. We begin by reducing each bond market to its two principal-component bond-factor
portfolios, which together explain about 98% of the variation in bond returns. Then we
estimate the joint dynamics of the volatility and Sharpe ratio of each bond-factor portfolio.
For both the US and China, we use traditional yield-curve variables to forecast the volatilities
and Sharpe ratios of the bond-factor portfolios. For the US bond returns, we also introduce
VIX as an important predictor variable, unspanned by yields.
    We have three main findings with respect to the bond factors. First, we identify an
important second factor in bond risk premia, which accounts for the stylized fact that Sharpe
ratios of bonds decline in maturity in both the US and China. The similarity between the
factor structure of bond returns in the US and China is striking given that these are two
effectively segmented markets whose returns are relatively uncorrelated.
    Second, for each bond-factor portfolio, both the conditional volatility and the conditional
Sharpe ratio vary stochastically, and the variation in volatility is as important as the variation
in the Sharpe ratio. In particular, the Gaussian models miss a central piece of the story.
For example, for the US Factor 1, which explains about 91% of the variation in US Treasury
returns, ignoring variation in volatility misattributes about 50% of the variation in risk
premia to variation in the Sharpe ratio.
    Third, we find that bond risk premia are solely compensation for bond risk in both
countries, as no-arbitrage theory predicts. I.e., bond risk premia go to zero as bond volatility
goes to zero.
    We also document interesting differences between risk premia in the US and China.
We find that the time-series correlation between each bond factor's predicted volatility and
predicted Sharpe ratio is significantly positive in the US, as equilibrium models would predict
for risk factors that are correlated with aggregate consumption. In particular, both the
quantity and price of interest rate risk in the US spike up during NBER recessions. By
   3
     There is an unresolved debate in the literature about whether macro factors have predictive power
incremental to that contained in the yield curve (Bauer and Hamilton, 2018). The resolution of this debate
is tangential to the main points we make in this paper.



                                                    2
contrast, in China, the time-series correlation between each bond factor's predicted volatility
and Sharpe ratio is significantly negative. For the first and largest factor in returns, this
result is driven primarily by large declines in volatility and increases in Sharpe ratios during
aggressive monetary policy interventions associated with two crisis periods: the financial
crisis of 2008 and the stock market crash of 2015.
    Finally, we can recover the risk and return dynamics for the underlying zero-coupon
bonds from the dynamics of the factors and the loadings of the bonds on these factors. We
do so for two-year and ten-year zeroes for both the US and China. Risk premia in the US
exhibit interesting cyclical patterns and time trends. Specifically, the term structure of bond
risk premia is steeply upward sloping at the beginning of expansions, but declines over the
cycle to the point where it is flat. Over time, volatilities and Sharpe ratios of both factors
have declined to the point where risk premia are close to zero across bonds of all maturities.
A similar decline over time shows up in volatility in China, but since there is no evidence
of a decline in the price of risk of either factor, Sharpe ratios remain higher on shorter-term
zeroes in recent years. Interestingly, variation in China appears to be policy driven rather
than linked to economic fluctuations as it is in the US.
    The paper begins by using data on key-maturity par rates for US Treasury (UST) bonds
from 1976 to 2019 from FRED and for Chinese government bonds (CGB) from 2004 to
2019 from Wind to construct monthly time series of excess returns on zeroes with annual
maturities from 1 to 10 years. We then use a principal components analysis (PCA) of the
monthly standardized excess returns on zero-coupon bonds to reduce each bond market to
two factor portfolios which together explain most of the variation in the zero returns. For
example, in the US bond market over the post-Volcker period 1990­2019, Factor 1 explains
91% of this variation and Factor 2 explains 7%. In China these proportions are 82% and
14%, respectively. We sign the factors so that their Sharpe ratios are positive. Consistent
with Litterman and Scheinkman (1991), movements in the first and second factor portfolios
correspond roughly to movements in the level and steepness of the yield curve. Interestingly,
this is true in both the US and China. In particular, unstandardized zeroes load on Factor 1
roughly in proportion to their duration. At the same time, short-term bonds load positively
on Factor 2 and long-term bonds load negatively on Factor 2, which explains the declining
term structure of unconditional Sharpe ratios of zeroes evident in both the US and China.
    Next, we lay out a continuous-time model of nominal bond returns, in which we incorpo-
rate the two-factor structure of bond returns as well as the no-arbitrage condition that risk
premia are solely compensation for risk. The discrete-time analogue of this model guides our
empirical specification of monthly bond-factor returns, in which we take conditional factor
volatilities and Sharpe ratios to be functions of a set of predictor variables.


                                               3
    Finally, as our main analysis, we perform a simultaneous generalized method of moments
(GMM) estimation of the joint dynamics of each bond factor's conditional volatility and
Sharpe ratio processes. This estimation allows us to test hypotheses about the relation
between bond risk and risk premia and uncover the underlying economic structure of bond
returns.
    Our paper is one of the first to provide evidence on the pricing of Chinese government
bonds.4 Although the time series of CGB yield data is still relatively short, China's bond
market as a whole is already the second largest in the world, with a total market capitalization
of 17 trillion USD at the end of 2020, compared with 45 trillion USD for the US bond market.
CGB constitute a smaller fraction of this market than US Treasuries represent as a fraction
of the total US bond market, 18% vs. 38%, respectively, but they still represent an important
benchmark for pricing. In "Investors find new safe place to hide: Chinese bonds," July 2020,
The Wall Street Journal reports that foreign holdings of CGB increased six-fold over the
last five years to over 200 billion USD (https://www.wsj.com/articles/investors-find-new-
safe-place-to-hide-chinese-bonds-11594632600?mod=hp lead pos5).
    Our paper also relates to the stock market risk-return literature in that the same no-
arbitrage relation should hold in that market: risk premia in the stock market should also
only be compensation for equity return risk. Interestingly, our strong positive results on this
dimension are in marked contrast to those in the equity return literature. Early papers, such
as French, Schwert, and Stambaugh (1987), Glosten, Jagannathan, and Runkle (1993), and
Whitelaw (1994) document a weak, or even negative, relation between expected returns and
conditional volatility, despite the evidence for a large unconditional equity risk premium,
and more recent work has had difficulty overturning this puzzling result. It may be that the
bond market is actually the more natural place to search for this fundamental link due to the
absence of cash flow risk, which increases the complexity of the structure of stock returns.
    The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 analyzes the empirical factor structure of
government bond excess returns in both the US and China. Section 3 lays out our theoretical
model of nominal bond returns, the corresponding empirical specification, and our estimation
strategy. Section 4 presents the estimation results for US Treasury bonds. Section 5 presents
the estimation results for Chinese government bonds, and Section 6 concludes.


2         The Empirical Factor Structure of Bond Returns
To lay the groundwork for our model of conditional bond return volatility and price of
risk in Section 3, this section presents the results of PCAs of implied zero-coupon bond
    4
        See Amstad and He (2018) for a description of China's bond markets.


                                                      4
excess returns in the US and China. Much of the existing empirical literature, going back
to Fama and Bliss (1987), forecasts bond risk premia maturity by maturity. We focus on
forecasting the risk premia of the first two principal components of bond returns, i.e., the
risk premia on portfolios of these bonds, for a number of reasons. First, using returns on
portfolios rather than on individual bonds avoids many of the measurement error issues that
have been discussed extensively in the prior literature. Specifically, in regressions that use
maturity-matched term structure variables as predictors, the same bond price shows up in
both the return on the left-hand side of the forecasting regression and the yield or forward
rate for the same maturity on the right-hand side. Thus, the same measurement error in this
price also potentially shows up on both sides of the regression equation. We also use yields as
predictors, but there are returns of bonds with many more different maturities in the portfolio
return we are trying to predict, so the possibility of common measurement error is much less
severe. Second, the PCA dramatically reduces the dimensionality of the problem, so we can
present results for only two factors rather than for multiple different maturities, making the
results easier to analyze and interpret. Third, more recent papers, such as Cochrane and
Piazzesi (2005) and Cieslak and Povala (2015), emphasize the existence of a single dominant
factor in expected returns. In a no-arbitrage framework, a single factor structure would imply
that all bonds have the approximately the same Sharpe ratio, assuming little idiosyncratic
risk, which is inconsistent with the strongly declining Sharpe ratio pattern in the data that
we will discuss later. However, given the low dimensionality of the bond return data, two
factors are likely to pick up much of the time-variation in returns and thus of risk premia.
    The results of these PCAs are strikingly consistent across subperiods and markets. They
also explain the pattern of declining Sharpe ratios with maturity, documented by Frazzini
and Pedersen (2014), in terms of an important second priced factor, on which short-term
bonds load positively and long-term bonds load negatively.


2.1    Priced Factors in Bond Returns
In the spirit of the analysis of Litterman and Scheinkman (1991) for UST implied zeroes over
the period 1984­1988, Panel A of Table 1 presents the results of PCAs of the standardized
excess returns of the implied zeroes. To construct the monthly returns on implied zero-
coupon bonds with annual maturities 1, 2, ..., 10 years, we first fit a cubic exponential
spline function through the key-maturity par rates from FRED for the US or from WIND
for China. Then we back out the implied zero rates for semi-annual maturities, fit another
spline through these implied zero rates, and compute monthly prices and returns for zero-
coupon bonds with monthly maturities. The columns on the left-hand side of Table 1 are


                                              5
for UST implied zeroes for two subperiods, 7/1976­12/1989 and 1/1990­12/2019. These
correspond roughly to the Volcker period and the post-Volcker period.5 The columns on the
right are for CGB implied zeroes.
    In each subsample, we standardize each zero's excess return series by its monthly volatility
so that the PCA is not dominated by the longer-maturity, higher-volatility zero returns.6
Thus, in the ten-maturity zero PCAs, the sum of the ten annualized variances, and thus the
sum of the ten resulting principal-component factor-portfolio variances, is 120. Panel A of
Table 1 contains the results for the first three principal-component factor portfolios. The first
row shows the percent of total variance explained by each of the first three factor portfolios.
The table shows that the first factor explains most of the total variance of the standardized
zero returns, while the second factor also explains a material portion. In the more recent
subperiods, the second factor becomes more important. For the UST implied zeroes during
the post-Volcker period, Factor 1 explains 91% of the total variance of the standardized zero
returns, while Factor 2 explains 7%. Factor 3 explains an additional 1% of the variation and
the remaining factors are negligible. For the CGB implied zeroes, the second factor is even
important; Factor 1 explains 82% of total variance and Factor 2 explains 14%. Panel A of
Table 1 also shows the annualized Sharpe ratios of each of the factor portfolios. We sign
the factors so that they have positive Sharpe ratios. The Sharpe ratios of Factors 1 and 2
are fairly large, especially in the UST zeroes in the post-Volcker period, where the Factor 1
portfolio has a Sharpe ratio of 0.77 and the Factor 2 portfolio has a Sharpe ratio of 0.85.
    The column-vector of zero loadings under each factor in Panel A of Table 1 is the factor
eigenvector. It simultaneously shows the loadings of the different standardized zero returns
on the factor portfolio return and the holdings of standardized zeroes in the factor portfolio.
The compositions of the three factor portfolios are similar across subperiods and across
markets. Factor 1 is a roughly equal-weighted portfolio of standardized zeroes. Factor 2 is
long short-maturity zeroes and short long-maturity zeroes. Factor 3 is long extreme-maturity
zeroes and short middle-maturity zeroes.
    Since the eigenvectors in Table 1 show the return responses of each implied zero to the
returns on the factor portfolios, we can approximate the yield-curve shift associated with
a one-annual-standard-deviation increase in each factor-portfolio return. Figure 1 plots the
yield curve shifts associated with the three different factors. As in Litterman and Scheinkman
(1991), movements in the three factors correspond roughly to shifts in the level, steepness,
and curvature of the yield curve, respectively, for all subsamples.
   5
      Paul Volcker was Chairman of the Federal Reserve from August 1979 to August 1987. The precise start
of the second subperiod is dictated by the availability of VIX data as we discuss later.
    6
      The results with unstandardized excess returns are qualitatively similar.



                                                   6
2.2    The "Betting-Against-Duration" Pattern in Sharpe Ratios
Frazzini and Pedersen (2014) document a "betting-against-duration" pattern in the Sharpe
ratios of Treasury bond portfolios over the period 1952­2012: Sharpe ratios are declining
with bond maturity. We verify that this pattern is robust across two US subsamples and in
China. Panel B of Table 1 presents unconditional annualized mean monthly excess returns,
volatilities, and Sharpe ratios for the ten constant-maturity zeroes. The table shows that in
both subperiods, the means and volatilities of the UST implied zero returns are increasing
with zero maturity, while their Sharpe ratios are decreasing with maturity. The patterns of
the performance measures for the CGB implied zeroes are qualitatively very similar. In par-
ticular, the Sharpe ratios of CGB implied zeroes are also mostly declining in maturity. This
is somewhat surprising, given that the Chinese securities markets are largely segmented from
other global financial markets, with limited ownership by foreign investors, and given that
CGB bond-factor portfolio returns have low correlation with the UST bond-factor portfolio
returns. The highest correlation is 22%, between CGB Factor 1 and UST Factor 1 returns.
    Frazzini and Pedersen (2014) attribute the "betting-against-beta" pattern in asset prices
to leverage-constrained investors bidding up high-beta assets for their high returns. However,
this explanation is less plausible in the bond markets, where the repo market facilitates the
use of leverage. The declining pattern of bond Sharpe ratios with maturity is better explained
through the presence of the important second priced factor in bond returns, on which short
bonds load positively and long bonds load negatively.


2.3    The Factor Structure and Performance of UST ETFs
Table 2 verifies that the bond factor structure and performance patterns presented in Ta-
ble 1 are not simply artifacts of our implied zeroes construction by demonstrating the same
patterns in the excess returns of UST exchange-traded funds (ETFs). These ETFs are
traded assets, in contrast to our synthetic zeroes, and therefore their returns are free from
any measurement error that might be induced by our splining procedure, for example. The
data, from the Center for Research in Security Prices for the period 2/2007 to 12/2019, are
for returns net of fees. The columns headed "Gross of 15-bp Fees" show results for excess
returns augmented with the 15-basis point management fee charged by Blackrock iShares.
Gross of these fees, the Sharpe ratios on the ETFs decline sharply with the maturity of the
underlying bonds, and net of these fees, the Sharpe ratios decline with maturity for all but
the shortest-maturity ETF. Panel A of Table 2 verifies that the factor structure of UST ETF
returns mirrors that of the UST implied zeroes. The Sharpe ratios for Factor 1 and Factor 2
are even larger in the ETF market, gross of fees, perhaps reflecting some variance reduction


                                              7
associated with holding portfolios of bonds. The large Sharpe ratio on Factor 2 explains the
declining pattern of ETF Sharpe ratios with maturity that we document in Panel B.


3     A Model of Nominal Bond Returns
This section develops a model of nominal bond returns that positions the bond market within
the broader financial market, formalizes our assumptions about the factor structure of bond
returns, derives a testable no-arbitrage relation between bond risk and return, and motivates
the empirical specification of bond returns in the estimation that follows. Suppose real asset
prices are It^
             o processes with respect to a standard d-dimensional Brownian motion Bt . In
particular, there is a riskless real money market account with instantaneous riskless rate rt
and there are n risky assets with real cum-dividend prices Si,t that follow

                                     dSi,t
                                           = µi,t dt + i,t dBt ,                                   (1)
                                     Si,t

where rt , the µi,t , and the d-dimensional row vector i,t are stochastic processes that are
measurable with respect to the information generated by the Brownian motion and satisfy
standard integrability conditions that ensure the processes Si,t are well-defined. The value
Wt of a self-financing portfolio that invests value i,t in risky asset i, for i = 1, . . . , n, follows

                           dWt = (rt Wt + t (µt - rt 1)) dt + t t dBt ,                            (2)

where t is the n-dimensional row vector with elements i,t , µt is the n-dimensional column
vector with elements µi,t , 1 is the n-dimensional vector of 1's, and t is the n × d-dimensional
matrix with rows equal to the i,t . Assume that t is such that t (µt - rt 1) and t t satisfy
the integrability conditions that ensure Wt is well-defined.


3.1     No-Arbitrage Condition
In the absence of arbitrage, the real price processes Si,t must satisfy the condition that if t
is such that t t = 0, then t (µt - rt 1) = 0. That is, a portfolio with zero risk must have
a zero risk premium. Otherwise, it would be possible to generate a locally riskless portfolio
that appreciates at a rate greater than rt . This condition is algebraically equivalent to the
condition that there exists a d-dimensional vector t such that

                                          t t = µt - rt 1 .                                        (3)



                                                  8
It follows that there exists a d-dimensional vector process t satisfying Equation (3), as well
as suitable measurability and integrability conditions.7 This process is typically called a
"market price of risk" or simply a "price of risk." Therefore, in the absence of arbitrage, we
can re-write Equation (1) as

                                     dSi,t
                                           - rt dt = i,t t dt + i,t dBt ,                         (4)
                                      Si,t

for any market price of risk process t . Moreover, together with the riskless rate rt , any such
market price of risk process t determines the dynamics of a stochastic discount factor
                                                t            t               t
                                                                   dBs - 1       |s |2 ds
                                     Mt = e-    0 rs   ds-   0 s         2   0                    (5)

such that
                                     Mu
                       Si,t = Et {      Si,u } for all 0 < t < u and i = 1, . . . , n .           (6)
                                     Mt
In many equilibrium models, the equilibrium stochastic discount factor is equal to the
marginal utility of consumption of the representative agent, and the equilibrium market
price of risk on the claim to aggregate consumption is

                                                  t = Rt c,t                                      (7)

where Rt is the coefficient of relative risk aversion of the representative agent, and c,t is the
volatility vector of aggregate consumption.8


3.2       Nominal Asset Prices with Locally Riskless Inflation
Suppose the price level qt is locally riskless, i.e.,

                                                  dqt
                                                      = it dt,                                    (8)
                                                  qt

where the expected inflation rate it is suitably integrable and measurable with respect to the
information generated by the d Brownian motions. Then the nominal riskless rate, that is,
the rate on a nominally riskless money market account, is rt + it and nominal asset prices,
Pi,t = qt Si,t satisfy

      dPi,t                   dqt dSi,t                    dSi,t
            - (rt + it ) dt =     +      - (rt + it ) dt =       - rt dt = i,t t dt + i,t dBt .   (9)
      Pi,t                     qt   Si,t                    Si,t
  7
      See Karatzas and Shreve (1998), Theorem 4.2.
  8
      See Karatzas and Shreve (1998), Eqn. (6.21).

                                                             9
Thus, nominal returns in excess of the nominal riskless rate are the same as real returns in
excess of the real riskless rate, and can shed light on the real price of risk t .9
   Note that the nominal stochastic discount factor for nominal asset prices is
                                              t               t               t
                                                                    dBs - 1        |s |2 ds
                               Mt /qt = e-    0 (rs +is ) ds- 0 s         2   0               ,       (10)

and the nominal price of a nominal zero-coupon bond with maturity T is
                                              T               T                T
                                                                  s dBs - 1        |s |2 ds
                             PtT = Et {e-    t (rs +is ) ds- t            2   t               }.      (11)

Therefore, the volatilities of nominal bond returns will in general reflect exposure to shocks
to the inflation rate it , and the risk premia on nominal bonds will contain compensation for
this exposure. I.e., there will in general be an inflation risk premium in both the real and
nominal excess returns of nominal bonds.


3.3       Bond Market Factors and Implied Zero Excess Returns
Motivated by the evidence from Section 2.1 of two important, orthogonal factor portfolios,
which together explain virtually all of the variation in nominal bond returns, we identify the
excess return of Factor 1 with the first Brownian motion and the excess return of Factor 2
with the second Brownian motion. This is without loss of generality, since we can always
rotate the original Brownian motions to achieve this representation. Thus, for j = 1, 2, we
write the excess return on Factor j , dFj as

                                      dFj,t = j,t j,t dt + j,t dBj,t ,                                (12)

where for j = 1, 2, j,t is now the scalar conditional volatility process for Factor j and j is
now the uniquely defined Sharpe ratio for Factor j . A natural interpretation is that Factors 1
and 2 from the bond market are correlated with important latent risk factors in aggregate
consumption, and their Sharpe ratios thus shed light on the prices of those dimensions of
consumption risk.
   Next, taking the ten annual maturity nominal implied zeroes to be the first ten risky
assets in the market, we write the nominal implied zero excess returns as

                    dPi,t
                          - (rt + it ) dt = i,1 dF1,t + i,2 dF2,t , for i = 1, . . . , 10 ,           (13)
                    Pi,t
  9
      Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005) and Cieslak and Povala (2015) effectively make this assumption as well.




                                                        10
where the i,1 and i,2 are the components of the eigenvectors associated with Factors 1
and 2, respectively. In particular, in light of evidence that the risk associated with the
third and higher principal components is economically negligible, we treat the zero-cost
constant-maturity implied-zero portfolios as constant-beta portfolios of the Factors 1 and
2 only. Note that we are not restricting the conditional Factor-1 and Factor-2 volatilities
and Sharpe ratios j,t and j,t to depend only on the information generated by the first two
Brownian motions. In general, these can depend on the information generated by the full set
of d Brownian motions, which justifies the possibility of a large set of predictor variables for
these conditional moments, not limited to bond yields. In particular, this flexible model can
accommodate unspanned stochastic volatility, such as that documented by Collin-Dufresne
and Goldstein (2002), and unspanned macro risks, such as in Joslin et al. (2014), among
others.
    Once we empirically characterize the conditional factor volatilities and Sharpe ratios j,t
and j,t , then we can recover the conditional volatility of each implied zero i as the two-
dimensional vector (i,1 1,t , i,2 2,t ) and the risk premium on implied zero i as i,1 1,t 1,t +
i,2 2,t j,t . In particular, the risk premia on the two factors, 1,t 1,t and 2,t 2,t , will drive the
risk premia on all ten zeroes, simply as a consequence of the two-factor structure of bond
returns. To the extent that the first bond factor's risk premium, 1,t 1,t , is dominant, as the
evidence in Table 1 suggests, it will appear as though this single forecasting variable drives
returns on all zeroes, with the individual zero loadings given by the i,1 . For the ordinary
unstandardized zero returns, each zero's loading is its element in the Factor-1 eigenvector in
Panel A of Table 1 times its volatility from Panel B of Table 1. As the Table shows, these
loadings are monotonic in the maturity of the zeroes. Thus, the presence of a dominant first
bond factor with time-varying risk premia will produce the finding of Cochrane and Piazzesi
(2005) that a single forecasting factor drives returns on all bonds, with loadings monotonic
in maturity.


3.4    Empirical Specification and GMM Estimation
To take the continuous-time model to monthly time-series data, we work with a discrete-time
analogue of Equation (12),

                             Rj,t+1 = j,t j,t + j,t j,t+1 for j = 1, 2 ,                        (14)




                                                 11
where Rj is the monthly excess return on Factor j , the j,t are i.i.d. standard normal, and
we assume that the volatilities and prices of risk satisfy

                                                       
                                              j,t = Xt j                                             (15)

and
                                                       
                                              j,t = Xt j                                             (16)

for a row-vector of predictor variables, Xt , which includes a constant.

3.4.1    Predictor Variables

A large literature going back to Fama (1986) uses yield-curve variables to forecast bond risk
premia, while another literature going back to Chan, Karolyi, Longstaff, and Sanders (1992)
uses yield-curve variables to forecast interest rate volatility. To capture the information about
future bond return volatility and risk premia in the yield curve, Xt includes three variables
that describe the yield-curve level, slope, and curvature, namely, the two-year zero-coupon
yield, Y2,t , the ten-year yield minus the two-year yield, Y2,t - Y10,t , and the six-year yield
minus the average of the two- and ten-year yields, Y6,t - Y2,t +  2
                                                                   Y10,t 10
                                                                        . As with the return data,
we make a conscious choice to reduce the dimensionality of the yield data used as predictors
for a number of reasons. First, and most important, we want to reduce the possibility of
overfitting. Second, the structure of yields looks similar to the structure of returns in that
there are a few factors that capture the vast majority of the time-variation in these series.
While it is theoretically possible that a yield factor that explains a very small fraction of the
variation in yields explains a large fraction of the variation in risk premia, this possibility
seems economically implausible. Third, the goal of the paper is not to maximize the R2 's
of our regressions. Rather we are trying to illuminate the underlying economic structure
of bond risk premia in as simple and parsimonious a specification as possible. We leave a
detailed specification search intended to maximize forecasting power to future research.
    For the UST factors, Xt also includes VIX, which is an index of the implied volatility
of the 30-day return on the S&P 500 derived from S&P 500 index options.11 In theory,
this implied volatility measure contains both a forecast of market volatility and information
about risk aversion, so it should be relevant for predicting both bond return volatility and
  10
     We use the two-year yield rather than the one-year yield to avoid any distortions in the short end of
the yield curve associated with monetary policy, although using the latter instead of the former produces
qualitatively similar results.
  11
     The VIX data are available from the CBOE going back to January 1990, which dictates the precise start
date of the sample period for our GMM estimation. This date also coincides roughly with the end of the
Volcker period.


                                                   12
its price of risk.12
    Fama and Bliss (1987) use matching-maturity forward rates to forecast excess returns on
zeroes with annual maturities one through five years. Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005) use all
five forward rates to forecast the excess returns on individual zeroes with annual maturities
one through five years. In our setting here, we are working with factor portfolios of zeroes
with annual maturities up to ten years. To include all ten forward rates seems likely to
lead to overfitting, so we prefer the more parsimonious summary of yield-curve information
contained in our Level, Slope, and Curvature variables, which correspond roughly to the
first three principal components of yields. A number of other variables have been used to
predict bond excess returns in the literature. Ang and Piazzesi (2003) and Joslin et al.
(2014) use measures of economic growth and inflation, Ludvigson and Ng (2009) use PCs
from 132 macro variables, Greenwood and Vayanos (2014) use measures of Treasury bond
supply, Cieslak and Povala (2015) use residuals from regressions of yields on an average of
past inflation, and Brooks and Moskowitz (2017) use measures of value, momentum, and
carry. We limit our predictor variables to our three yield-curve variables plus VIX, which
seem natural and well-motivated.

3.4.2    GMM Estimation Equations and Diagnostics
                                                                     
For each j = 1, 2, we perform a simultaneous GMM estimation of j and j from the
following two equations:

                                                         
                                 Rj,t+1 = j + (Xt j )(Xt j ) + uj,t+1 ,                                   (17)

                                                          
                                           |uj,t+1 | = Xt j + vj,t+1 ,                                    (18)
                                         2
where we use E{      |u |} = E{ 
                    2 j,t
                                      |      |} = j,t-1 . We refer to Equation (17) as the
                                     2 j,t-1 j,t
"return equation" and Equation (18) as the "volatility equation." The "return constant" j
in Equation (17) should be zero in theory by no arbitrage.13 We include this constant in
preliminary specifications to check for possible mis-specification in Equations (15) and (16).
  12
     We also tried the MOVE Index, which tracks the U.S. Treasury yield volatility implied by current prices
of one-month over-the-counter options on two-year, five-year, ten-year and thirty-year Treasuries. MOVE is
highly correlated with VIX and is subsumed by VIX in our empirical specifications. This result is perhaps
somewhat surprising, since one might speculate that a bond market volatility measure such as MOVE would
do better than a stock market measure such as VIX. However, the latter is based on a much more liquid and
widely traded set of instruments, especially in the early part of the sample, which may explain the result. For
both the UST and CGB factors, we also tried including the lagged value of realized volatility, approximated
as    2 |Rj,t |, as a predictor variable, but it is insignificant in all cases.
  13
     Other papers that have made this point in the context of bond pricing include Cox, Ingersoll, and Ross
(1985) and Stanton (1997).


                                                      13
   Unless otherwise specified, the set of moment conditions we use in the estimations are

                                                                      
                          E{uj,t+1 Zt } = E{[Rj,t+1 - [j + (Xt j )(Xt j )]]Zt } = 0 ,         (19)
                                                                        
           E{vj,t+1 Xt } = E{[     |Rj,t+1 - [j + (Xt j )(Xt j )]| - Xt j ]Xt } = 0 ,         (20)
                                 2

where the vector Zt includes all of the unique elements of the matrix Xt Xt . These moment
conditions allow us to test the restrictions on the coefficients on the square and cross-product
terms in Xt Xt imposed by Equations (15) and (16) using the standard J -statistic over-
identifying restrictions test.
   We also report goodness-of-fit measures for the two estimated equations, defined as

                                                               tu2j,t
                        Goodness-of-fit (1) = 1 -                      ¯ 2 ,                  (21)
                                                         t (Rj,t - Rj )
                                                                      2
                                                                 t vj,t
                        Goodness-of-fit (2) = 1 -                        ¯j |)2 .             (22)
                                                     2     t (|uj,t | - |u

These are similar to ordinary-least-squares (OLS) regression R2 's. The difference is that
an OLS regression chooses coefficients to maximize R2 , while the GMM estimation chooses
coefficients to minimize the weighted sum of the squares and cross-products of the sample
moments in the moment conditions.
   In addition, we formally test three null hypotheses about the dynamics of the bond factor
returns. The first null hypothesis, based on the no-arbitrage theory, is that bond factor risk
premia are solely compensation for bond risk, that is,

                                         H0,0 : j = 0 .

We test this with the standard z-test. The second null hypothesis is that bond factor volatility
is constant, that is,
                                                         
                             H0,1 : j, 1 = j,2 = · · · = j,k = 0 ,

                          
where the j,  1 , . . . , j,k are the volatility coefficients on the k non-constant elements of X .
We test this joint hypothesis with a standard Wald test. The third null hypothesis is that
the price of bond factor risk is constant, that is,

                                                       
                                  H0,2 : j,1 = · · · = j,k = 0 ,


                         
where the j, 1 , . . . , j,k are the Sharpe ratio coefficients on the k non-constant elements of
X . We also test this joint hypothesis with a standard Wald test.

                                                14
4      Results for US Treasury Bonds
This section first presents the results of the GMM estimation of UST factor volatility and
Sharpe ratio dynamics using data from FRED for the period 1990 to 2019. Then we provide
evidence on the effect of the length of the return horizon, monthly or annual, on the OLS R2 's
of excess return regressions, and we show that our goodness-of-fit measures for the return
equation are comparable to R2 's in bond return regressions documented in the previous
literature. Finally, we analyze the times series of fitted volatility and Sharpe ratio values to
shed additional light on the dynamics of return premia.


4.1     GMM Estimation Results for the UST Factors
                                                                  
The top panel of Table 3 presents GMM estimates of j , j        , j , and their robust z-statistics
for alternative specifications of Equations (17) and (18) for the UST factors. The bottom
panel indicates the number of moment conditions used in the estimation, the p-value of the J -
statistic over-identifying restrictions test, p-values for the Wald tests of null hypotheses H0,1
and H0,2 described above, and the goodness-of-fit measures. The left-hand side of Table 3
reports results for UST Factor 1 and the right-hand side reports results for UST Factor 2.
For convenience, the yield-curve variables are divided by 10 and VIX is divided by 100 to
give their coefficients comparable magnitude.
    The first specification for UST Factor 1, Specification (1a), includes all the predictor
variables linearly, as well as the "return constant" 1 . The z -statistic for the estimate of the
return constant is insignificant, as predicted by theory. The p-value of the J -statistic test
for misspecification is large, suggesting that we are not omitting any important higher-order
terms in our specification. The p-values for the Wald tests indicate that we can easily reject
Hypothesis H0,1 that Factor-1 volatility is constant but we cannot yet reject Hypothesis
H0,2 that the Factor-1 price of risk is constant. However, when we impose the no-arbitrage
restriction that 1 = 0 in Specification (1b), we increase power.14 In particular, while the
                                                                    
estimates of the volatility and Sharpe ratio coefficients j   and j   in Specification (1b) remain
similar to those in (1a), we are now not only able to reject H0,1 easily but we are also able
to reject H0,2 at close to the 10% level. The Curvature variable is insignificant in both the
volatility and return equations, so to further increase power, we exclude this variable in
Specification (1c). This boosts the significance levels of most of the coefficients on the other
predictor variables. In particular, in Specification (1c), both the volatility and the Sharpe
  14
     The decision about whether or not to impose this restriction involves the usual tradeoff between efficiency
and robustness, as noted in a slightly different asset pricing context by Cochrane (2005) (see p. 236). We
follow the natural recommendation of Lewellen, Nagel, and Shanken (2010) to both test the restriction and
impose it ex ante (see the discussion of their Prescription 2).

                                                      15
ratio of UST Factor 1 are significantly positive functions of Level and Slope, consistent with
previous studies forecasting bond risk premia and interest rate volatility. Our analysis is
the first to decompose these effects into the price and quantity of interest rate risk in bond
returns. We also find that the volatility of Factor 1 is a significantly positive function of
VIX. The p-value of the J -statistic remains large, suggesting this is well-specified, and the
p-values of the Wald tests are 0.0% and 5.4%, so we reject that volatility and the price of
risk are constant.
    For UST Factor 2, Specifications (2a) and (2b) are analogous to (1a) and (1b) for Fac-
tor 1. The p-values of the J -statistics are still well above 10%, suggesting that the linear
specifications are adequate. The estimate of the return constant 2 in Specification (2a) is in-
significant, so we impose the no-arbitrage restriction 2 = 0 in Specification (2b). This again
boosts power, and brings the p-values for the Wald tests down below 1%. Thus, we strongly
reject the hypotheses that Factor-2 volatility is constant and that the price of Factor-2 risk
is constant. Factor-2 volatility is a significantly positive function of Level, Slope, and VIX,
and a significantly negative function of Curvature. Factor-2 price of risk is a significantly
positive function of Level and VIX.
    The result that expected returns in the bond market are compensation for risk, i.e., that
bond risk premia go to zero as bond risk goes to zero, is consistent with the no-arbitrage
restriction in our model of Section 3. However, this result is in stark contrast to much of the
literature on the risk-return relation in the stock market. Starting with French et al. (1987),
this literature has often failed to find a statistically significant or even positive relation
between expected returns and the conditional volatility of stock returns.


4.2       Monthly versus Annual R2 's in Bond Return Regressions
While the empirical results in Table 3 are both economically and statistically significant, and
we document significant predictable variation in UST returns, the goodness-of-fit measures
in the return equation look small relative to those in the existing literature. Specifically, it
is not unusual to see R2 's in linear regressions of maturity-specific bond returns on various
predictor variables of 30% or more.15 Why then are our goodness-of-fit measures so much
lower than the R2 's reported in earlier papers? The simple answer is that, for the most part,
the existing literature uses monthly overlapping annual returns as the dependent variable
in these regressions, whereas as we use non-overlapping monthly returns. As we illustrate
below, the use of overlapping annual returns instead of monthly returns mechanically boosts
R2 's.
 15
      See, for example, Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005) and Cieslak and Povala (2015).



                                                    16
    However, there is one clear benefit of using monthly returns when the predictor variables
are persistent: higher frequency non-overlapping returns generate larger effective sample
sizes, which increases confidence in the validity of asymptotic inference and reduces concerns
about small sample biases. This issue has been discussed extensively in the stock-return
predictability literature, with Boudoukh and Richardson (1994) providing a comprehensive
analysis of the properties of long-horizon return regressions. In the context of bond-return
predictability, Bauer and Hamilton (2018) show that there are substantial biases in the
standard errors and regression R2 's in studies with overlapping annual returns due to their
poor small sample properties.
    We illustrate the effect of using overlapping annual returns instead of monthly, and put
the goodness-of-fit measures presented in Table 3 into perspective, as follows. We estimate
regressions of UST Factor-1 returns on a fitted volatility measure and contrast the R2 's from
regressions of monthly returns with the R2 's from regressions of overlapping annual returns.
For ease of comparison to existing papers, we do not use the simultaneous GMM estimation
of Table 3, but rather a two-stage OLS approach.
    Table 4 presents the full set of results in five steps. Panel A shows the first-stage regression
of realized Factor-1 monthly return volatility on the three predictor variables in our preferred
specification (1c) in Table 3. In addition to the fact that this volatility regression is not
estimated simultaneously with the return equation, the other difference from our previous
econometric strategy is that the independent variable uses the total Factor-1 return rather
than the fitted unexpected return for the obvious reason that we have not yet estimated the
expected component of this return. Nevertheless, the results are very consistent with the
earlier estimation. All three predictors are statistically and economically significant, and the
magnitudes of the coefficients are similar.
    The fitted monthly volatility from this first-stage regression will be the predictor variable
in the second-stage return equation. However, before we get to this estimation, it is important
to understand the time-series properties of this predictor. Therefore, Panel B shows the
results from a simple first-order autoregression (AR(1)) of fitted volatility. There are two
related results of note. Fitted volatility is extremely persistent, with an autoregression
coefficient exceeding 0.9, and this simple AR(1) model seems to provide a reasonably good
description of the data. The high serial correlation is of particular importance, because it is
this feature together with the overlap in annual returns that boosts the R2 of the annual-
return regression and also creates small-sample biases.
    In Panel C we run the second-stage predictive regression for monthly Factor-1 returns.
This regression is likely misspecified, given the evidence in Table 3 of a time-varying price of
risk, but it is sufficient to illustrate the point. Fitted volatility predicts returns with a positive


                                                 17
and significant coefficient and an R2 of just over 4%, which is slightly below the goodness-
of-fit from our GMM specification. Up to this point in Table 4, we have only reported
simple OLS t-statistics in parentheses but we now also report Newey-West t-statistics in
square brackets, calculated using twelve lags. At the monthly frequency, the Newey-West
adjustment makes little difference because there is little, if any, serial correlation in the
monthly returns.
     Panel D illustrates what happens to this predictive regression when the returns are ag-
gregated to the annual level. The same fitted volatility is used as the lone predictor variable,
and the regression uses monthly overlapping annual returns. The results are striking. The
R2 increases by a factor of approximately five and the coefficient increases by even more. In
many ways, these results look much more impressive than their monthly counterparts, but
are they really? Not surprisingly, the OLS t-statistic is deceptively high. Once we adjust
for serial correlation in the residuals, the t-statistic returns to the level from the monthly
regression. Moreover, even this t-statistic is likely overstated because, while the Newey-
West methodology has good asymptotic properties, it underweights the correlations in small
samples in the context of overlapping data in order to ensure positive definiteness.
     Boudoukh, Richardson, and Whitelaw (2008) show analytically how the regression coef-
ficient and the R2 should scale up as the data are aggregated. Specifically, even under the
null hypothesis that there is no true predictability, if the predictor is sufficiently highly auto-
correlated, these estimated quantities increase dramatically with the return horizon. Panel
E shows the annual-return regression coefficient and R2 that the econometrician should ex-
pect to see under the assumption that fitted volatility follows an AR(1).16 In particular,
even when the annual-return regression provides no incremental information about return
predictability relative to the monthly return regression, the econometrician should expect
to see an R2 an order of magnitude higher with the annual regression. This phenomenon
is what Boudoukh et al. (2008) call the myth of long-horizon predictability. The annual
R2 of 27%, while seemingly very large, provides no more evidence of predictability than the
monthly R2 closer to 4%. In this particular instance, the implied annual numbers actually
exceed the estimates generated using annual returns, so the idea that running annual return
regressions provides incremental information is difficult to support.
     Putting these results together, our conclusion is that there is no good reason to use annual
returns in our analyses. While the goodness-of-fit measures using monthly returns may look
less impressive, statistically and economically they support the same conclusions without
the econometric problems associated with using long-horizon, overlapping return data.
  16
       See equations (6) and (7) in Boudoukh et al. (2008).




                                                      18
4.3        Fitted UST Factor Volatilities and Sharpe Ratios
Figure 2 plots the time series of annualized fitted values of UST Factor-1 and Factor-2 Sharpe
ratios and volatilities based on the GMM estimates from Table 3. Panel A plots Factor-1
fitted values from Specification (1c) of Table 3, and Panel B plots Factor-2 fitted values from
Specification (2b) of Table 3. As the figure shows, the correlations between the Sharpe ratio
(price of risk) and the volatility (quantity of risk) are significantly positive for both factors.
More specifically, the time-series correlation between the Sharpe ratio of Factor 1 and the
volatility of Factor 1 is 99.9% and this same correlation for Factor 2 is 55% with a Newey-
West t-statistic of 5.51. The positive relation between the factor prices and quantities of risk
are consistent with the predictions of equilibrium models of the pricing of risk factors that
are correlated with aggregate consumption.17 At the same time, the fitted Sharpe ratios for
Factor 1 and Factor 2 change sign over the sample period, which cannot be accommodated
by affine models with stochastic variation in volatility (Duffee, 2002).
    Figure 2 also shows that factor prices and quantities of risk spike up during NBER
recessions. This former effect is similar to cyclical pattern of the US stock market Sharpe
ratio demonstrated by Tang and Whitelaw (2011), and it is consistent with increasing risk
aversion in bad economic times. Increases in volatility during recessions are also a feature
seen in other financial and economic series.
    In addition to this cyclical pattern in volatility, there is also evidence of a notable decline
in the volatility of both factors over the sample period. Fitted volatilities are approximately
half as large at the end of the sample as they are at the beginning of the sample. Given
the positive correlation between the volatilities and Sharpe ratios of both factors, it is not
surprising that the Sharpe ratios exhibit a similar time series pattern. More specifically,
fitted annualized Sharpe ratios that exceed one for both factors in the 1990s decline to
values that average closer to zero from 2012 onwards.
    Given that we have factored conditional risk premia into conditional volatilities and
conditional Sharpe ratios, a natural question to ask is, what is the relative contribution to
the time variation in risk premia of each of these two component factors? To address this,
we start with the decomposition (^      ^) =  ^ (  ^) +  ^(^  ) + (^   )(  ^). Then, using a first-
order approximation, we drop the higher-order term (^        )(   ^) and approximate the squared
change in the risk premium as

                             
                           [(^ ^)]2  ^ 2 (^)2 + ^2 (^
                                                     )2 + 2^
                                                             ^(^
                                                                )(^) .                        (23)

Summing Equation (23) over the observations in our sample and dividing by the left-hand
  17
       See, for example, Campbell (1987).


                                                19
side, we get a sample variance decomposition under the natural assumption that the mean
of the risk premium is zero. For UST Factor 1, the components of this decomposition are
    T -1 2 ^        ^t )2               T -1 ^2                                  T -1    ^t (^            ^t+1 -    ^t )
    t=1   ^t (t+1 -                     t=1 t (^  t+1 - ^t )2                    t=1  ^t     t+1 -   ^t )(
  T -1        ^
        t+1 t+1 -       ^   2
                              = 48% , T -1        ^
                                             t+1 t+1 -       ^   2
                                                                   = 9%, and 2       T -1         ^
                                                                                           t+1 t+1 -         ^  2
                                                                                                                          = 38%.18
  t=1 (^            ^t t )            t=1 (^            ^t t )                       t=1 (^              ^t t )
Thus, neglecting variation in volatility is effectively equivalent to misattributing about
50% of the variation in risk premia. Similarly, for UST Factor 2 these components are
    T -1 2 ^        ^t )2               T -1 ^2                                    T -1     ^t (^            ^t+1 -    ^t )
    t=1   ^t (t+1 -                     t=1 t (^  t+1 -  ^t )2                     t=1   ^t     t+1 -   ^t )(
  T -1
        
       (^     ^
                  - ^   ^  )2
                              = 42% , T - 1
                                            (^
                                                  ^    - ^   ^
                                                                )2
                                                                   = 14%, and  2       T -1
                                                                                              
                                                                                             (^     ^     - ^   ^
                                                                                                                   )2
                                                                                                                            = 36%.
  t=1     t+1 t+1     t  t            t=1      t+1 t+1     t  t                        t=1      t+1 t+1       t  t
As in the case of UST Factor 1, neglecting variation in volatility is equivalent to misattribut-
ing about 50% of the variation in risk premia. These results suggest that empirical studies
motivated by constant volatility models, where all variation in risk premia is attributable to
movements in the price of risk, are missing an important part of the story.


4.4        Fitted UST Bond Volatilities, Sharpe Ratios, and Risk Premia
As discussed in Section 3.3, we can recover the risk and return dynamics of the zero-coupon
bonds from the dynamics of the factors together with the zero volatilities and the loadings
of the standardized zeroes on the factors from the principal components analysis in Table 1.
For simplicity, we assume that just the first two principal component factors are driving the
zero returns and we ignore Factors 3 through 10 since their combined explanatory power
is small. Thus, the standardized monthly excess return on the zero with maturity i is the
loading-weighted sum of the monthly excess returns on Factors 1 and 2:

                                               szi,t = i1 R1,t + i1 R2,t ,                                                  (24)

where ij are the loadings of standardized zero i on factor j from Table 1 Panel A. Letting
vi denote the unconditional monthly volatility of the i-year zero, based on Table 1 Panel
B, the unstandardized monthly excess return on zero i is zi,t = vi szi,t . It follows that the
annualized fitted conditional volatility of the unstandardized excess return on zero i is
                                                       
                                        volt (zi ) =      12vi    i21  2
                                                                      ^1      2 2
                                                                         ,t + i2 ^2,t .                                     (25)

Similarly, the annualized fitted conditional risk premium of the unstandardized excess return
on zero i is
                             rpt (zi ) = 12vi (i1 ^1,t ^1,t + i2 ^2,t ^2,t ) ,           (26)

and the annualized fitted conditional Sharpe ratio of the unstandardized excess return on
zero i is
                                srt (zi ) = rpt (zi )/volt (zi ) .                   (27)
  18
       These components do not sum to exactly one because we dropped the higher-order terms.

                                                                 20
    Figure 3 illustrates the time series of the annualized fitted conditional volatilities, Sharpe
ratios, and risk premia of the unstandardized excess returns on the UST two-year and ten-
year zeroes. These plots illustrate a number of interesting features of the data.
    First, with regard to volatility, it is no surprise that the two-year and ten-year zeroes
exhibit similar time series behavior, with the ten-year volatility scaled by a factor of approx-
imately five, i.e., its relative duration. Most notable is that both volatility series exhibit the
same approximately 50% decline in volatility exhibited by the underlying factors as discussed
in Section 4.3.
    Second, while both zeroes also exhibit major declines in fitted Sharpe ratios over the
sample, the decline is much larger in magnitude for the two-year zero. For much of the sam-
ple, the Sharpe ratio on the shorter-term security exceeds that on the longer-term security,
consistent with the unconditional evidence in Table 1. However, by the end of the sample
these Sharpe ratios have converged, as the fitted Sharpe ratio on the second bond market
factor, which determines Sharpe ratio differences across the term structure, hovers close to
zero. As we noted earlier, in a world with a single priced factor on which all bonds load
positively, the Sharpe ratios on all bonds are equal.
    Third, the joint dynamics of the volatilities and Sharpe ratios generate an interesting
pattern in risk premia. Specifically, the gap between the risk premia on the ten-year and
two-year zeroes shows both a marked business cycle pattern and a trend over time. This
gap is minimal or even negative at the end of expansions and heading into recessions, but it
spikes at the beginning of expansions. However, this gap has also apparently been declining
over time, with small or no differences between the risk premia on the two bonds over the
last five years of the sample.


5     Results for Chinese Government Bonds
This section first presents the results of the GMM estimation of CGB factor volatility and
Sharpe ratio dynamics using data from Wind for the period 5/2004 to 12/2019. Then we
analyze the times series of fitted volatilities and Sharpe ratios for bond-factor portfolios and
individual bonds in China. These results are important for three reasons. First, the size of
the CGB market and its increasing global importance make the market inherently worthy of
study. Second, since for most of the sample the CGB market was effectively segmented from
the UST market, the CGB market provides independent evidence on the pricing of interest
rate risk. Third, the structure of the CGB market is quite different from the UST market,
therefore these results shed some light on the extent to which market structure affects the
pricing of risk.

                                               21
5.1    GMM Estimation Results for the CGB Factors
                                                                   
The top panel of Table 5 presents GMM estimates of j , j        , j , and their robust z-statistics
for alternative specifications of Equations (17) and (18) for the CGB factors. The bottom
panel indicates the number of moment conditions used in the estimation, the p-value of the
J -statistic over-identifying restrictions test, p-values for the Wald tests of null hypotheses
H0,1 and H0,2 , and the goodness-of-fit measures. The left side of Table 5 reports results for
CGB Factor 1 and the right side reports results for CGB Factor 2.
    For each CGB factor, the table reports results for specifications that include all three
yield-curve variables in the volatility and Sharpe ratio functions. The p-values of the J -
statistic tests are uniformly high, suggesting that linear functions of the predictor variables
are adequate for modeling the factor volatilities and Sharpe Ratios. For CGB Factor 1,
Column (1a) of Table 5 reports estimation results for the specification that includes the
return constant 1 . As the table shows, the estimate of 1 is insignificant, as no-arbitrage
theory predicts, so in Specification (1b), we impose the theoretical restriction 1 = 0. This
has little effect on the estimates of the volatility coefficients, but imposing the theoretical
restriction 1 = 0 appears to increase the power of the estimation of the Sharpe ratio
coefficients. Three of the coefficient estimates become marginally to highly significant. In
addition, the p-values for the Wald tests all fall below 1% or 5%. We reject the hypotheses
that CGB Factor-1 volatility is constant and that the price of CGB Factor-1 risk is constant.
    These results display a striking similarity to those for UST Factor 1 in Table 3. The signs
of the coefficients on the three term structure variables in both the volatility and Sharpe
ratio functions are identical across markets. The difference is in the importance of curva-
ture. While we dropped this variable from the UST specifications because of its statistical
insignificance, in China it is by far the most significant variable in the volatility function and
it also shows up with at least marginal significance in the Sharpe ratio. Moreover, the mag-
nitude of the curvature coefficient, both in an absolute sense and relative to the coefficients
on level and slope, is much bigger in China. We will return to this feature of the data when
examining the prices and quantities of interest rate risk below.
    For CGB Factor 2, Specification (2a) in Table 5 includes the return constant 2 and the
estimate of 2 is again insignificant, as no-arbitrage theory predicts. In Specification (2b),
we impose the theoretical restriction 2 = 0. As with CGB Factor 1, this increases our
power to reject the null hypothesis that the price of CGB Factor-2 risk is zero or constant.
The Wald test p-value is about 1%. For Factor 2, while the signs of the coefficients in the
volatility function are the same as those in the US, the same is not true of the Sharpe ratio.
    However, most importantly, we conclude that, as in the case of the UST factors, the risk
premia in the CGB factors are solely compensation for risk, and both the quantities and

                                                22
prices of these risks vary stochastically. This confirmatory evidence from China indicates
that modeling these components of bond risk premia separately, as the theory would suggest,
is likely important for understanding the economic underpinnings of time-variation in these
premia.


5.2    Fitted CGB Factor Volatilities and Sharpe Ratios
Figure 4 plots the time series of fitted values of CGB Factor-1 and Factor-2 Sharpe ratios and
volatilities based on GMM estimates from Table 5. Panel A plots Factor-1 fitted values from
Specification (1b) of Table 5, and Panel B plots Factor-2 fitted values from Specification
(2b) of Table 5. In contrast to the results for the UST factors, the CGB factors exhibit
negative correlations between their prices and quantities of risk. In particular, the time-
series correlation between the Sharpe ratio of Factor 1 and the volatility of Factor 1 is -46%
with a Newey-West t-statistic of -2.68 and this same correlation for Factor 2 is -63% with a
Newey-West t-statistic of -6.37.
    For Factor 1, these negative correlations appear to be driven by the dynamics around
two periods with heavy government interventions, that of the massive post-crisis stimulus
starting in 2009, and that following the stock market crash in the summer of 2015. During
each of these periods, the People's Bank of China (PBoC) conducted major monetary policy
interventions involving five reductions of the benchmark bank deposit and lending rates and
four reductions of the bank deposit reserve requirement ratio. These interventions may have
lead bond market participants to anticipate significant stabilization of prices, reflected in
the drop in expected volatility. At the same time, an increase in risk aversion during these
periods of economic and stock market crisis may have lead to an increase in the price of
risk. Interestingly, it is the curvature variable, which has opposite signs in the volatility and
Sharpe ratio equations, that appears to pick up this phenomenon. For Factor 2, the negative
correlation is stronger, and it appears to be more consistent over time.
    The two bond factor volatilities appear to follow a time trend broadly similar to that in
the US. Specifically, both series exhibit significant declines in magnitudes over the sample
period. In the US, most of this decline occurs in the latter half of the sample, which
corresponds to the sample period over which we have Chinese data. However, the same is
not true of the CGB factor Sharpe ratios. There is little or no evidence of a decline in the
price of risk in China. A full exploration of the economic underpinnings of this empirical
evidence is beyond the scope of this paper, but the results do show the potential of our
theoretically motivated decomposition of bond risk premia to highlight important economic
phenomena.


                                               23
5.3    CGB Bond Volatilities, Sharpe Ratios, and Risk Premia
Following the method described in Section 4.4, we recover the annualized fitted conditional
volatilities, Sharpe ratios, and risk premia of the unstandardized excess returns on the CGB
two-year and ten-year zero-coupon bonds from the fitted values of the conditional volatilities
and Sharpe ratios of CGB Factors 1 and 2. Figure 5 illustrates their time series.
    The decline in volatility over time is perhaps not surprising given the results from the
previous section. The Sharpe ratios do not exhibit an obvious time trend, but they do
exhibit substantial time-variation. For China, the higher unconditional Sharpe ratio for
shorter maturity bonds seems to be attributable to the latter part of the sample, in contrast
to the result from the US. In fact, the post-crisis stimulus appears to coincide with a period
when the Sharpe ratio of the ten-year zero greatly exceeded that of the two-year zero. Putting
these components together, the gap between the two bonds' risk premia shows interesting
variation. There are apparently substantial periods of time when the risk premia on longer-
term bonds are very high compared to those on shorter-term bonds. However, this difference
has all but disappeared in recent years as the higher Sharpe ratio on the two-year bond offsets
its lower volatility.


6     Conclusion
While for many investors and investment managers, Treasury securities are a critical com-
ponent of their portfolios, in some cases even more critical than equities, the associated aca-
demic literature has not evolved to answer a number of key questions. Many of these studies
neglect consideration of risk, which is of particular importance in fixed income markets where
expected returns can be levered almost arbitrarily. At the same time, the dynamics of bond
risk and risk premia have implications for other important issues, such as the underlying
economic equilibrium and the transmission of monetary policy.
    Our paper advances the literature by providing two critical insights in a well-motivated
economic framework. First, our empirical specifications restrict risk premia to be functions
of risk, i.e., volatility. Thus, we decompose premia into two components: the quantity of risk
(volatility) and the price of that risk (the Sharpe ratio). Second, our focus on Sharpe ratios
reveals the existence of two important factors in government bond returns. For both factors,
the quantity and price of risk vary over time in important and economically reasonable ways.
Interestingly, these two components covary positively in the US Treasury market. This result
is in stark contrast to the evidence in the US equity markets, where the observed correlation
is negative, leading to apparently Sharpe-ratio-maximizing, volatility-timing strategies that


                                              24
increase equity exposure when volatility is low (see, for example, Fleming, Kirby, and Ostdiek
(2001) and Moreira and Muir (2017)). The reverse is true in the Treasury bond market. For
example, a volatility-managed portfolio that holds UST Factor 1 in inverse proportion to its
variance, as in Moreira and Muir (2017), has a Sharpe ratio only 67% as large as the original
Factor 1 portfolio.
    Of further interest, the structure of risk premia in the Chinese government bond market
is broadly similar to that in the US Treasury market, despite the fact that for much of
the sample the bond market in China was effectively segregated from the bond market in
the US. This independent evidence lends credence to the argument that we have uncovered
fundamental structural components of bond risk premia. The one result that does not
hold in China is the consistently positive correlation between the quantity and price of risk.
Specifically, periods of significant government intervention, associated with the financial crisis
and the 2015 stock market meltdown, generate a negative rather than a positive correlation
between the price and quantity of interest rate risk.




                                               25
References
Adrian, Tobias, Richard K Crump, and Emanuel Moench, 2013, Pricing the term structure
 with linear regressions, Journal of Financial Economics 110, 110­138.

Amstad, Marlene, and Zhiguo He, 2018, Handbook of China's Financial System Chapter 6:
 Chinese bond market and interbank market.

Ang, Andrew, and Monika Piazzesi, 2003, A no-arbitrage vector autoregression of term struc-
 ture dynamics with macroeconomic and latent variables, Journal of Monetary Economics
 50, 745­787.

Bauer, Michael D, and James D Hamilton, 2018, Robust bond risk premia, Review of Fi-
  nancial Studies 31, 399­448.

Boudoukh, Jacob, Christopher Downing, Matthew Richardson, Richard Stanton, and Robert
  Whitelaw, 2010, A multifactor, nonlinear, continuous-time model of interest rate volatility,
  Volatility and Time Series Econometrics: Essays in Honor of Robert F. Engle 296­322.

Boudoukh, Jacob, and Matthew Richardson, 1994, The statistics of long-horizon regressions
  revisited, Mathematical Finance 4, 103­119.

Boudoukh, Jacob, Matthew Richardson, and Robert F Whitelaw, 2008, The myth of long-
  horizon predictability, Review of Financial Studies 21, 1577­1605.

Brooks, Jordan, and Tobias J Moskowitz, 2017, Yield curve premia, Available at SSRN
  2956411 .

Campbell, John Y, 1987, Stock returns and the term structure, Journal of Financial Eco-
  nomics 18, 373­399.

Campbell, John Y, and Robert J Shiller, 1991, Yield spreads and interest rate movements:
  A bird's eye view, Review of Economic Studies 58, 495­514.

Chan, Kalok C, G Andrew Karolyi, Francis A Longstaff, and Anthony B Sanders, 1992,
 An empirical comparison of alternative models of the short-term interest rate, Journal of
 Finance 47, 1209­1227.

Cieslak, Anna, and Pavol Povala, 2015, Expected returns in Treasury bonds, Review of
  Financial Studies 28, 2859­2901.




                                             26
Cieslak, Anna, and Pavol Povala, 2016, Information in the term structure of yield curve
  volatility, Journal of Finance 71, 1393­1436.

Cochrane, John H, 2005, Asset Pricing , revised edition (Princeton University Press, Prince-
  ton, New Jersey).

Cochrane, John H, and Monika Piazzesi, 2005, Bond risk premia, American Economic Review
  95, 138­160.

Collin-Dufresne, Pierre, and Robert Goldstein, 2002, Do bonds span the fixed income mar-
  kets? Theory and evidence for unspanned stochastic volatility, Journal of Finance 57,
  1685­1730.

Cox, John C, Jonathan E Ingersoll, and Stephen A Ross, 1985, A theory of the term structure
  of interest rates, Econometrica 53, 385­407.

Dai, Qiang, and Kenneth J Singleton, 2000, Specification analysis of affine term structure
 models, Journal of Finance 55, 1943­1978.

Duffee, Gregory R, 2002, Term premia and interest rate forecasts in affine models, Journal
 of Finance 57, 405­443.

Duffee, Gregory R, 2011, Information in (and not in) the term structure, Review of Financial
 Studies 24, 2895­2934.

Duffie, Darrell, and Rui Kan, 1996, A yield-factor model of interest rates, Mathematical
 Finance 6, 379­406.

Engle, Robert F, David M Lilien, and Russell P Robins, 1987, Estimating time varying risk
  premia in the term structure: The ARCH-M model, Econometrica 55, 391­407.

Fama, Eugene F, 1986, Term premiums and default premiums in money markets, Journal
  of Financial Economics 17, 175­196.

Fama, Eugene F, and Robert R Bliss, 1987, The information in long-maturity forward rates,
  American Economic Review 77, 680­692.

Fleming, Jeff, Chris Kirby, and Barbara Ostdiek, 2001, The economic value of volatility
  timing, Journal of Finance 56, 329­352.

Frazzini, Andrea, and Lasse Heje Pedersen, 2014, Betting against beta, Journal of Financial
  Economics 111, 1­25.

                                            27
French, Kenneth R, G William Schwert, and Robert F Stambaugh, 1987, Expected stock
  returns and volatility, Journal of Financial Economics 19, 3­29.

Glosten, Lawrence R, Ravi Jagannathan, and David E Runkle, 1993, On the relation between
  the expected value and the volatility of the nominal excess return on stocks, Journal of
  Finance 48, 1779­1801.

Greenwood, Robin, and Dimitri Vayanos, 2014, Bond supply and excess bond returns, Review
  of Financial Studies 27, 663­713.

Joslin, Scott, Marcel Priebsch, and Kenneth J Singleton, 2014, Risk premiums in dynamic
  term structure models with unspanned macro risks, Journal of Finance 69, 1197­1233.

Karatzas, Ioannis, and Steven E Shreve, 1998, Methods of Mathematical Finance , volume 39
 (Springer).

Lettau, Martin, and Jessica A Wachter, 2011, The term structures of equity and interest
  rates, Journal of Financial Economics 101, 90­113.

Lewellen, Jonathan, Stefan Nagel, and Jay Shanken, 2010, A skeptical appraisal of asset
  pricing tests, Journal of Financial Economics 96, 175­194.

Litterman, Robert, and Jose Scheinkman, 1991, Common factors affecting bond returns,
  Journal of Fixed Income 1, 54­61.

Ludvigson, Sydney C, and Serena Ng, 2009, Macro factors in bond risk premia, Review of
  Financial Studies 22, 5027­5067.

Moreira, Alan, and Tyler Muir, 2017, Volatility-managed portfolios, Journal of Finance 72,
 1611­1644.

Stanton, Richard, 1997, A nonparametric model of term structure dynamics and the market
  price of interest rate risk, Journal of Finance 52, 1973­2002.

Tang, Yi, and Robert F Whitelaw, 2011, Time-varying Sharpe ratios and market timing,
  Quarterly Journal of Finance 1, 465­493.

Whitelaw, Robert F, 1994, Time variations and covariations in the expectation and volatility
 of stock market returns, Journal of Finance 49, 515­541.

Wright, Jonathan H, 2011, Term premia and inflation uncertainty: Empirical evidence from
 an international panel dataset, American Economic Review 101, 1514­34.

                                            28
Table 1: Factor Structure and Performance of UST and CGB Implied Zero Excess Returns
 The factor structure of US Treasury and Chinese Government Bond implied zero excess returns in
Panel A, and their unconditional means, volatilities, and Sharpe ratios in Panel B. All quantities
are annualized. Means and volatilities are in percent. Panel A shows the factor structure of the
standardized excess zero returns based on PCAs of their 10x10 correlation matrix for each subperiod
and market. For each subperiod and market, Panel A contains results for the first three principal
components, F1, F2, and F3. Factor Var. as % of Tot. is the factor's eigenvalue expressed as a
percent of the sum of all ten eigenvalues from the PCA. Factor Vol and SR are the volatility and
Sharpe ratio of each factor portfolio, constructed with holdings in the standardized zeroes given by
the eigenvector for the factor. The column-vector of zero loadings under each factor is the factor
eigenvector.
                                       UST Implied Zeroes                    CGB Implied Zeroes
                              7/1976­12/1989       1/1990­12/2019              5/2004­12/2019
A. Factor Structure            F1    F2     F3      F1    F2     F3             F1    F2     F3
Factor Var. as % of Tot.    94.69   4.07 0.73 90.64 7.35 1.42                82.05 13.91 2.37
Factor Vol                  10.66   2.21 0.93 10.43 2.97 1.30                 9.92   4.09 1.69
Factor SR                    0.27   0.45 0.45     0.77 0.85 0.61              0.53   0.21 0.07
1-year zero loadings         0.30    0.57    0.43     0.26    0.66    0.66    0.24    0.56    0.59
2-year zero loadings         0.31    0.40    0.11     0.31    0.40   -0.24    0.29    0.46    0.09
3-year zero loadings         0.32    0.27   -0.14     0.32    0.24   -0.36    0.32    0.30   -0.27
4-year zero loadings         0.32    0.15   -0.29     0.33    0.10   -0.32    0.34    0.15   -0.39
5-year zero loadings         0.32    0.02   -0.39     0.33   -0.03   -0.23    0.34    0.01   -0.38
6-year zero loadings         0.32   -0.14   -0.33     0.33   -0.12   -0.11    0.34   -0.12   -0.21
7-year zero loadings         0.32   -0.26   -0.19     0.33   -0.20    0.01    0.33   -0.22    0.01
8-year zero loadings         0.32   -0.31    0.02     0.32   -0.26    0.13    0.33   -0.27    0.14
9-year zero loadings         0.32   -0.34    0.27     0.32   -0.31    0.25    0.32   -0.32    0.27
10-year zero loadings        0.31   -0.34    0.58     0.31   -0.35    0.37    0.31   -0.35    0.38
B. Performance Measures     Mean      Vol     SR     Mean      Vol     SR    Mean      Vol     SR
1-year zero                  1.40    2.51    0.56     0.80    0.64    1.24    0.46    0.89    0.52
2-year zero                  1.56    4.70    0.33     1.54    1.63    0.94    0.86    1.52    0.57
3-year zero                  1.68    6.34    0.26     2.10    2.67    0.79    1.12    2.07    0.54
4-year zero                  1.94    8.07    0.24     2.77    3.68    0.75    1.39    2.68    0.52
5-year zero                  2.26    9.71    0.23     3.27    4.67    0.70    1.68    3.37    0.50
6-year zero                  2.61   11.11    0.23     3.82    5.58    0.68    2.08    3.99    0.52
7-year zero                  2.60   12.43    0.21     4.04    6.47    0.62    2.08    4.67    0.45
8-year zero                  2.73   13.55    0.20     4.35    7.33    0.59    2.27    5.30    0.43
9-year zero                  2.83   14.46    0.20     4.58    8.20    0.56    2.46    5.95    0.41
10-year zero                 2.84   15.25    0.19     4.61    9.08    0.51    2.61    6.64    0.39




                                                29
          Table 2: Factor Structure and Performance of UST ETF Excess Returns
  The factor structure of US Treasury ETF excess returns, gross and net of 15-basis-point annual
fees, in Panel A, and their unconditional means, volatilities, and Sharpe ratios in Panel B. The
sample period is 2/2007­12/2019. All quantities are annualized. Means and volatilities are in
percent. Panel A shows the factor structure of the standardized excess ETF returns based on
PCAs of their 6x6 correlation matrix for each subperiod. Panel A contains results for the first
three principal components, F1, F2, and F3. Factor Var. as % of Tot. is the factor's eigenvalue
expressed as a percent of the sum of all ten eigenvalues from the PCA. Factor Vol and SR are the
volatility and Sharpe ratio of each factor portfolio, constructed with holdings in the standardized
zeroes given by the eigenvector for the factor. The column-vector of zero loadings under each factor
is the factor eigenvector.
                                       Gross of 15-bp   Fees        Net of Fees
         A. Factor Structure             F1      F2       F3      F1      F2    F3
         Factor Var. as % of Tot.      76.19 16.30      5.92    76.19 16.30 5.92
         Factor Vol                     7.41 3.43       2.06     7.41 3.43 2.06
         Factor SR                      0.91 0.94       0.29     0.79 0.44 0.17
         0-1-year ETF                   0.27 0.75 0.59   0.27 0.75 -0.59
         1-3-year ETF                   0.40 0.39 -0.53  0.40 0.39 0.53
         3-7-year ETF                   0.45 0.06 -0.42  0.45 0.06 0.42
         7-10-year ETF                  0.46 -0.19 -0.02 0.46 -0.19 0.02
         10-20-year ETF                 0.44 -0.32 0.22  0.44 -0.32 -0.22
         >20-year ETF                   0.41 -0.38 0.38  0.41 -0.38 -0.38
         B. Performance Measures       Mean    Vol   SR Mean    Vol   SR
         0-1-year ETF                   0.33 0.25 1.32   0.18 0.25 0.72
         1-3-year ETF                   1.22 1.19 1.02   1.07 1.19 0.90
         3-7-year ETF                   3.11 3.54 0.88   2.96 3.54 0.83
         7-10-year ETF                  4.40 6.31 0.70   4.25 6.31 0.67
         10-20-year ETF                 5.33 8.76 0.61   5.18 8.76 0.59
         >20-year ETF                   6.85 13.71 0.50  6.70 13.71 0.49




                                                30
                        Table 3: GMM Estimates of UST Factor Dynamics
                          
 GMM estimates of j , j , j , and their robust z-statistics for alternative specifications of the system
                                                                   
                                           Rj,t+1 = j + (Xt j )(Xt j ) + uj,t+1 ,
                                                         
                                          |uj,t+1 | = Xt j + vj,t+1 .
                                        2

The sample period is 1/1990­12/2019. R1 and R2 are the monthly returns on the first and second principal-
component UST factor portfolios. Results for Factor 1 are on the left, results for Factor 2 are on the right.
Xt is the vector of predictor variables indicated by the row titles. Level = Y2 /10, Slope = (Y10 - Y2 )/10,
and Curvature = (Y6 - Y2 + 2
                            Y10
                                )/10, where YT is the yield on the T -year zero, for T = 2, 6, and 10. VIX is
an index of the implied volatility of the 30-day return on the S&P 500 derived from S&P 500 index options.
                                                                                                        
Wald test (1) tests the null hypothesis that factor volatility is constant, i.e., j, 1 = j,2 = · · · = j,k = 0.
                                                                                                        
Wald test (2) tests the null hypothesis that the price of factor risk is constant, i.e., j, 1 = · · · = j,k = 0.
                                     2                                                 2
                                  t uj,t                                           t vj,t
Goodness-of-fit (1) = 1-      ( R    -  ¯ 2.
                                 j,t Rj )
                                               Goodness-of-fit (2) = 1-         |          ¯ 2.
                            t                                           2   t (   u j,t |-|uj |)


                                                        UST Factor 1                       UST Factor 2
                                                         (1a)    (1b)         (1c)          (2a)    (2b)
                                        
               Volatility Coefficients (j )
                    Constant                              0.30      0.28      0.40           0.00     -0.02
                                                        (0.65)    (0.73)     (1.10)        (0.03)    (-0.14)
                    Level                                 2.90     2.93       2.60           0.61     0.62
                                                        (3.89)    (4.29)     (4.51)        (2.99)    (3.07)
                    Slope                                 7.44     7.49       6.16           2.79     2.83
                                                        (2.87)    (3.02)     (4.01)        (3.12)    (3.22)
                    Curvature                            -6.72     -6.90                    -8.41     -8.59
                                                        (-0.71)   (-0.74)                  (-2.29)   (-2.41)
                    VIX/100                               3.88     3.88       4.10           1.93     2.02
                                                        (2.81)    (2.90)     (3.03)        (3.74)    (3.71)
                                          
               Sharpe Ratio Coefficients (j )
                   Constant                              -0.48     -0.25     -0.36           0.69     -0.36
                                                        (-0.27)   (-1.11)   (-1.69)        (0.36)    (-1.64)
                    Level                                 0.44     0.30      0.57            0.12      0.66
                                                        (0.42)    (0.93)    (2.14)         (0.11)    (1.85)
                    Slope                                 0.76     0.41      1.44           -2.46     -0.25
                                                        (0.26)    (0.34)    (1.94)         (-0.58)   (-0.18)
                    Curvature                             4.35     4.76                      7.65      1.43
                                                        (0.80)    (1.04)                   (0.61)    (0.27)
                    VIX/100                               1.20     1.01       0.95           0.99     2.05
                                                        (0.78)    (1.29)     (1.24)        (0.49)    (3.14)
               Return Constant (j )                       0.32                              -0.37
                                                        (0.13)                             (-0.55)
               No. Moment Conditions                       20       20         14             20       20
               J -stat p-value (in %)                    69.26    78.37      83.97          15.01    20.44
               Wald test (1) p-value (in %)               0.00     0.00       0.00           0.00     0.00
               Wald test (2) p-value (in %)              60.20    10.86       5.40           6.22     0.11
               Goodness-of-fit (1) (in %)                 4.72     4.62       4.53           4.31     2.48
               Goodness-of-fit (2) (in %)                 8.08     8.19       8.17          10.22    11.30




                                                            31
                   Table 4: R2 's in Monthly and Annual Return Regressions
The table compares regression results using monthly returns with those using annual overlapping
returns. Panel A shows the coefficients, t-statistics, and R2 from the first-stage regression of
realized volatility, measured as     2 |R1,t+1 |, on the indicated predictor variables. R1 is the return
on UST Factor 1. Panel B shows the coefficients, t-statistics, and R2 from the autoregression
of fitted volatility values, Volhat, from the first-stage regression. Panel C shows the coefficients,
t-statistics, and R2 from the second-stage regression of UST Factor-1 monthly returns on Volhat.
Panel D shows the coefficients, t-statistics, and R2 from the second-stage regression of UST Factor-
1 annual, overlapping returns on Volhat. Panel E shows the coefficient and R2 for the second-stage
annual, overlapping return regression implied by the model of Boudoukh et al. (2008). Ordinary-
least-squares t-statistics are in parenthesis, Newey-West t-statistics are in brackets, and R2 's are in
percent.
                           A. First-stage volatility regression
                           Constant Level         Slope VIX/100     R2
                           -0.19         3.08      7.72      6.19  11.82
                           (-0.40)      (4.80) (4.78)       (3.79)
                           B. Autoregression of fitted volatility
                           Constant Volhat          R2
                           0.18          0.94     87.19
                           (3.03)      (49.29)
                           C. Second-stage monthly return regression
                           Constant Volhat          R2
                           -1.55         0.74      4.32
                           (-2.71)      (4.02)
                           [-3.00]      [4.25]
                           D. Second-stage annual return regression
                           Constant Volhat          R2
                           -10.28        6.13     19.12
                           (-4.84)      (9.06)
                           [-2.23]      [4.22]
                           E. BRW-implied annual return regression
                                       Volhat       R2
                                         6.43     27.01




                                                  32
                        Table 5: GMM Estimates of CGB Factor Dynamics
                         
GMM estimates of j , j , j , and their robust z-statistics for alternative specifications of the system
                                                                   
                                           Rj,t+1 = j + (Xt j )(Xt j ) + uj,t+1 ,
                                                         
                                          |uj,t+1 | = Xt j + vj,t+1 .
                                        2

The sample period is 5/2004­12/2019. R1 and R2 are the monthly returns on the first and second principal-
component CGB factor portfolios. Results for Factor 1 are on the left, results for Factor 2 are on the right.
Xt is the vector of predictor variables indicated by the row titles. Level = Y2 /10, Slope = (Y10 - Y2 )/10,
and Curvature = (Y6 - Y2 +  2
                             Y10
                                 )/10, where YT is the yield in percent on the T -year zero, for T = 2, 6, and
                                                                                                           
10. Wald test (1) tests the null hypothesis that factor volatility is constant, i.e., j, 1 = j,2 = · · · = j,k = 0.
                                                                                                           
Wald test (2) tests the null hypothesis that the price of factor risk is constant, i.e., j,1 = · · · = j,k = 0.
                                     2                                              2
                                  t uj,t                                          vj,t
                                                                                  t
Goodness-of-fit (1) = 1-      ( R    -  ¯ 2.
                                 j,t Rj )
                                               Goodness-of-fit (2) = 1-                 ¯ 2.
                            t                                           2   t (|uj,t |-|uj |)


                                                             CGB Factor 1             CGB Factor 2
                                                              (1a)   (1b)              (2a)   (2b)
                                             
                    Volatility Coefficients (j )
                         Constant                              2.19       1.96         -0.34     -0.38
                                                             (2.16)     (1.64)        (-0.75)   (-0.86)
                           Level                               1.98       2.63          3.11      3.23
                                                             (0.73)     (0.85)        (2.56)    (2.71)
                           Slope                               5.49       7.42          6.95      7.04
                                                             (1.17)     (1.42)        (4.24)    (4.46)
                           Curvature                         -50.65     -61.89         -5.39     -4.64
                                                             (-3.08)    (-4.25)       (-0.76)   (-0.66)
                                               
                    Sharpe Ratio Coefficients (j )
                        Constant                               0.33      -1.21          1.57      0.85
                                                             (0.16)     (-2.15)       (0.76)    (1.62)
                           Level                               2.69       3.57         -1.90     -1.04
                                                             (1.11)     (2.46)        (-0.71)   (-0.75)
                           Slope                              -0.04      1.91          -5.15     -3.34
                                                             (-0.01)    (0.86)        (-0.92)   (-1.84)
                           Curvature                          52.58      21.55         -9.51    -11.52
                                                             (1.64)     (1.86)        (-1.09)   (-1.54)
                    Return Constant (j )                      -3.78                    -0.35
                                                             (-0.84)                  (-0.38)
                    No. Moment Conditions                       14        14             14       14
                    J-stat p-value (in %)                     69.11     55.20          47.74    58.35
                    Wald test (1) p-value (in %)               1.38      0.00           0.04     0.01
                    Wald test (2) p-value (in %)              11.06      3.99          10.91     1.14
                    Goodness-of-fit (1) (in %)                 6.18      5.17           5.31     5.28
                    Goodness-of-fit (2) (in %)                 4.12      4.45          10.03    10.47




                                                            33
                                                   Figure 1: Yield Curve Shifts for One-Std-Dev Increases in Factors

                                                              Yield Curve Shifts for One-Std-Dev Increases in Factor 1
                                               0
                                                     1     2       3     4      5     6     7     8     9        10
                                                                                                            Maturity
                                           -50
      Yield Curve Shift in Basis Points




                                          -100                                                                           UST 1976-1989
                                                                                                                         UST 1990-2019
                                          -150                                                                           CGB 2004-2019


                                          -200


                                          -250

                                                              Yield Curve Shifts for One-Std-Dev Increases in Factor 2
                                           60

                                           40
     Yield Curve Shift in Basis Points




                                           20

                                               0                                                                         UST 1976-1989
                                                     1     2       3     4      5     6     7     8     9        10
                                           -20                                                                           UST 1990-2019
                                                                                                            Maturity
                                           -40                                                                           CGB 2004-2019

                                           -60

                                           -80

                                          -100


                                                              Yield Curve Shifts for One-Std-Dev Increases in Factor 3
                                          30

                                          20
     Yield Curve Shift in Basis Points




                                          10

                                                                                                                         UST 1976-1989
                                           0
                                                    1     2       3      4     5     6      7     8     9        10      UST 1990-2019
                                          -10
                                                                                                            Maturity     CGB 2004-2019

                                          -20

                                          -30

                                          -40



Yield curve shifts associated with one-standard-deviation increases in the returns of the
bond market factors described in Table 1.
                                                                                     34
                                                                                                                       UST Factor 2 Fitted Sharpe Ratio (bars)                                                           UST Factor 1 Fitted Sharpe Ratio (bars)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   4




                                                                                                                                                                                                             -1




                                                                                                                                                         10
                                                                                                                                                               12
                                                                                                                                                                    14




                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                                                       4
                                                                                                                                             6
                                                                                                                                                   8




                                                                                                                  -2
                                                                                                                  199001                                                                                              199001
                                                                                                                  199101                                                                                              199101
                                                                                                                  199201                                                                                              199201
                                                                                                                  199301                                                                                              199301
                                                                                                                  199401                                                                                              199401
                                                                                                                  199501                                                                                              199501




     of Table 3, respectively.
                                                                                                                  199601                                                                                              199601
                                                                                                                  199701                                                                                              199701
                                                                                                                  199801                                                                                              199801
                                                                                                                  199901                                                                                              199901




                                                                                                                                                                         B. UST Factor 2 Dynamics
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        A. UST Factor 1 Dynamics




                                                                                                                  200001                                                                                              200001
                                                                                                                  200101                                                                                              200101




                                                                                                NBER Recessions
                                                                                                                                                                                                    NBER Recessions
                                                                                                                  200201                                                                                              200201
                                                                                                                  200301                                                                                              200301
                                                                                                                  200401                                                                                              200401




35
                                                                                                                  200501                                                                                              200501
                                                                                                                  200601                                                                                              200601
                                                                                                                  200701                                                                                              200701




                                                                                                UST Theta2hat
                                                                                                                                                                                                    UST Theta1hat
                                                                                                                  200801                                                                                              200801
                                                                                                                  200901                                                                                              200901
                                                                                                                  201001                                                                                              201001
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Figure 2: UST Factor Dynamics




                                                                                                                  201101                                                                                              201101
                                                                                                                  201201                                                                                              201201
                                                                                                                  201301                                                                                              201301
                                                                                                                  201401                                                                                              201401




                                                                                                UST Sigma2hat
                                                                                                                                                                                                    UST Sigma1hat




                                                                                                                  201501                                                                                              201501
                                                                                                                  201601                                                                                              201601
                                                                                                                  201701                                                                                              201701
                                                                                                                  201801                                                                                              201801
                                                                                                                  201901                                                                                              201901
                                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     8




                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                                                       3
                                                                                                                                             4
                                                                                                                                                   5
                                                                                                                                                         6
                                                                                                                                                               7
                                                                                                                                                                    8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   20




                                                                                                                           UST Factor 2 Fitted Volatility (line)                                                           UST Factor 1 Fitted Volatility (line)




     volatilities based on GMM estimates of factor dynamics from Specifications (1c) and (2b)
     Time series of annualized fitted values of UST Factor 1 and Factor 2 Sharpe ratios and
                                 Figure 3: UST Bond Dynamics
     A. UST Bond Volatilities
     16

     14

     12

     10

      8                                                                    NBER Recessions
                                                                           Two-Year Vol
      6
                                                                           Ten-Year Vol
      4

      2

      0
          199001
          199101
          199201
          199301
          199401
          199501
          199601
          199701
          199801
          199901
          200001
          200101
          200201
          200301
          200401
          200501
          200601
          200701
          200801
          200901
          201001
          201101
          201201
          201301
          201401
          201501
          201601
          201701
          201801
          201901
     B. UST Bond Sharpe Ratios
     4



     3



     2                                                                     NBER Recessions
                                                                           Two-Year SR

     1                                                                     Ten-Year SR



     0
          199001
          199101
          199201
          199301
          199401
          199501
          199601
          199701
          199801
          199901
          200001
          200101
          200201
          200301
          200401
          200501
          200601
          200701
          200801
          200901
          201001
          201101
          201201
          201301
          201401
          201501
          201601
          201701
          201801
          201901




     -1


     C. UST Bond Risk Premia
     16



     12



      8                                                                    NBER Recessions
                                                                           Two-Year RP

      4                                                                    Ten-Year RP



      0
          199001
          199101
          199201
          199301
          199401
          199501
          199601
          199701
          199801
          199901
          200001
          200101
          200201
          200301
          200401
          200501
          200601
          200701
          200801
          200901
          201001
          201101
          201201
          201301
          201401
          201501
          201601
          201701
          201801
          201901




     -4



Time series of annualized fitted volatilities, Sharpe ratios, and risk premia of UST implied
2-year and 10-year zero-coupon bonds, based on the fitted values of UST Factor 1 and
Factor 2 Sharpe ratios and volatilities together with the loadings of the standardized excess
returns of the zeroes on the factors and the unconditional volatilities of the zero excess
returns from Table 1.
                                             36
                                                                                             Figure 4: CGB Factor Dynamics


                                                A. CGB Factor 1 Dynamics
                                           5                                                                                                                                                                  14
CGB Factor 1 Fitted Sharpe Ratio (bars)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CGB Factor 1 Fitted Volatility (line)
                                           4                                                                                                                                                                  12


                                           3                                                                                                                                                                  10


                                           2                                                                                                                                                                  8


                                           1                                                                                                                                                                  6


                                           0                                                                                                                                                                  4
                                                200404

                                                         200504

                                                                  200604

                                                                           200704

                                                                                    200804

                                                                                              200904

                                                                                                       201004

                                                                                                                   201104

                                                                                                                            201204

                                                                                                                                      201304

                                                                                                                                                201404

                                                                                                                                                          201504

                                                                                                                                                                    201604

                                                                                                                                                                              201704

                                                                                                                                                                                        201804

                                                                                                                                                                                                   201904
                                           -1                                                                                                                                                                 2


                                           -2                                                                                                                                                                 0

                                                                                                                Theta1hat               Sigma1hat


                                                B. CGB Factor 2 Dynamics
                                           2                                                                                                                                                                   8
 CGB Factor 2 Fitted Sharpe Ratio (bars)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CGB Factor 2 Fitted Volatility (line)
                                           1                                                                                                                                                                   6




                                           0                                                                                                                                                                   4
                                                200404

                                                         200504

                                                                  200604

                                                                           200704

                                                                                    200804

                                                                                              200904

                                                                                                       201004

                                                                                                                   201104

                                                                                                                             201204

                                                                                                                                       201304

                                                                                                                                                 201404

                                                                                                                                                           201504

                                                                                                                                                                     201604

                                                                                                                                                                               201704

                                                                                                                                                                                          201804

                                                                                                                                                                                                     201904




                                           -1                                                                                                                                                                  2




                                           -2                                                                                                                                                                  0
Time series of annualized fitted values   of CGB Factor
                                      Theta2hat           1 and Factor 2 Sharpe ratios and
                                                  Sigma2hat
volatilities based on GMM estimates of factor dynamics predicted by yield-curve level,
slope, and curvature from Specifications (1b) and (2b) of Table 5, respectively.



                                                                                                                            37
                                                                         Figure 5: CGB Bond Dynamics
     A. CGB Bond Volatilities
     10
      9
      8
      7
      6
      5
                                                                                                                                                                             Two-Year Vol
      4
                                                                                                                                                                             Ten-Year Vol
      3
      2
      1
      0
           200404

                     200504

                                200604

                                           200704

                                                     200804

                                                               200904

                                                                         201004

                                                                                   201104

                                                                                             201204

                                                                                                       201304

                                                                                                                 201404

                                                                                                                           201504

                                                                                                                                     201604

                                                                                                                                               201704

                                                                                                                                                         201804

                                                                                                                                                                   201904
     B. CGB Bond Sharpe Ratios
     4


     3


     2

                                                                                                                                                                             Two-Year SR
     1
                                                                                                                                                                             Ten-Year SR

     0
          200404

                     200504

                                200604

                                           200704

                                                     200804

                                                               200904

                                                                         201004

                                                                                   201104

                                                                                             201204

                                                                                                       201304

                                                                                                                  201404

                                                                                                                           201504

                                                                                                                                     201604

                                                                                                                                                201704

                                                                                                                                                          201804

                                                                                                                                                                    201904
     -1


     -2



     C. CGB Bond Risk Premia
     25

     20

     15

     10
                                                                                                                                                                             Two-Year RP
      5
                                                                                                                                                                             Ten-Year RP
      0
            200404

                       200504

                                  200604

                                            200704

                                                      200804

                                                                200904

                                                                          201004

                                                                                    201104

                                                                                              201204

                                                                                                        201304

                                                                                                                  201404

                                                                                                                            201504

                                                                                                                                      201604

                                                                                                                                                201704

                                                                                                                                                          201804

                                                                                                                                                                    201904




      -5

     -10

     -15



Time series of annualized fitted volatilities, Sharpe ratios, and risk premia of CGB implied
2-year and 10-year zero-coupon bonds, based on the fitted values of CGB Factor 1 and
Factor 2 Sharpe ratios and volatilities together with the loadings of the standardized excess
returns of the zeroes on the factors and the unconditional volatilities of the zero excess
returns from Table 1.
                                                                                                                 38
