                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




ARE BEHAVIORAL CHANGE INTERVENTIONS NEEDED TO MAKE CASH TRANSFER
PROGRAMS WORK FOR CHILDREN? EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE FROM MYANMAR

                                         Erica M. Field
                                        Elisa M. Maffioli

                                       Working Paper 28443
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28443


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2021




We thank the Livelihoods and Food Security Trust Fund and the International Growth Centre for
their support. We also thank Save the Children for their guidance, feedback, and faith in the
research process. This project would not have been possible without the contributions of the
Ministry of Social Welfare, Relief, and Resettlement; the Department of Social Welfare; the
Myanmar Nurse and Midwife Association; and the Pact Global Microfinance Fund. Finally, we
extend our deepest gratitude to the hardworking staff at Innovations for Poverty Action, in
particular Nicholus Tint Zaw, Thein Zaw Oo, and Than Zaw Oo. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Erica M. Field and Elisa M. Maffioli. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Are Behavioral Change Interventions Needed to Make Cash Transfer Programs Work for
Children? Experimental Evidence from Myanmar
Erica M. Field and Elisa M. Maffioli
NBER Working Paper No. 28443
February 2021
JEL No. I12,I15,I38

                                        ABSTRACT

We experimentally evaluate the impact on child malnutrition of a maternal cash transfer program
in Myanmar that was supplemented with Social Behavior Change Communication (SBCC) in a
subset of villages. The combination of interventions significantly reduced the proportion of
children stunted, while cash alone had no impact on stunting. SBCC appears to have worked in
conjunction with cash to reduce stunting by encouraging mothers to increase children's total
calories and protein consumed. The findings provide evidence that information constraints
contribute to low income-elasticity of calorie demand among malnourished populations, and
underscore the importance of adding SBCC to cash transfer programs.


Erica M. Field
Department of Economics
Duke University
Social Sciences Building
Box 90097
Durham, NC 27708
and CEPR
and also NBER
emf23@duke.edu

Elisa M. Maffioli
elisamaf@umich.edu
1     Introduction
Despite widescale improvements in economic wellbeing over the past few decades, child
malnutrition remains a global health concern, affecting more than 150 million children
annually (World Bank, 2017). When families cannot afford to provide children with
sufficient nutrient-rich calories during critical windows of growth, malnutrition can
lead to irreversible decreases in health and cognitive human capital that are visible
in permanent differences in stature. In Myanmar, where this study takes place, an
estimated 29 percent of the children under age five are stunted, a rate that can reach
as high as 50 percent in poor rural areas (Demographic Health Surveys, 2015; United
Nation Standing Committee on Nutrition, 2010).
     The provision of adequate nutrition in early life is believed to be crucial to realizing
an individual's full physical and cognitive potential throughout the life course. Evi-
dence from both medical and social science research has contributed to the consensus
that the in-utero phase and the first two years of life constitute the most critical pe-
riod of development (Almond and Currie, 2011a). Inadequate nutrition during the first
1000 days of life is believed to produce higher susceptibility to illness, and impaired
physical and cognitive ability later in life (Almond and Currie, 2011b; Doyle, 2019).
These early life health insults have the potential to lower human capital accumulation,
productivity and earnings in adult life, thereby contributing to the inter-generational
transmission of poverty (Engle et al., 2007; Hoddinott et al., 2013; Richter et al., 2017).
     Concern over malnutrition in utero and during the first two years of life has mo-
tivated a number of governments, NGOs, and international agencies to direct cash
transfers programs to households with young children, which to date have reached be-
tween 750 million to one billion people globally (Bastagli et al., 2016; Hoddinott et al.,
2017). There are two principal ways in which cash transfers may directly reduce early
life malnutrition. First, households at risk of malnourishment are expected to spend a
large fraction of each additional dollar of income on child nutrition (both quantity and
quality of calories) simply because investing in children who are malnourished during
critical windows of physical and cognitive development is one of the highest return
investments a family can make. Likewise, cash transfers could also facilitate similarly
high-return investments in child health production such as health care expenditures.
Second, these programs are frequently directed to mothers ("maternal cash transfer
programs"), and increasing women's control over income is believed to promote invest-



                                             1
ment in children in and of itself.1
     However, it is not obvious that simply giving cash to families at risk is sufficient to
make a dent in early life malnourishment. Although stunting rates do indeed fall with
household income in cross-sectional data, empirical research on calorie "Engel curves"
suggests that even very poor households do not spend a large fraction of each additional
dollar received on food consumption.2 In fact, a number of scholars have noted a "mal-
nutrition puzzle" in parts of the developing world whereby calorie consumption stays
constant or even declines when income rises (Deaton and Dr`   eze, 2009). Consistent with
this, there is no consensus from evaluations of existing programs that cash transfers
generate significant reductions in stunting. While cash transfer programs have been
associated with a wide range of positive household outcomes, including increases in
schooling and business income of vulnerable populations (Bastagli et al., 2016), the
evidence on positive effects on child malnutrition is scarce and inconclusive (Baird et
al., 2019; Ahmed et al., 2019). As described in evidence reviews (Ritcher, 2010; Soares
et al., 2010; Cecchini and Madariaga, 2011; Manley et al., 2013; Bastagli et al., 2016;
Tirivayia et al., 2016; Biscaye et al., 2017; Millan et al., 2019), while some program
evaluations have shown positive impacts, several reported mixed or null results.
     There are three primary explanations for why maternal cash transfer programs
may fail to reduce malnutrition. First, households may lack sufficient information
on child health production to understand the value of early life nutrition, reducing
the marginal impact of income on child health. Second, even when cash is targeted to
mothers, households may fail to direct consumption towards children because those who

   1
      There is a substantial body of literature linking female income share to increases in children's
expenditure. Bobonis (2009) finds that climate shocks that contribute to female bargaining power,
increased household expenditures on children's goods (education, health). Similarly, Duflo and Udry
(2004) find that positive rainfall shocks to women-controlled crops in Cote D' Ivoire increased shares
of education expenditures for children. L´   epine and Strobl (2013) find that positive rainfall shocks
to women-controlled crops in Ghana increased children's nutritional status. Duflo (2003) find that
providing pensions to South African grandmothers increased height-for-age of grandchildren. There
are several theories explaining this bias including gender differences in old age security, preferences,
and altruism.
    2
      For a review of evidence suggesting very low elasticity of calorie consumption, see Colen et al.
(2018). While cash transfers were shown to boost food consumption (Bailey, 2013), generally, food
demand is income inelastic (Colen et al., 2018). In addition, the increase in demand for calories
becomes smaller as income levels become higher, as result from reaching a saturation point in calorie
consumption (Skoufias et al., 2011; Salois et al., 2012). While income has been found to have limited
effects on calorie intake in more developed countries where preference for quality of food rather than
calories becomes more important (Subramanian and Deaton, 1996; Robert T. Jensen, 2011; Zhou
and Yu, 2014), in poor economies income elasticities remain positive, suggesting that not all poorer
countries have reached the saturation point.

                                                   2
control income do not internalize the health benefits to young children of additional
calories and hence prefer an alternative consumption bundle. Lastly, a failure to spend
marginal income on calories may reflect limited local food availability, such as occurs
during famines or in food deserts.
    To increase their impact on child malnutrition, policymakers increasingly enhance
maternal cash transfer programs with complimentary features designed to address these
constraints. In many settings, programs include conditionalities such as mandatory
health visits in order to incentivize households who may otherwise prefer to put cash
elsewhere to invest in child health, thereby addressing one or both of the first two con-
straints. While a number of studies show positive effects of conditional cash transfers
(CCTs) on stunting, there is ongoing concern that imposing conditionalities excludes
the most vulnerable households from receiving program benefits (Cahyadi et al., 2020;
Kandpal et al., 2016). In-kind transfer programs can mitigate all three constraints de-
scribed above, but are costly to implement and may be difficult to tailor to households'
idiosyncratic dietary needs.
    An alternative strategy for promoting child health that has been implemented in
a number of different settings in conjunction with maternal cash transfers are infor-
mation programs delivered via Social and Behavior Change Communication (SBCC).
SBCC sessions attached to maternal cash transfer programs are designed to tackle
the first constraint by supplementing cash transfers with information on child health
production, and their curricula typically focus on infant and child health and feeding
practices. Participation in SBCC programs is voluntary (not tied to the receipt of
cash benefits), and hence immune to concerns over systematic exclusion. However, it
is unclear whether information frictions impose a binding constraint on the marginal
propensity to invest in child health out of cash transfer income, and also whether
relevant information on child health production can be effectively delivered at scale.
    In empirical work to date, the efficacy of supplementing maternal cash transfers
with SBCC in bolstering child health remains uncertain. A number of studies have
evaluated child health impacts of maternal SBCC programs (Luo et al., 2012; Zulfiqar
A Bhutta et al., 2013), but evidence is often inconclusive and limited to behavior change
outcomes. For instance, several evaluations show that cash transfer programs can lead
to improved infant and child feeding practices only if they are combined with SBCC
(Fiszbein et al., 2009; Avula et al., 2013; Hoddinott et al., 2017), but fail to measure
impacts on child health outcomes. Among those, the bulk of existing evidence on


                                           3
child outcomes suggests that, even when SBCC programs are successful in promoting
behavior change among transfer recipients, those changes are insufficient to reduce
malnutrition in children. For example, a recent randomized experiment in Nepal found
meaningful effects of supplementing cash transfers with SBCC on health knowledge
and behavior, but null effects on child malnutrition (Levere et al., 2016).3 One study
that does find meaningful impacts of SBCC plus cash transfers on child stunting in
Nigeria is unable to shed light on the marginal contribution of SBCC to cash transfer
programs because the research does not evaluate the impact of cash alone (Carneiro et
al., 2019).
    In this study we seek evidence on the potential value of supplementing cash transfers
with SBCC for child malnutrition. We evaluate a combination of interventions designed
to reduce chronic malnutrition during the first 1000 days of life by providing cash
transfers with and without SBCC to women who are pregnant or have children under
age two. The program, sponsored by the Government of Myanmar and implemented
by Save the Children International (SCI), was run for 30 months in 416 rural villages
as a pilot for the government's national maternal transfer program.4 The program
targeted all pregnant women in intervention villages, who were provided monthly cash
transfers from enrollment until their child reached age two (i.e. for 24-30 months).
In a randomly chosen subset of treatment villages, program recipients also received
monthly SBCC group sessions for the duration of the program that covered a range of
topics relevant to child health and nutrition.
    We assess the impact after 30 months of implementation of transfers alone and
in combination with SBCC on child height-for-age Z-scores (HAZ scores) and stunt-
ing, a well-validated biometric measure of chronic malnutrition in children (Leroy and
Frongillo, 2019). We restrict our analysis to women found to be pregnant immediately
prior to program announcement, which allows us to gauge the impact of receiving
the full duration of program transfers while also circumventing concerns over selective
fertility or migration into treatment villages.
    Our results indicate that the combination of cash transfers and SBCC leads to a 4.6
percentage point (13.5%) statistically significant reduction in the proportion of children
who are stunted. The program appears to be effective for children at risk of moderate

   3
      One exception is an experimental evaluation of a child nutrition SBCC program without cash
transfers in Malawi, which was associated with gains in HAZ (0.27 SD) (Fitzsimons et al., 2016).
    4
      The name of the program was LEGACY, which stands for "Learning, Evidence Generation, and
Advocacy for Catalyzing Policy".

                                               4
but not severe stunting, which indicates that more heavy-handed approaches or higher
levels of transfers might be required to address malnutrition among the most vulnerable
children. Meanwhile, cash alone has no detectable impact on child biomarkers relative
to the control group.
    Survey data on health behaviors collected at endline indicate that the cash transfers,
when combined with SBCC, reduced stunting through some combination of improve-
ments in total food consumption, dietary diversity, breastfeeding and hand-washing
practices, all of which are reported to be significantly higher among those treated with
the combined interventions relative to both control and cash only groups. Most notably,
relative to the control group, food consumption in the combined treatment group rises
by 15%, accompanied by a significant improvement in a standardized index of child
dietary diversity. Both amount of calories and specific types of calories like protein
can directly reduce chronic malnutrition by increasing energy availability, while higher
rates of breastfeeding and hand-washing lower stunting by reducing nutrient-depleting
episodes of diarrheal disease.
    We evaluate these competing mechanisms by examining survey data on child illness
episodes, health care expenditures and food diary reports of specific foods consumed,
all of which point towards dietary diversity being the critical behavior change. First, we
find no decrease in child illness episodes or health care spending among children in the
cash plus SBCC group, which indicates limited roles of hand-washing and breastfeed-
ing behaviors in reducing child stunting. Second, dietary reports reveal that transfer
recipients who were also exposed to the SBCC curriculum incorporate significantly
more protein-rich foods into children's diets, including meat, pulses, dairy, and eggs.
While fruits and vegetables can improve child nutrition, animal proteins in particular
have been shown to have a significant impact on child stunting in multiple settings.5 In
sum, the weight of evidence indicates that most of the reductions in stunting observed
among children whose mothers received cash transfers alongside the SBCC program
arise from improvements in dietary diversity. Our pattern of results is corroborated by
contemporaneous evidence from a similar RCT that was conducted in Bangladesh at
the same time as our study, which finds similar evidence in preliminary reports that
cash transfers plus SBCC reduces stunting in children relative to both control and cash
alone (Ahmed et al., 2019).

   5
    See Laplante and Sabatini (2012) and Semba et al. (2016a,b) for meat and fish; Molgaard et al.
(2011); Iannotti et al. (2013); Dyer et al. (2016) for dairy products; Semba et al. (2016c); Bekdash
(2016) for eggs.

                                                 5
    Meanwhile, cash transfers both with and without SBCC improved reported take-up
of prenatal care and lead to higher levels of food consumption. However, the similar
rates of stunting between the cash only and control groups indicate that these behavior
modifications were insufficient to influence chronic malnutrition. While prenatal care is
unlikely to have a significant effect on stunting in any setting, the absence of a stunting
effect on the cash only arm even when calorie intake rises is more surprising. However,
not only is the increase in food consumption among the cash only group relative to
control significantly lower than that observed in SBCC villages (7%, p < 0.01), but
there is no significant change in child dietary diversity, both of which could account
for a null result on stunting.
    These findings provide new evidence on the policy importance of combining mater-
nal cash transfers with behavioral change interventions in order to generate meaningful
improvements in child nutrition. The critical role that SBCC plays in realizing the child
health benefits of maternal cash transfers also provides novel evidence that informa-
tion constraints are an important factor contributing to the low income-elasticity of
calorie demand among populations that are visibly malnourished but not living hand-
to-mouth.
    At a policy level, our findings offer a fundamental lesson for the design and im-
plementation of maternal cash transfer programs in low-income countries. First and
foremost, in settings such as rural Myanmar where child malnutrition remains a sig-
nificant problem, policies that increase household income still have large potential to
improve child malnutrition as long as mothers are also provided adequate knowledge
to purchase the appropriate quantity and quality of foods. Moreover, given that the
improvements in stunting appear to be driven largely by promoting changes in dietary
diversity, lessons on infant and child feeding practices should be heavily emphasized
in SBCC curriculum and prioritized whenever programs are streamlined for scale-up.
Finally, the fact that impacts happen by way of dietary changes towards more ex-
pensive foods rather than cost-free changes in health practices, such as infant feeding
and hand-washing, suggest that a similar curriculum of SBCC delivered without the
additional benefit of cash transfers would be unlikely to achieve a comparable impact
on child stunting in similar settings.
    Our findings also offer an important lesson for program evaluation of both SBCC
and cash transfer programs. In particular, maternal cash transfers both with and
without SBCC can lead to meaningful changes in parental health behaviors without


                                            6
generating significant reductions in child malnourishment. Hence, tracking child health
outcomes and not just behavioral responses is critical for comprehensive evaluation of
program effects on children.


2       Methods
2.1     Setting
In Myanmar, close to 1 out of 3 children are chronically malnourished. To address
concerns over child malnutrition, in 2014 the government of Myanmar committed to
rolling out a national maternal cash transfer program, which is projected to reach
2.25 million beneficiaries and 0.32% of GDP by 2024 (The Republic of The Union
of Myanmar, 2014). SCI was chosen to implement a pilot version of the program
as a randomized controlled trial (RCT) for 30 months prior to national scale-up in
order to test the delivery model, including the inclusion of a maternal behavior change
component, and measure impacts on malnutrition.6
    The pilot was implemented between 2016 and 2019 in 416 villages in three town-
ships of Myanmar's Dry Zone ­ Pakkoku, Yesagyo, and Mahlaing. All villages within
two hours of an urban center were eligible for the study. Overall, study villages have
reasonable access to food markets (96% have a food market located in their commu-
nity), but relatively poor access to medical care: only 18% have a village health facility,
and only 22% have a midwife that visits regularly. The majority of households in this
area earn income from agriculture (89%) and livestock (27%), and casual labor (77%)
(Appendix Table 2 presents these statistics by treatment and control groups).
    Malnutrition in this area is representative of the country as a whole. Baseline
data collected prior to the intervention reveal that 28.7% of children under 5 in the
study villages were stunted, almost identical to the national rate of under 5 stunting of
29% in 2015 (Demographic Health Surveys, 2015). In terms of weight-for-height, 18%
were wasted and 31% were underweight.7 Meanwhile, malnutrition among mothers is
relatively low. Only 6.7% of pregnant or lactating mothers were found to be malnour-
ished at baseline, as measured by mid-and-upper arm conference (MUAC), which is
    6
      Since 2018 the program has been extended at scale in several states and (in 2020-2021) to further
support vulnerable households during the COVID-19 pandemic (Livelihoods and Food Security Fund,
2020).
    7
      The rate at baseline is somewhat higher among children 22-35 months old, the age group used for
our endline analysis. In the age group, 30% were stunted, 16% were wasted and 33% under-weight.

                                                  7
considerably lower than rates found in other Asian countries.8
    In terms of parental health behaviors that contribute to child malnourishment and
hence are generally included in SBCC curricula, baseline data reveal that households
in this setting performed very well on some measures and relatively poorly on others.
Breastfeeding is nearly universal in the study area, as is early initiation of breastfeed-
ing: 98% of children 0-23 months were ever breastfed and 94% received colostrum.
Consistent with this, at baseline, 99% of mothers were aware of the best time to ini-
tiate breastfeeding. Hence, there is little scope for program participation to influence
nursing practices in this setting.
    Likewise, households do fairly well at baseline in terms of WASH behaviors. Almost
every women reported using soap when washing their hands (99%), and the vast ma-
jority reported doing so consistently after going to the toilet (77%), the most critical
routine WASH behavior for disease control. However, there is room for improvement
in terms of hand-washing practices in all other situations of heightened contamination
risk. Only half of the sample reported using soap before or after eating (51% and 47%)
and fewer than half reported using soap before cooking (37%), after disposing baby
feces (31%), after cleaning their baby's bottom (17%), before feeding children (16%)
and before or after handling children (4%).
    In contrast, nutritional intake of children over 6 months is poor in this setting. Only
37% of children 6-23 months have a minimum acceptable diet in terms of food diversity.
Moreover, there appears to be room for information interventions to have an impact
on complementary feeding practices, which are a major focus of SBCC. In particular,
only 85% of mothers are aware of the best age to introduce complementary feeding. In
addition, program participation has scope to influence health-seeking behavior. Only
78% of mothers attended 4 or more antenatal care visits as recommended by WHO.
    In addition to addressing information constraints on child feeding and health care
practices, the cash transfer alone has the potential to lead to improvements in child
diet and take-up of health care services by relaxing household budget constraints.
However, it is relevant to note that consumption data gathered from our analysis
sample indicate that few households in this setting are living hand-to-mouth. At
baseline, households with stunted children reported spending on average only 54% of
their budget on food, and reported spending their remaining income on a number of
"non-essentials" including an average of 7% on gifts and donations. Given this, it is

   8
       See for example Vasundhara et al. (2020).

                                                   8
not obvious that households in the program with infants at risk of malnourishment
will exhibit a high income-elasticity of calorie demand from the infusion of cash alone,
unless it is the case that directing disposable income to mothers has a large effect on
child consumption shares.


2.2    Program Design
The program comprised two separate interventions: 1) monthly cash transfers to moth-
ers beginning in pregnancy until their children turned two; and 2) monthly cash trans-
fers supplemented with monthly SBCC that covered a range of topics relevant to child
health and nutrition.
    Both interventions were randomized across 102 sub-rural health care center catch-
ment areas (the geographic unit of randomization) located within two hours of an urban
center. To minimize differences across experimental arms, prior to random assignment,
catchment areas were first grouped into 34 triplets (strata) based on geographic cluster-
ing. Within each stratum, individual catchment areas were randomly assigned to one
of three experimental arms: (1) Treatment 1 (Cash + SBCC ), in which cash transfers
and SBCC activities were provided jointly (N = 34 catchment areas encompassing 142
villages); (2) Treatment 2 (CashOnly ), in which only cash transfers were provided (N=
34 catchment areas encompassing 146 villages); and (3) Control, in which neither cash
transfers nor SBCC were offered (N = 34 catchment areas encompassing 149 villages)
(Appendix Fig 1).
    Within both T1 and T2 catchment areas, all pregnant women were assigned to
receive monthly cash transfers worth 10,000 MMK (about 6.5 USD) beginning in their
second trimester of pregnancy until their child reached age two.9 As a reference, the
legal minimum wage in Myanmar at that time was 3,600 MMK per day, so the cash
transfer amount represented about 3-4 days of work at the minimum wage. In addition
to monthly cash transfers, beneficiaries in T1 were targeted with SBCC in the form
of monthly information sessions on four main topics: infant and young child feeding
(IYCF) practices, health-seeking behavior, hygiene practices, and household expendi-
tures.
    The program was implemented by SCI in collaboration with the Myanmar Nurse
and Midwives Association (MNMA), a national non-governmental organization that

   9
     In October 2017 the implementer (SCI) increased the amount to 15,000 MMK (about 10 USD)
to stay in line with similar initiatives in other parts of the country.

                                             9
provides prevention and community-based care, and Pact Global Microfinance (PGMF),
a nonprofit international development organization that delivers microfinance in rural
areas. PGMF managed monthly cash disbursements by creating an ad-hoc bank ac-
count for each program beneficiary into which transfers were deposited on a monthly
basis and delivered through PGMF's network of rural loan agents. MNMA was re-
sponsible for coordinating the sensitization and enrollment of eligible women in each
treatment village and organizing SBCC activities in villages assigned to the T1 group.10
    SBCC activities were implemented in two stages. First, between May 2016 and
January 2017, MNMA delivered basic SBCC programming within each village aimed
at mobilizing communities to address poor nutrition. Basic programming included
mother-to-mother support groups (including 12-15 pregnant women or mothers of un-
der 5 years old children) in which mothers were brought together monthly to dis-
seminate information and share experiences with feeding practices during pregnancy,
lactation, and early childhood; and a handful of participatory community-level sessions
(13-15 community members) that explored perceptions and current practices around
diet and nutrition, health care, and household and food expenditures.
    Based on the information gathered through the basic SBCC activities, SCI then de-
signed a series of intensive SBCC sessions that focused on key behaviors and messaging
across four topics: IYCF (including dietary diversity and breastfeeding), health-seeking
behavior, hygiene practices, and household expenditures. These sessions were deliv-
ered both to the maternal support groups, and also through separate sessions targeted
to fathers and elderly household members. The last cohort of mothers was enrolled
in May 2018. The last monthly cash transfer and the last SBCC interventions were
completed in November 2018 and May 2019, respectively (Appendix Figure 2).
    SBCC participation was voluntary. While all mothers in SBCC villages were en-
couraged to attend the sessions, they still received the full transfer if they were unable
or refused to attend. Nevertheless, administrative data indicate high participation in
SBCC sessions: administrative data from SCI found that in Cash+SBCC villages, 99%
of enrolled mothers attended at least one SBCC session and 81% attended five times
or more.11 Unsurprisingly, take-up of the cash transfer was also high and relatively

   10
      One aspect of delivery the government was interested in testing in this pilot program was utilizing
a NGO for distribution of cash payments versus government workers. Hence, in 40 villages, payments
were delivered by government workers instead of PGMF. A description of the difference in delivery
agents and findings from that evaluation are the subject of a companion paper (Field and Maffioli,
2020).
   11
      Monitoring data were collected only in one township because of limited funding availability and

                                                   10
"clean" in terms of eligibility criteria: monitoring activities conducted independently
by the research team 30 months into implementation in one of three townships revealed
low exclusion and inclusion errors to the cash transfer programs (6.8% and 9.8%, re-
spectively), and all inclusion errors were women in treatment villages who received
transfers despite not meeting the eligibility criteria rather than non-compliers from
outside villages, reducing concern over contamination of the control group.


2.3     Analysis Sample
We evaluate the program's impact on child nutrition among women who were pregnant
at the time of enrollment. Restricting the sample to this group mitigates concern over
selective fertility and migration into study areas that could confound a comparison
between babies that were conceived in treatment versus control groups after program
announcement. Moreover, women who were pregnant at enrollment are the only pro-
gram beneficiaries to receive the full 30 months of coverage as part of the pilot.
    Women in this group were identified by conducting a full listing of individuals
(Appendix Figure 2) in treatment and control study villages two months prior to the
start of the program (February 2016) in which community health workers recorded
every woman's age and pregnancy status. All 2,338 pregnant women identified in
the listing were enrolled in the study. After 30 months we successfully tracked and
administered an endline survey to 91.3% of women, resulting in an analysis sample
of 2,134 women. Although attrition was slightly higher in the control group (10.8%)
relative to treatment groups (7.9%), as is common in program evaluations due to the
greater ease of tracking individuals where administrative data is collected regularly,
attrition has no measurable impact on the balance of observable characteristics of
respondents across treatment arms (see Appendix Table 1). The fact that observables
are almost identical pre- and post-attrition waylays concern over differential attrition
that could bias our estimates (see Appendix Table 1 vs Table 3).
    The endline survey gathered data on household and individual characteristics, in-
cluding weight and height data of all children under age 5, socio-economic status in-
cluding income and assets, food consumption including dietary diversity, health-seeking
behaviors emphasized in the SBCC sessions, credit and saving, decision-making, desired
and realized fertility, and program participation. Our analysis estimates the effects of

the implementing partner's (SCI) preference for the implementation of a related project (Field and
Maffioli, 2020).

                                               11
the interventions on the 2,154 children born to these women during the study, i.e,
those covered by the LEGACY program for their first 1,000 days of life. At endline,
the children that benefited from the full duration of treatment are between 22 and 35
months old.12


2.4     Empirical Strategy
The random assignment of interventions across villages allows us to identify the causal
effect of cash transfers and the relative importance of pairing cash transfers with SBCC
by comparing endline outcomes across study arms. We estimate program effects with
the following ordinary least squares (OLS) model:

           Yiv =  +   [Cash + SBCC ]v +   [CashOnly ]v + Xiv + t +                           iv


    where Y is the primary health outcome of interest for child or mother i living in
village v . To capture nutritional impacts on children, we use child height and age data
from endline to construct height-for-age z-scores (HAZ), a well-validated anthropomet-
ric measure of chronic malnutrition, using the WHO child growth standards (World
Health Organization, 2006). A HAZ value of -1 indicates that, given sex and age,
a child's height is one standard deviation below the median child in her age/sex ref-
erence group. In addition, we construct an indicator of stunting that equals one if
HAZ < -2; an indicator of severe stunting that equals one if HAZ < -3; and an
indicator of moderate stunting that equals one if -3 <= HAZ < -2.
    To better understand potential pathways of influence, we examine a number of be-
havioral outcomes available at endline that capture economic and health determinants
of malnutrition, focusing on knowledge and behaviors emphasized in the SBCC cur-
riculum. These include infant feeding practices (dietary diversity and breastfeeding),
total expenditures on food and healthcare, illness episodes and visits to skilled health
personnel, and hand-washing behavior.
   12
     Several additional women, who were not classified as pregnant at the time of the initial listing,
either because they were unaware of, or reluctant to report pregnancy status early on, or because
they were not found in the village at the time of the initial listing, were reclassified as eligible midway
through the program and received program benefits thereafter. However, significantly more of such
women were found in treatment relative to control villages (unsurprisingly, given their greater incentive
to reveal themselves in order to receive benefits once they became aware of the program), which could
bias our estimates of program effects were we to include them in the analysis. Hence, we restrict our
evaluation of program impacts to women identified as pregnant at the onset of the study, prior to the
announcement of the program.

                                                    12
    Cash + SBCC is an indicator of whether the respondent's village was assigned to
T1, and CashOnly is an indicator of whether the village was assigned to T2. The ex-
cluded group is the control group (CG). The model also controls for a number of prede-
termined observables, X , which include (i) individual demographic controls, including
mother's age and education, household head's age and education, and child's sex and
age (child-level analysis only); and (ii) village-level controls, including distance to large
and small markets, indicators for main source of livelihood (agriculture, livestock, or
casual labor), availability of government provided electricity, and participation in a
concurrent water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) intervention. Village-level controls
were collected prior to the start of program activity. In accordance with our ran-
domization design, the model includes fixed effects for geographic strata (one variable
for each triplet of sub-rural health catchment areas, t), which control for unobserved
characteristics that may vary across clusters and influence program delivery. Standard
errors are clustered at the village cluster level, the unit of randomization.
    To ensure that comparability across study arms was achieved by random assign-
ment, we test for observable differences across experimental arms based on time-
invariant individual characteristics (Appendix Table 3) and village-level data collected
prior to the program launch (Appendix Table 2). Overall, the randomization was
successful with only 1 out of 68 comparisons unbalanced across any of the treatment
arms at a 99% confidence interval, 1 out of 68 unbalanced at a 95% confidence interval
and only 2 out of 68 unbalanced at a 90% confidence interval. Moreover, the mean
differences that are significant are small in magnitude and work against our ability to
attribute differences in stunting to treatment: for example, the head of the household's
education is lower in the Cash + SBCC arm, so could potentially bias downward
a comparison of differences in stature at endline. We control for these unbalanced
covariates in the empirical model.
    It is important to note that our study design precludes non-random imbalances
across treatment arms driven by selection into treatment. Although maternal cash
transfers have the potential to incentivize women to become pregnant earlier than
they would have otherwise or might encourage migration into treatment villages, our
analysis sample is limited to women who were living in the village and pregnant prior
to learning about the program, so is not subject to concerns over endogenous selection
into the sample. However, because we run a handful of regressions on the sample of
new mothers ­ the only group among which we are able to measure detailed infant


                                             13
feeding practices ­, we also test directly whether the program led to fertility responses
that could bias a comparison of infant feeding outcomes across experimental arms.
Relative to the control group, women in Cash + SBCC and CashOnly are no more
likely to be currently pregnant and do not report a greater number of pregnancies since
the start of the program, indicating that there is no increase in fertility in response to
the program (Appendix Table 4).


3        Results
Our main outcome of interest is stunting among children 22-35 months old.13 Table
1 reveals that, in control villages, a full 34% of children in this cohort are stunted,
including 7% that are severely stunted.


3.1      Program Effects on Chronic Malnutrition
Table 1 shows that children born to mothers who received both cash and SBCC (Cash+
SBCC , T1) from pregnancy until the child reached 24 months are an estimated 4.6
percentage points (a 13.5 percent reduction, p<0.05) less likely to be stunted at 22-35
months of age compared to children living in control group households. Meanwhile,
children in CashOnly (T2) villages are no less stunted than children in the control
group, and we can firmly reject the equality of Cash + SBCC and CashOnly treatment
effects on stunting (p-value<=0.02). This pattern supports the hypothesis that cash
transfers ­ even those directed to mothers ­ are only able to effectively combat chronic
malnutrition in children when paired with an intervention that encourages behavior
change.
    Column 4 of Table 1 presents the treatment indicators regressed on a continuous
measure of height for age, i.e., HAZ score. Although the Cash + SBCC intervention
arm does not have a statistically significant effect on the continuous measure of height,
the point estimate is large (0.074) and close to significance at the 90% level.14 Moreover,
    13
      In Appendix, we present results for weight measurements, such as underweight (Appendix Table
5) and wasting (Appendix Table 6). However, for most of the children in our sample (22-35 months
old) the program had already ended at the time of the endline survey. For this reason we do not expect
measures of non-chronic malnutrition to be affected by the program. The evidence in Appendix Tables
5 and 6 confirms this.
   14
      As a point of comparison, the point estimate is similar in magnitude to a deworming intervention
in Kenya that increased the mean HAZ by 0.09 SD, which was significant in a larger sample (Miguel
and Kremer, 2004). Our estimates are also in line with the non-experimental estimates of HAZ impacts

                                                 14
                                 Table 1: Child stunting

                                     (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)
                                  Prop. of         Prop. of       Prop. of       HAZ score
                                  children         children       children        (WHO)
                                  stunted          moder-         severely
                                                    ately         stunted
                                                   stunted
Cash+SBCC                         -0.046**         -0.053***        0.007           0.074
                                   (0.021)          (0.018)        (0.011)         (0.047)
CashOnly                            -0.004           -0.008         0.004           -0.017
                                   (0.021)          (0.020)        (0.011)         (0.041)
Observations                         2151             2151          2151             2151
Mean Control                         0.34             0.27           0.07            -1.57
Clusters                              102             102            102              102
Cash+SBCC=CashOnly                   0.02             0.01           0.75            0.02

Notes: The table presents OLS estimates of the effects of the maternal cash transfer pro-
gram interventions on measures of stunting for children whose mothers were pregnant at
enrollment, following WHO classification."Cash+SBCC" indicates T1 villages, where cash
transfers and SBCC activities were provided jointly; "CashOnly" indicates T2 villages, where
only cash transfers were provided; the reference group are villages in the control group where
neither cash transfers nor SBCC took place. Outcomes include the proportion of children
stunted as children with Height for Age Z score (HAZ) < -2 (1); the proportion of children
moderately stunted as children with HAZ < -2 and >= -3 (2); the proportion of children
severely stunted as children with HAZ < -3 (3); and, HAZ (4). Controls include (i) in-
dividual demographic controls, including child's sex and age, mother's age and education,
and household head's age and education; (ii) village-level controls, including distance to
large and small markets, main source of livelihood (agriculture, livestock, or casual labor),
availability of government provided electricity, and participation in a concurrent WASH
intervention. Fixed effects per geographic strata (34) are included. Standard errors are
clustered at the village cluster level. P-values from t-test from the difference in means are
reported. ***p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                              15
a more nuanced test of the distribution of HAZ scores reveals program effects that are
consistent with the stunting results.15 In particular, Figure 1 reveals a rightward shift
in the distribution of HAZ scores among Cash + SBCC beneficiaries compared to the
control group. A Kolmogorov-Smirnov non-parametric test for equality of distributions
indicates that the Cash + SBCC intervention has a statistically significant positive
effect on the distribution of HAZ score when compared to the CashOnly arm (p=0.048)
and the control group (p=0.098). Once again, we can reject the null hypothesis of equal
distributions of HAZ scores in the CashOnly arm and control group (p=0.071).
         .4
         .3
      Density
       .2.1
         0




                -6   -5    -4    -3   -2         -1             0              1   2         3   4   5   6
                                                      Height for Age Z Score

                                           Cash+SBCC                CashOnly       Control


Notes: This figure describes the distribution of Height for Age Z score (HAZ) for children whose
mothers were pregnant at enrollment, by treatment status. "Cash+SBCC" indicates T1 villages,
where cash transfers and SBCC activities were provided jointly; "CashOnly" indicates T2 villages,
where cash transfers only were provided; "Control" indicates villages in the control group where
neither cash transfers nor SBCC took place.



                          Figure 1: Child HAZ distribution, by treatment

    Consistent with these distributional patterns, columns 2 and 3 of Table 1 show that
the reduction in malnutrition achieved by the program corresponds to a decrease in
the proportion of children moderately stunted (5.3 percentage points, a 19.6 percent
reduction, p<0.01) but no change in the proportion severely stunted. This implies that,
while chronic malnutrition in early childhood fell for many children at risk, the SBCC
intervention did not succeed in combating malnutrition among the most vulnerable
households.
    Although severe stunting is relatively low in this setting (7% in the control group),

from other conditional or unconditional cash transfer programs (Biscaye et al., 2017; IEG World Bank,
2011) or early stimulation and nutrition interventions (Attanasio et al., 2018).
   15
      Note that the distribution of HAZ is centered at zero only if the population follows the WHO
standard growth curve, which is not the case in our context given the high prevalence of malnutrition.

                                                           16
the absence of a program effect on this tail of the HAZ distribution is somewhat coun-
terintuitive given that severe stunting is likely to be concentrated among the poorest
households, and one might anticipate that the same amount of cash makes a bigger
difference for households in more dire circumstances. One possible explanation is lower
SBCC participation rates of extremely poor households. However, self-reported data
from endline do not indicate significantly lower participation rates among households
below median income relative to those above median income. Alternatively, the SBCC
curriculum or mode of delivery may be inappropriately designed to meet the needs of
very poor participants. For instance, households at risk of severe stunting may lack
sufficient human capital to translate information into behavior change, or might face
additional financial barriers to implementing changes such as diet diversification, even
with the additional liquidity provided through a cash transfer. Finally, households
at risk of severe stunting may be concentrated in villages with poor infrastructure to
support the adoption of certain health practices such as access to clean water or food
products.
     To further evaluate whether the absence of a program effect on severe stunting is
related to differences in socio-economic status (SES), we examine patterns of treatment
effects across villages according to village-level SES. In the absence of baseline data
on wealth or income, we proxy for village SES with the average number of years of
education attained by resident women.
     It is first worth noting that rates of severe stunting are similar in magnitude across
villages with low versus high average levels of parental education. This pattern alone
suggests that some fraction of the population may face a poverty trap such as chronic
reinfection that keeps them in a state of persistent malnutrition even when village
resource levels rise. Interestingly, results from the subsample analysis indicate that the
program effects are concentrated in low SES villages. In particular, we observe that
the distribution of the HAZ scores is strongly shifted to the right in the Cash + SBCC
intervention arm compared to the CashOnly arm or the control group only in low SES
villages (Figure 2), and the difference is statistically significant. Meanwhile, in the
above-median villages, HAZ score distributions are similar across experimental arms.
Appendix Table 7 shows a similar heterogeneous pattern in a regression framework: the
results indicate that relatively low-SES villages gain the most in terms of reductions
in rates of stunting from maternal cash transfers combined with SBCC.
     Moreover, households below median income within the low-SES village benefit dis-


                                            17
           .5                                     Low                                                                                         High




                                                                                                 .4
           .4




                                                                                                 .3
           .3
 Density




                                                                                              Density
                                                                                               .2
           .2




                                                                                                 .1
           .1
           0




                                                                                                 0
                -6    -5   -4   -3   -2   -1           0          1   2   3    4     5    6             -6   -5   -4        -3   -2   -1           0          1   2   3   4   5   6
                                            Height for Age Z Score                                                                      Height for Age Z Score


                                                                              Cash+SBCC       CashOnly            Control


Notes: This figure describes the distribution of Height-for-age Z-score (HAZ) for children whose
mothers were pregnant at enrollment, by treatment status, and by low vs high socio-economic
status. As a proxy, we use the average number of years of education attained by resident women
in the village. "Cash+SBCC" indicates T1 villages, where cash transfers and SBCC activities
were provided jointly; "CashOnly" indicates T2 villages, where cash transfers only were provided;
"Control" indicates villages in the control group where neither cash transfers nor SBCC took place.



                     Figure 2: Child HAZ distribution by women village-level average education


proportionately in terms of reductions in moderate stunting relative to those above the
village median (Appendix Table 8). That is, if we divide the sample into four groups
according to both village-level SES and median household income at endline, the pat-
tern of results indicates that reductions in moderate stunting due to exposure to cash
plus SBCC are fully concentrated among the quartile of households in the lower half
of the income distribution within the lowest SES half of villages. Still, even among
this subsample, severe stunting does not improve with either version of the program,
consistent with non-convexities at extremely low levels of income.
    Figure 2 also reveals that, within low-SES villages, the CashOnly and the Cash +
SBCC treatments appear to operate on the same distribution of children who are
on the left-hand side of the stunting distribution, but the Cash + SBCC treatment
appears to push them relatively further rightward in terms of HAZ scores relative to
the CashOnly treatment. That is, the patterns of HAZscore distributions indicates
that the CashOnly treatment is effective for the same number of marginal responders
as the Cash + SBCC treatment just to a lesser extent, rather than being equally
effective for fewer kids. This implies that all responders are made better off by adding
SBCC sessions to a maternal cash transfer program.




                                                                                     18
3.2     Mechanisms
To better understand the channels through which a combination of Cash + SBCC
generates positive effects on child health, in this section we explore program effects on
maternal health behaviors, including the amount of calories consumed, as measured by
total food consumption, and health-care utilization as measured by total health expen-
ditures. We also investigate whether assignment to Cash + SBCC is associated with
increases in maternal knowledge about child health production. Finally, to disentan-
gle whether stunting impacts are driven by reductions in nutrition-depleting illnesses
versus increases in the intake of nutritious food, we examine whether treatment is
associated with reductions in reported episodes of child illness.

3.2.1   Program Effects on Maternal Health Behaviors

Table 2 and Table 5 describe the program impacts on behaviors and knowledge that
were emphasized in the SBCC curriculum. Specifically, we focus on the following
key topics covered by the education sessions: dietary diversity, breastfeeding, hand
washing practices, health-seeking behavior, and food consumption. To capture dietary
diversity, we take the standard approach in the literature (based on WHO guidelines)
of constructing a dietary diversity score (DDS) measured as the number of food groups
consumed by the child in the previous day out of the following seven: (1) cereals, roots
and tubers; (2) legumes and nuts; (3) milk and milk derivatives; (4) meat products
(meat, poultry, offal, and fish); (5) eggs; (6) vitamin A-rich fruits and vegetables (leafy
green vegetables, yellow fruits and vegetables); and (7) other fruits and vegetables.
A DDS of four is considered the minimum DDS for a healthy diet. As children in
our sample are at least 22 months old, the DDS is measured excluding milk, following
WHO guidelines.
    Because stunting is associated with low levels of protein-rich foods in particular,
we also look specifically at how treatment assignment influences food consumption in
categories 2-5 aggregated. Not only are higher levels of protein-rich food consumption
most likely to translate into reductions in child stunting, but ­ in addition to em-
phasizing the general importance of food diversity ­ SBCC health messaging focused
specifically on the importance of feeding young children a higher fraction of calories
from protein-rich food groups.
    Hand-washing practices are measured as a cumulative score of regularly adopted
practices, where each practice is counted as 1 when the respondent reports washing

                                            19
hands with soap in that specific situation and 0 otherwise: after cleaning a baby's
bottom, after using the toilet, before preparing and eating food, before feeding children,
after disposing of baby feces, before and after handling children, and on other occasions.
Total food consumption is measured as recalled household consumption in the past 7
days and is winsorized at the 99th percentile level.16

                                     Table 2: Maternal health behaviors

                                            (1)             (2)              (3)             (4)              (5)              (6)
                                        Tot. food          Child         Prop. of         Prop. of        Index of        Prop. of
                                        consump-          dietary        children         children         hand-           mothers
                                           tion          diversity         ever           received        washing          with at
                                         (USD)             score         breastfed       colostrum        behavior         least 4
                                                        (non-milk,                                                       ANC visits
                                                          24 hrs                                                          to skilled
                                                          recall)                                                          health
                                                                                                                         personnel
Cash+SBCC                               2.168***         0.655***         0.007*          0.021**         0.651***         0.161***
                                         (0.373)          (0.063)         (0.003)         (0.008)          (0.128)          (0.024)
CashOnly                                1.097***           0.096           0.003           0.001            0.151          0.117***
                                         (0.365)          (0.070)         (0.004)         (0.010)          (0.118)          (0.024)
Observations                              2134             2154            2154             2151            2134             2134
Mean Control                              14.33             3.39            0.99            0.96             2.60            0.67
Clusters                                   102              102             102             102              102              102
Cash+SBCC=CashOnly                        0.00              0.26            0.06            0.00             0.05             0.00

Notes: The table presents OLS estimates of the effects of the maternal cash transfer program interventions on measures of behavior
related to four topics covered by the education sessions in SBCC activities (1) IYCF -including diet diversity (column 1) and
breastfeeding (columns 2-3), hand-washing practices (column 4), health-seeking behavior (column 5) and food expenditures (column
6). "Cash+SBCC" indicates T1 villages, where cash transfers and SBCC activities were provided jointly; "CashOnly" indicates
T2 villages, where cash transfers only were provided; the reference group are villages in the control group where neither cash
transfers nor SBCC took place. Outcomes include: total food consumption, winsorized at the 99th percentile level (in last 7 days,
in USD, exchange rate at 31 December 2018, 1); child diversity score constructed following WHO standards, for children at least
22 months old (2); the proportion of children ever breastfed (3); the proportion of children who received colostrum (4); an index of
hand washing practices combining whether mothers report always washing hands after cleaning a baby's bottom, after using the
toilet, before preparing and eating food, before feeding children, after disposing of baby feces, before and after handling children,
and on other occasions (5); the proportion of mothers receiving at least 4 Antenatal Care visits with skilled health personnel, as
defined by WHO standards (6); Controls include (i) individual demographic controls, including child's sex and age, mother's age
and education, and household head's age and education for child-level analysis; mother's age and education, and household head's
age and education for mother-level analysis; (ii) village-level controls, including distance to large and small markets, main source of
livelihood (agriculture, livestock, or casual labor), availability of government provided electricity, and participation in a concurrent
WASH intervention. Fixed effects per geographic strata (34) are included. Standard errors are clustered at the village cluster level.
P-values from t-test from the difference in means are reported. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.


    Consistent with the stunting results, women assigned to the Cash + SBCC inter-
vention spend significantly more money on food relative to the control group (increase
of 2.2 USD, column 1). Women assigned to the Cashonly intervention also exhibit a
positive change, but the increase in spending is significantly less stark: food consump-

  16
       Results are robust to using raw consumption data.

                                                              20
        .08
        .06
     Density
      .04
        .02
        0




               0     5      10    15     20            25           30     35         40   45   50
                                              Tot food consumption (USD)

                                       Cash+SBCC             CashOnly       Control


This figure describes the distribution of the total food consumption in the last 7 days by treatment
status. "Cash+SBCC" indicates T1 villages, where cash transfers and SBCC activities were pro-
vided jointly; "CashOnly" indicates T2 villages, where cash transfers only were provided; "Control"
indicates villages in the control group where neither cash transfers nor SBCC took place.



                   Figure 3: Food consumption distribution by treatment status


tion in the Cashonly arm is 7.65% higher than the control group compared with a
15.13% difference among the Cash + SBCC arm (column 1). The changes in the total
food consumption represents about 17% (for Cashonly ) and 33% (for Cash+SBCC ) of
the monthly cash amount (10,000MMK), suggesting a meaningful change in household
food consumption that could account for large changes in stunting. This increase in
food consumption is also reflected in a statistically significant rightward shift in the dis-
tribution (Figure 3) for Cash + SBCC compared to Cashonly and to the control group
(p-value=0.00), when using a Kolmogorov-Smirnov non-parametric test for equality of
distributions. Instead there is no statistically significant difference in the food con-
sumption distribution between Cashonly and the control group (p-value=0.81).
    We also find positive changes in behaviors related to child food diversity and
breastfeeding practices (Table 2), and these results are all significantly larger for the
Cash + SBCC arm. In particular, we find a 0.655 unit increase in the child food diver-
sity score (column 2) in the Cash + SBCC arm that is significantly different from the
CashOnly and the control group. We also find a change in the proportion of children
ever breastfed (0.7 percentage points, column 3) and in the proportion of children who
received colostrum (2.1 percentage points, column 4) in the Cash + SBCC interven-
tion arm only. Although these treatment effects are statistically significant, it is worth
noting that they are small in magnitude on account of the near universality of these
practices prior to the intervention, as exhibited also by the high control group means.


                                                     21
Essentially, SBCC participation shifts the fraction of children receiving colostrum from
96% to 98%, relative to both CashOnly and the control group. Finally, we find a 0.651
unit increase in the index of hand-washing behavior (column 5) in the Cash + SBCC
group relative to both CashOnly and the control group, as well as a significant increase
in the proportion of mothers attending at least 4 antenatal care visits (column 6) that is
observed in both treatment arms but is significantly higher for the Cash + SBCC arm
(16.1 percentage points for Cash + SBCC and 11.7 percentage points for CashOnly ).
    The absence of a program effect from cash alone on WASH and breastfeeding be-
haviors is unsurprising given that income alone should not be expected to increase
rates of early initiation, so this can be readily interpreted as an impact of information
on maternal health behavior. In contrast, ANC visits among the Cash + SBCC arm
have the potential to be influenced by both an income effect of receiving cash trans-
fers as well as an information effect of SBCC participation. However, the difference
in health-seeking behavior between CashOnly and Cash + SBCC can be interpreted
as the impact of information on health care utilization whereas the treatment effect
women in the CashOnly group picks up the income effect on health-seeking behavior.
    The results in Table 2 column 1 highlight how cash transfers with and without
SBCC increase total household food consumption. Table 3 additionally explores the
shares of the household food budget (in the last 7 days) spent on specific categories
of foods: (animal or vegan) protein-rich foods, fruits and vegetables, staple carbohy-
drates including rice, wheat, maize, soybeans, potatoes, and other food, including oil
and condiments. We find that cash transfers with or without SBCC increased house-
hold consumption of animal proteins (meat, fish, eggs and dairy), while decreasing
consumption of less nutritious food such as staples and other food. However, the in-
crease is statistically significantly higher for Cash + SBCC relative to CashOnly (5.8
percentage points vs 3.8 percentage points, respectively, column 1). In addition, those
households exposed to the SBCC curriculum spent more of their budget on vegan pro-
teins (pulses, 1.5 percentage points) and slightly more on vegetables and fruits (0.5
percentage points).
    Reassuringly, these patterns are also reflected in measures of child dietary intake
reported in food diaries. In particular, Table 4 investigates food intake from various
food groups among the sample of children in the endline analysis sample. Data on child
diets isolate changes in child feeding practices among mothers exposed to the SBCC
curriculum rather than just household-level changes in food consumption, which may


                                           22
                   Table 3: Household budget shares of food consumption

                                            (1)             (2)             (3)              (4)             (5)
                                         Animal           Vegan         Vegetables        Staples          Other
                                         proteins        proteins       and fruits
Cash+SBCC                               0.058***         0.015***         0.008**        -0.040***       -0.039***
                                         (0.006)          (0.002)         (0.004)          (0.007)        (0.003)
CashOnly                                0.038***          0.005*           -0.001         -0.015**       -0.027***
                                         (0.007)          (0.002)         (0.004)          (0.007)        (0.004)
Observations                              2134             2134             2134            2134            2134
Mean Control                               0.28             0.05            0.15             0.34           0.19
Clusters                                   102              102             102              102            102
Cash+SBCC=CashOnly                        0.00              0.00            0.00            0.00            0.00

Notes: The table presents OLS estimates of the effects of the maternal cash transfer program interventions on
household budget shares of food consumption. Outcomes include the share of total household food consumption
spent on animal proteins (dairy, meat and fish, eggs, 1); vegan proteins (pulses and nuts, 2); vegetables and
fruits (3); staples (4) and other food, including oil and other condiments (5). "Cash+SBCC" indicates T1
villages, where cash transfers and SBCC activities were provided jointly; "CashOnly" indicates T2 villages,
where cash transfers only were provided; the reference group are villages in the control group where neither
cash transfers nor SBCC took place. Controls include (i) individual demographic controls, including child's sex
and age, mother's age and education, and household head's age and education for child-level analysis; mother's
age and education, and household head's age and education for mother-level analysis; (ii) village-level controls,
including distance to large and small markets, main source of livelihood (agriculture, livestock, or casual labor),
availability of government provided electricity, and participation in a concurrent WASH intervention. Fixed
effects per geographic strata (34) are included. Standard errors are clustered at the village cluster level. P-
values from t-test from the difference in means are reported. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                       23
not be directed towards children. Table 4 shows clearly that children's (reported) food
intake improved systematically in the Cash + SBCC arm. Mothers in villages where
cash transfers were supplemented with SBCC report that their children were 13.6
percentage points more likely to consume animal proteins than those in the control
group. Households in the CashOnly arm are also 7.7 percentage points more likely
to eat animal proteins than households in the control group, but the difference is
significantly lower that observed among children in the Cash+SBCC arm (p-value=0).
In addition, children in households exposed to SBCC are also 21.7 percentage points
and 9.3 percentage points more likely to consume vegan proteins and vegetables and
fruits, respectively, compared to children in the control group. Instead, we do not find
any statistically significant changes in children's diets for the CashOnly arm, and more
generally observe shifts towards less nutritious food (columns 4 and 5).

              Table 4: Inclusion of protein-rich food groups in children's diet

                                  (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)
                               Animal            Vegan          Vegetables        Staples           Other
                               proteins         proteins        and fruits
  Cash+SBCC         0.136***                    0.217***         0.093***            0.005          0.005
                     (0.015)                     (0.025)          (0.022)          (0.006)         (0.006)
  CashOnly          0.077***                      0.025            -0.012           -0.001          0.001
                     (0.015)                     (0.024)          (0.023)          (0.007)         (0.006)
  Observations        2154                        2154              2154             2154           2154
  Mean Control         0.80                        0.31             0.76              0.99           0.99
  Clusters             102                         102              102               102            102
  Cash+SBCC=CashOnly 0.00                          0.00             0.00              0.26           0.34

  Notes: The table presents OLS estimates of the effects of the maternal cash transfer program interventions
  on children's diet. Outcomes include the proportion of children eating: animal proteins (dairy, meat and
  fish, eggs, 1); vegan proteins (pulses and nuts, 2); vitamin-rich vegetables and fruits (3); staples (4);
  other, including oil and other condiments (5)."Cash+SBCC" indicates T1 villages, where cash transfers
  and SBCC activities were provided jointly; "CashOnly" indicates T2 villages, where cash transfers only
  were provided; the reference group are villages in the control group where neither cash transfers nor
  SBCC took place. Controls include (i) individual demographic controls, including child's sex and age,
  mother's age and education, and household head's age and education for child-level analysis; mother's
  age and education, and household head's age and education for mother-level analysis; (ii) village-level
  controls, including distance to large and small markets, main source of livelihood (agriculture, livestock,
  or casual labor), availability of government provided electricity, and participation in a concurrent WASH
  intervention. Fixed effects per geographic strata (34) are included. Standard errors are clustered at the
  village cluster level. P-values from t-test from the difference in means are reported. *** p<0.01, **
  p<0.05, * p<0.1.


    These patterns suggest that one source of explanation for why cash transfers alone
increase food expenditure but do not reduce stunting may be that the additional food

                                                       24
is not going towards children's diets. This implies that one key mechanism through
which SBCC might enhance the malnutrition impact of cash transfers is by convincing
parents to direct increases in food consumption towards young children. For instance,
they may be feeding school-going children without realizing the importance of critical
windows of growth.17
    This pattern of results on program effects on specific food groups is consistent with
the observed biomarker findings on child stunting, as protein-rich foods are generally
needed to generate medium-run changes in chronic malnutrition through diet alone.
In particular, a large literature in medicine and nutrition posits that nutrients from
proteins primarily support child growth. Animal proteins from meat and fish are a
source of amino acids (Laplante and Sabatini, 2012; Semba et al., 2016a,b), dairy
products ­ and specifically cow milk ­ are an important source of amino acids and
other micronutrients (calcium, vitamin A, zinc) (Molgaard et al., 2011; Iannotti et
al., 2013; Dyer et al., 2016), and eggs are an excellent source of choline (Semba et
al., 2016c; Bekdash, 2016). Similarly, vegan proteins contain essential amino-acids,
although in smaller doses. Meanwhile, the key nutritional value of vegetables and
fruits is the vitamins (including vitamin A) and minerals (Gilbert, 2013) they contain.
While vitamin deficiencies can increase risk of infections, their impact on stunting is
likely to be of second-order importance compared to the role of protein-rich foods.
    The fact that cash alone increased protein-rich food consumption without informa-
tion provision is also consistent with previous literature documenting a reasonably high
income elasticity of demand for animal proteins relative to other food groups in many
settings. Meanwhile, households are less likely to increase consumption of non-animal
proteins and vitamin-rich foods without outside information and encouragement since
they are less likely to be informed about the nutritional value of these food groups.
The fact that SBCC is successful in promoting child consumption of vegan proteins in
addition to greater consumption of animal proteins is particularly valuable given that
vegan proteins are likely to be significantly more cost-effective means of increasing child
protein intake.




  17
     Unfortunately, our data do not allow us to test this directly by looking at program effects on
weight-for-height among older children and adults in the sample as biometric data were only collected
for young children.

                                                 25
3.2.2    Program Effects on Maternal Health Knowledge

Consistent with the changes in behavior, we find treatment effects on maternal knowl-
edge. Table 5 shows a 3.3 percentage point increase in the proportion of mothers in the
Cash + SBCC intervention arm who know the importance of diversity in their child's
diet (column 1), along with significant increases in the proportion of mothers who
know the correct meaning of exclusive breastfeeding (3.1 percentage points, column 2),
the best time to initiate breastfeeding (1.3 percentage points, column 3) and the best
time to start complementary feeding (8.9 percentage points, column 4). The estimates
are statistically significant for all knowledge measures. It is worth noting the levels of
maternal knowledge about infant feeding practices overall: control group means indi-
cate that most women in our sample (80-90%) already have correct information about
breastfeeding and basic infant feeding practices prior to the intervention.
    Overall, the analysis of treatment effects on knowledge shows a high degree of
learning from the program, although there is puzzling evidence of a change in knowledge
on the importance of child food diversity among women in the CashOnly arm that is
also statistically significant and similar in magnitude to the Cash + SBCC arm. Since
these women were not exposed to any training on feeding practices, this effect likely
reflects reporting bias (e.g. a form of ex-post rationalization in which mothers who
cannot afford to feed children a diverse diet claim that diversity is less important).18

3.2.3    Program Effects on Child Illness

The evidence on maternal behavior indicates that reductions in child stunting were
achieved in the Cash + SBCC treatment by encouraging mothers to increase total
food consumption and shift children's diets towards a broader array of protein-rich
foods. In addition, combining cash transfers with SBCC appears to have encouraged
a higher rate of early initiation of breastfeeding, better hand-washing practices, and
greater use of prenatal care. While these specific behaviors are unlikely to account for
the large reduction in stunting observed in Table 1, it is possible that they correlate with
a broader range of changes in infant feeding practices (e.g. longer duration of exclusive
breastfeeding) and health care utilization (e.g. use of Oral Rehydration Therapy to
curtail episodes of diarrheal disease) and disease control measures that could have more
direct effects on stunting but are unobserved in our data. That is, some of the impact
  18
     An alternative possibility is learning by doing that results from spending more on child nutrition,
but this seems less likely in the absence of an obvious source of knowledge transfer.

                                                  26
                                Table 5: Maternal health knowledge

                                             (1)                 (2)                 (3)                 (4)
                                           Prop. of           Prop. of           Prop. of            Prop. of
                                        mothers who         mothers who        mothers who         mothers who
                                         know child           know the           know the           know the
                                       food diversity        meaning of        best time to        best time to
                                        is important          exclusive           initiate          introduce
                                                            breastfeeding      breastfeeding       complemen-
                                                                                                       tary
                                                                                                     feeding
Cash+SBCC                                  0.033**             0.031*            0.013***            0.089***
                                           (0.015)             (0.016)            (0.005)             (0.022)
CashOnly                                   0.030**              -0.000            0.009*               0.033
                                           (0.014)             (0.019)            (0.005)             (0.025)
Observations                                 2134                2134              2134                2134
Mean Control                                 0.91                0.94               0.98                0.81
Clusters                                     102                  102               102                 102
Cash+SBCC=CashOnly                           0.87                0.11               0.39                0.01

Notes: The table presents OLS estimates of the effects of the maternal cash transfer program interventions on
measures of knowledge covered by the education sessions in SBCC activities. Outcomes include: the proportion
of mothers who know the importance of food diversity in their children diet (1); the proportion of mothers who
know the meaning of exclusive breastfeeding (2); the proportion of mothers who know the best time to initiate
breastfeeding (3); the proportion of mothers who know the best time to introduce complementary feeding
(4). "Cash+SBCC" indicates T1 villages, where cash transfers and SBCC activities were provided jointly;
"CashOnly" indicates T2 villages, where cash transfers only were provided; the reference group are villages in
the control group where neither cash transfers nor SBCC took place. Controls include (i) individual demographic
controls, including child's sex and age, mother's age and education, and household head's age and education
for child-level analysis; mother's age and education, and household head's age and education for mother-level
analysis; (ii) village-level controls, including distance to large and small markets, main source of livelihood
(agriculture, livestock, or casual labor), availability of government provided electricity, and participation in
a concurrent WASH intervention. Fixed effects per geographic strata (34) are included. Standard errors are
clustered at the village cluster level. P-values from t-test from the difference in means are reported. *** p<0.01,
** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                       27
on stunting may have resulted from changes in health behaviors other than food intake
if they led to significant reductions in diarrheal disease, which in and of itself can
produce chronic undernourishment in children.
    To ascertain whether this is a source of stunting impacts, it is useful to note that
hand-washing, breastfeeding exclusivity and health-seeking behavior can only impact
child stunting via a reduction in nutrition-depleting illness. Hence, if these behavior
changes contributed to reductions in child stunting, we should see corresponding re-
ductions in diarrheal disease in the Cash + SBCC arm. Likewise, although antenatal
care is unlikely to impact stunting itself, it could be correlated with an increase in
expenditures on other health care services like oral rehydration therapy (ORT) that
could have directly reduced nutrition-depleting illnesses.
    Hence, to provide further evidence on the mechanisms through which the program
reduces stunting, we examine survey data on the number of child illness episodes and
health care expenditures as a proxy for severity of illness. As shown in Table 6, we
do not find any evidence that the interventions led to changes in whether the child
was brought in for treatment (column 4-5), or on total annual health expenditures
on children under five (column 6). We find weak evidence that children were less
likely to experience diarrhea in the last two weeks, but the effects are not statistically
significantly different between the CashOnly and Cash + SBCC arms (p-value=0.39),
suggesting that SBCC, along with cash, did not contribute more to reducing the risk
of infections. There are also no significant effects on the likelihood that children had
pneumonia or fever in the past two weeks.
    Finally, we confirm that the effects on child health are not driven by dispropor-
tionate changes in women's decision-making power in the Cash + SBCC arm. It is
first worth noting that the pattern of results does not indicate that changes in child
health are driven by an increase in female financial empowerment given that women
in both treatment groups received the same amount of cash but only those in the
Cash + SBCC arm exhibit improvements in child health. However, it is theoreti-
cally possible that female decision-making power improved disproportionately in the
combination arm due to an interaction effect on female agency of cash provision in con-
junction with increased knowledge from participation in SBCC sessions. To rule out
this mechanism, we use endline data on spousal decision-making over various spending
categories. Appendix Table 9 shows no differential effects on female decision-making
of either CashOnly or Cash + SBCC . Endline data indicate that mothers in both


                                           28
              Table 6: Child Illness, seeking behavior and health expenditures

                                 (1)             (2)              (3)             (4)              (5)              (6)
                             Diarrhea       Pneumonia           Fever            Seek             Pay          Health ex-
                                                                              treatment        treatment       penditures
                                                                                                                (children
                                                                                                                   U5)
Cash+SBCC          -0.014*                      0.003            0.008           -0.021          -0.022            0.417
                   (0.008)                     (0.027)          (0.026)         (0.020)         (0.021)          (2.516)
CashOnly          -0.020**                      0.002            -0.017          -0.008          -0.005           -0.033
                   (0.008)                     (0.026)          (0.025)         (0.023)         (0.025)          (2.143)
Observations        2154                        2154              2154            2154            2153             2134
Mean Control         0.03                        0.20             0.72            0.89            0.86             27.75
Clusters             102                         102              102             102             102               102
Cash+SBCC=CashOnly 0.39                          0.93             0.31            0.56            0.46             0.85

Notes: The table presents OLS estimates of the effects of the maternal cash transfer program interventions on children
outcomes. Outcomes include: the proportion of children with diarrhea in the past two weeks (1); the proportion of
children with pneumonia in the past two weeks (2); the proportion of children with fever in the past two weeks (3); the
proportion of children who sought treatment for that illness (4); the proportion of children who payed for the treatment
(5); total health expenditures for children under 5 years old in the last year (in USD, 6). "Cash+SBCC" indicates
T1 villages, where cash transfers and SBCC activities were provided jointly; "CashOnly" indicates T2 villages, where
cash transfers only were provided; the reference group are villages in the control group where neither cash transfers
nor SBCC took place. Controls include (i) individual demographic controls, including child's sex and age, mother's
age and education, and household head's age and education for child-level analysis; mother's age and education, and
household head's age and education for mother-level analysis; (ii) village-level controls, including distance to large and
small markets, main source of livelihood (agriculture, livestock, or casual labor), availability of government provided
electricity, and participation in a concurrent WASH intervention. Fixed effects per geographic strata (34) are included.
Standard errors are clustered at the village cluster level. P-values from t-test from the difference in means are reported.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                           29
CashOnly and Cash + SBCC are no more likely to decide on expenditures from their
own or spouse's earnings, health care, major household purchases, or visiting relatives,
than those in the control group.


3.3    Robustness Checks
Although administrative program data show no documented cases of cash being de-
livered through the program to individuals residing in control villages, two forms of
contamination in the SBCC intervention may compromise the validity of some of our
estimates. First, according to SCI's administrative data on the SBCC rollout, 18 vil-
lages assigned to the CashOnly treatment received SBCC activities for 20 rather than
30 months because of an error in program implementation. Second, SBCC activities
were expanded to all CashOnly villages beginning in January 2019, although part of
the endline data were collected after December 2018 at which point those respondents
had already received at least one month of SBCC activities.
    To address these two issues, we re-run the analysis excluding those 18 CashOnly
villages and all mothers interviewed after December 2018, for a total of 138 mothers
or 6.5 percent of the 2,134 women in the analysis sample. As reported in Appendix
Table 10, the results are robust to these exclusions.
    In addition, the main results are robust to considering the full endline sample
(Appendix Tables 11) identified in the 2017 listing of pregnant mothers, which includes
women who may have migrated into the village or become pregnant after announcement
of the program. Results are also robust to the clustering of standard errors at the level
of the program delivery (village) rather than the unit of randomization (health center
catchment area), as shown in Appendix Table 12. Finally, the main results are largely
unchanged in a specification that excludes control variables other than the strata fixed
effects (Appendix Table 13).


4     Conclusion
Our findings provide novel evidence from biomarker data that (unconditional) maternal
cash transfer programs delivered for the first 1000 days of life lead to statistically signif-
icant reductions in the proportion of children (moderately) stunted, but only when they
are combined with intensive Social Behavior Change Communication (SBCC). The sig-
nificant effects on stunting are concentrated among below-median-income households

                                             30
in low-SES villages, consistent with the notion that nutrition programs matter most
where vulnerability to malnutrition is highest, yet the combination of interventions im-
proved outcomes only among those at risk of moderate but not severe stunting. These
patterns provide insight into which sub populations are most easily reached by such
interventions, and indicate that greater efforts are needed to combat severe malnutri-
tion. Tailoring SBCC programming to households with low levels of resources or facing
chronic infections may be needed to address the most severe cases of malnutrition.
    The program was successful in changing a number of maternal health behaviors,
including total food consumption, dietary diversity, breastfeeding, hand-washing prac-
tices, and utilization of prenatal care. However, given that we do not find evidence
that the combined interventions reduced child illness episodes, our pattern of results
suggests that SBCC succeeded in reducing child malnutrition primarily through im-
provements in children's diet, including more calories and more diverse calories from a
variety of protein-rich foods. In contrast, while cash alone increased child food intake
and consumption of animal proteins, the changes were significantly smaller than those
observed in the Cash + SBCC arm, and there was no increase in consumption of the
more affordable vegan proteins emphasized in the SBCC curriculum. Moreover, the
changes in child diet achieved through cash alone were insufficient to improve biometric
indicators of malnutrition in young children who are in a critical window of growth.
    Together, these findings underscore the importance of adding information compo-
nents to social safety net programs involving cash disbursement in order to successfully
change investment in human capital and thereby disrupt the inter-generational cycle
of poverty. Our interventions show that (unconditional) cash transfers alone are insuf-
ficient to reduce chronic malnutrition. Instead, providing mothers with knowledge on
how to use the additional disposable income can be transformative in reducing stunting.
More generally, our analysis reveals that SBCC was fundamental in changing mothers'
knowledge and practices, which indicates that information constraints contribute to
low-income elasticity of (child) calorie demand among malnourished populations.
    Further research is needed to better understand which particular curricular compo-
nents are key to maximizing the child health gains of maternal cash transfer programs.
In addition, more research is needed to establish whether information alone would be
similarly effective in improving child health outcomes. However, given that the most
meaningful behavior changes in terms of child outcomes involved switching to more ex-
pensive foods rather than cost-free changes in health practices, it is likely that SBCC


                                          31
delivered without the additional benefit of cash transfers would be unlikely to achieve
a comparable impact on child stunting.


References
Ahmed, Akhter, John Hoddinott, and Shalini Roy, "Food transfers, cash
 transfers, behavior change communication and child nutrition: Evidence from
 Bangladesh," 2019.
Almond, Douglas and Janet Currie, Human Capital Development Before Age
 Five. in in O. Ashenfelter and D. Card (eds.) Handbook of Labor Economics. Vol. 4,
 Elsevier, 2011.
   and , "Killing Me Softly: The Fetal Origins Hypothesis," Journal of Economic
  Perspectives, 2011, 25 (3), 153­172.
Attanasio, Orazio, Helen Baker-Henningham, Raquel Bernal, Costas
 Meghir, Diana Pineda, and Marta Rubio-Codina, "Early Stimulation and
 Nutrition: The Impacts of a Scalable Intervention," Cowles Foundation Discussion
 Paper No. 2145, 2018.
Avula, Rasmi, Purnima Menon, Kuntal K Saha, Mahbubul Bhuiyan,
 Saiqa Siraj Anita S Chowdhury, and Edward E. Frongillo, "A program im-
 pact pathway analysis identifies critical steps in the implementation and utilization
 of a behavior change communication intervention promoting infant and child feeding
 practices in Bangladesh," The Journal of Nutrition, 2013, 143 (12), 2029­2037.
Bailey, Sarah, "The Impact of Cash Transfers on Food Consumption in Humanitarian
 Settings: A review of evidence," Technical Report 2013.
Baird, Sarah, Craig McIntoshb, and Berk Ozler, "When the money runs out:
 Do cash transfers have sustained effects on human capital accumulation?," Journal
 of Development Economics, 2019, 140, 169­185.
Bastagli, Francesca, Jessica Hagen-Zanker, Luke Harman, Valentina Barca,
 Georgina Sturge, Tanja Schmidt, and Luca Pellerano, "Cash transfers: what
 does the evidence say? A rigorous review of programme impact and of the role of
 design and implementation features," 2016.
Bekdash, Rola Aldana, "Choline and the Brain: An Epigenetic Perspective," Ad-
 vances in Neurobiology, 2016, 12, 381­399.
Bhutta, Jai K Das Zulfiqar A, Arjumand Rizvi, Michelle Gaffey, Neff
 Walker, Susan Horton, Patrick Webb, Anna Lartey, and Robert Black,
 "Evidence-based interventions for improvement of maternal and child nutrition:
 What can be done and what cost?," The Lancet, 2013, 382 (9890), 452­477.

                                          32
Biscaye, Pierre, David Coomes, Elan Ebeling, Annie Rose Favreau, and
  Trygve Madsen, "Review of Evidence on Long-term Impacts of Cash Transfer
  Programs," 2017.

Bobonis, Gustavo J, "Is the allocation of resources within the household efficient?
 New evidence from a randomized experiment," Journal of political Economy, 2009,
 117 (3), 453­503.

Cahyadi, Nur, Rema Hanna, Benjamin A. Olkena, Rizal Adi Prima, Elan
 Satriawan, and Ekki Syamsulhakim, "Cumulative Impacts of Conditional Cash
 Transfer Programs: Experimental Evidence from Indonesia," American Economic
 Journal: Economic Policy, 2020.

Carneiro, Pedro, Lucy Kfraftman, Giacomo Mason, Lucie Moore, Imran
 Rasul, and Molly Scott, "The Impacts of a Multifaceted Pre-natal Intervention
 on Human Capital Accumulation in Early Life," 2019.

Cecchini, Simone and Aldo Madariaga, "Conditional cash transfer programmes:
 the recent experience in Latin America and the Caribbean," 2011.

Colen, L., PC Meloc nd Y Abdul-Salamd, D Robertsd, S Maryf, S Gomez,
 and Y Palomaa, "Income elasticities for food, calories and nutrients across Africa:
 A meta-analysis," Food Policy, 2018, 77, 116­132.

Deaton, Angus and Jean Dr`     eze, "Food and nutrition in India: facts and interpre-
 tations," Economic and political weekly, 2009, pp. 42­65.

Demographic Health Surveys, 2015.

Doyle, Orla, "The First 2000 Days and Children's Skills," Journal of Political Econ-
 omy, 2019.

Duflo, Esther, "Grandmothers and granddaughters: old-age pensions and intra
 household allocation in South Africa," The World Bank economic review, 2003, 17
 (1), 1­24.

   and Christopher Udry, "Intrahousehold resource allocation in Cote d'Ivoire: So-
  cial norms, separate accounts and consumption choices," Technical Report, National
  Bureau of Economic Research 2004.

Dyer, Adam, Cyrus Vahdatpour, Albert Sanfeliu, and Daniela Tropea, "The
 Role of Insulin Like Growth Factor 1 (IGF-1) in Brain Development, Maturation
 and Neuroplasticity," Neuroscience, 03 2016, 325.

Engle, Patrice L, Maureen M Black, Jere R Behrman, Meena Cabral
 de Mello, Paul J Gertler, Lydia Kapiriri, Reynaldo Martorell, Mary Em-
 ing Young, and the International Child Development Steering Group, "

                                         33
  Strategies to Avoid the Loss of Developmental Potential in More than 200 Million
  Children in the Developing World," The Lancet, 2007, 369, 229­242.
Field, Erica and Elisa M Maffioli, "A Comparison Between Government and NGO
  in Delivering Cash Transfers: Who Does Perform Better?," 2020.
Fiszbein, Ariel, Norbert Schady, Francisco H G Ferreira, Margaret Grosh,
  Niall Keleher, Pedro Olinto, and Emmanuel Skoufias, "Conditional Cash
  Transfers: reducing present and future poverty," 2009.
Fitzsimons, Emla, Bansi Malde, Alice Mesnard, and Marcos Vera-
  Hernandez, "Nutrition, information and household behavior: Experimental evi-
  dence from Malawi," Journal of Development Economics, 2016, 122, 113­126.
Gilbert, Clare, "What is vitamin A and why do we need it?," Community Eye Health.,
 2013, 84 (65), 1205­1223.
Hoddinott, John, Ishita Ahmed, Akhter Ahmed, and Shalini Roy, "Behavior
 change communication activities improve infant and young child nutrition knowledge
 and practice of neighboring non-participants in a cluster-randomized trial in rural
 Bangladesh," PLoS One, 2017, 12 (6).
  , , Jere R Behrman, Lawrence Haddad, and Susan Horton, "The economic
  rationale for investing in stunting reduction," Maternal and Child Nutrition, 2013, 9
  (2), 69­82.
Iannotti, Lora, Ellen Muehlhoff, and Deirdre Mcmahon, "Review of milk and
  dairy programmes affecting nutrition," Journal of Development Effectiveness, 2013,
  5 (1), 82­115.
IEG World Bank, "What Can We Learn from Nutrition Impact Evaluations?," 2011.
Jensen, Nolan H. Miller Robert T., "Do consumer price subsidies really improve
  nutrition? ," Review of Economics and Statistics, 2011, 93 (4), 1205­1223.
Kandpal, Eeshani, Harold Alderman, Jed Friedman, Deon Filmer, Junko
 Onishi, , and Jorge Avalos, "A Conditional Cash Transfer Program in the Philip-
 pines Reduces Severe Stunting," The Journal of Nutrition, 2016.
Laplante, Mathieu and David M. Sabatini, "mTOR signaling in growth control
  and disease," Cell, 2012, 149, 274­293.
L´
 epine, Aur´  elia and Eric Strobl, "The effect of women's bargaining power on child
  nutrition in rural Senegal," World Development, 2013, 45, 17­30.
Leroy, Jef and Edward A Frongillo, "Perspective: What Does Stunting Really
  Mean? A Critical Review of the Evidence," Advances in Nutrition, 2019, 10 (2),
  196­204.

                                          34
Levere, Michael, Gayatri Acharya, and Prashant Bharadwaj, "The Role of
  Information and Cash Transfers on Early Childhood Development, Evidence from
  Nepal," 2016.
Livelihoods and Food Security Fund, "MEDIA RELEASE: LIFT and DSW an-
  nounce USD9 million in COVID-19 cash support to mothers, pregnant women and
  social pension beneficiaries," Technical Report 2020.
Luo, Renfu, Yaojiang Shi, Linxiu Zhang, Huiping Zhang, Grant Miller,
 Alexis Medina, and Scott Rozelle, "The Limits of Health and Nutrition Educa-
 tion: Evidence from Three Randomized-Controlled Trials in Rural China," CESifo
 Economic Studies, 2012, 58 (2), 385­404.
Manley, James, Seth Gitter, and Vanya Slavchevska, "How effective are cash
 transfers at improving nutritional status?," Word Development, 2013, 48, 133­155.
Miguel, Edward and Michael Kremer, "Early Stimulation and Nutrition: The
 Impacts of a Scalable Intervention," Econometrica, 2004, 72 (1), 159­217.
Millan, Teresa Molina, Tania Barham, Karen Macours, John A Maluccio,
 and Marco Stampini, "Long-Term Impacts of Conditional Cash Transfers in Latin
 America: Review of the Evidence," The World Bank Research Observer, 2019, 34
 (1), 119­159.
Molgaard, Christian, Anni Larnkjaer, Karina Arnberg, and Kim F
 Michaelsen, "Milk and growth in children: Effects of whey and casein," Nestle
 Nutrition workshop series. Paediatric programme, 2011, 67, 67­78.
Richter, Linda M, Bernadette Daelmans, Joan Lombardi, Jody Heymann,
 Florencia Lopez Boo, Jere R Behrman, Chunling Lu, Jane E Lucas, Rafael
 Perez-Escamilla, Tarun Dua, Zulfiqar A Bhutta, Karin Stenberg, and Paul
 Gertler, "Investing in the Foundation of Sustainable Development: Path- ways to
 Scale Up for Early Childhood Development," The Lancet, 2017, 389, 103­118.
Ritcher, Linda, "Social cash transfers to support children and families affected by
 HIV/AIDS. Vulnerable Children and Youth Studies," Vulnerable Children and Youth
 Studies, 2010, 5 (1), 81­91.
Salois, Matthew J, Richard Tiffin, and Kelvin G Balcombe, "Impact of income
  on nutrient intakes: implications for undernourishment and obesity," The Journal
  of Development Studies, 2012, 48 (12), 1716­1730.
Semba, Richard D, Indi Trehan, Marta Gonzalez-Freire, Klaus Kraemer,
  Ruin Moaddel, M Isabel Ordiz, Luigi Ferrucci, , and Mark J Manary,
  "Perspective: the potential role of essential amino acids and the mechanistic target
  of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) pathway in the pathogenesis of child stunting,"
  Advances in Nutrition, 2016, 7 (5), 853­865.

                                         35
  , Michelle Shardell, Fayrouz A Sakr Ashour, Ruin Moaddel, Indi Tre-
  han, Kenneth M Maleta, M Isabel Ordiz, Klaus Kraemer, Mohammed A
  Khadeer, Luigi Ferrucci, and Mark J Manary, "Child stunting is associated
  with low circulating essential amino acids," EBioMedicine, 2016, 6, 246­252.

  , Pingbo Zhang, Marta Gonzalez-Freire, Ruin Moaddel, Indi Trehan, Ken-
  neth M Maleta, M Isabel Ordiz, Luigi Ferrucci, and Mark J Manary, "The
  association of serum choline with linear growth failure in young children from rural
  Malawi," American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 2016, 104 (1), 191­197.

Skoufias, Emmanuel, Vincenzo Di Maro, Teresa Gonzalez-Cossio, and So-
  nia Rodriguez Ramirez, "Food quality, calories and household income," Applied
  Economics, 2011, 43, 4331­4342.

Soares, Fabio Veras, Rafael Perez Ribas, and Rafael Guerreiro Osorio, "Eval-
  uating the impact of Brazil's Bolsa Familia: Cash transfer programs in comparative
  perspective," Latin American Research Review, 2010, 45 (2), 173­190.

Subramanian, Shankar and Angus Deaton, "The Demand for Food and Calories,"
  Journal of Political Economy, 1996, 104 (1), 133­162.

The Republic of The Union of Myanmar, "Myanmar National Social Protection
 Strategic Plan," Technical Report 2014.

Tirivayia, Nyasha, Marco Knowlesb, and Benjamin Davisb, "The interaction
  between social protection and agriculture: A review of evidence," Global Food Secu-
  rity, 2016, 10, 52­62.

United Nation Standing Committee on Nutrition, "Sixth Report on the World
 Nutrition Situation: Progress in Nutrition," 2010.

Vasundhara, Donugama, Rajkumar Hemalatha, Saurabh Sharma,
 Baru Anantha Ramalaxmi, Varanasi Bhaskar, JagJeevan Babu,
 Radha Krishna Kankipati Vijaya, and RajaSriswan Mamidi, "Maternal
 MUAC and fetal outcome in an Indian tertiary care hospital: A prospective ob-
 servational study," Maternal & child nutrition, 2020, 16 (2), e12902.

World Bank, "World development indicators," 2017.

World Health Organization, "WHO child growth standards: Length/height-for-
 Age, weight- for-age, weight-for-length, weight-for-height and Body Mass Index-for-
 age: Methods and development," 2006.

Zhou, De and Xiaohua Yu, "Calorie elasticities with income dynamics: evidence
 from the literature," Applied Economic Perspectives and Policy,, 2014, 37 (4), 575­
 601.


                                         36
Appendix: Additional Tables and Figures

                            Table 1: Balance on woman-level characteristics

                                       T1               T2              CG          PV (T1-CG)         PV (T2-CG)         N(T1/T2/CG)
Resp married                         0.96             0.97             0.96              0.541              0.199         840 / 802 / 695
                                    (0.19)           (0.17)           (0.20)
Resp age                            32.16            31.42            31.26             0.013**             0.683         840 / 802 / 696
                                    (6.37)           (6.52)           (6.17)
Resp educ years                      5.70             5.86             6.08              0.132              0.370         840 / 802 / 696
                                    (3.19)           (3.38)           (3.36)
HH size                              4.95             4.99             4.81              0.224              0.103         840 / 802 / 696
                                    (1.71)           (1.77)           (1.64)
Children U5                          1.12             1.11             1.13              0.750              0.370         840 / 802 / 696
                                    (0.37)           (0.34)           (0.38)
HH head female                       0.08             0.09             0.07              0.593              0.421         840 / 802 / 696
                                    (0.28)           (0.28)           (0.26)
HH head tot yrs educ                 5.49             5.79             6.06             0.030**             0.292         840 / 802 / 696
                                    (3.19)           (3.35)           (3.35)
HH head worked past 3m               0.89             0.83             0.86              0.650              0.386         840 / 802 / 696
                                    (0.66)           (0.39)           (0.58)
HH head income                    349964.00        330294.12        332720.14            0.627              0.949         839 / 799 / 695
                                 (478142.69)      (486734.66)      (466277.61)
Any electricity                      0.42             0.38             0.47              0.515              0.198         840 / 802 / 696
                                    (0.49)           (0.48)           (0.50)
Always electricity                   0.38             0.33             0.40              0.775              0.350         833 / 790 / 688
                                    (0.48)           (0.47)           (0.49)
Cooking fuel electricity             0.29             0.24             0.29              0.953              0.360         840 / 802 / 696
                                    (0.46)           (0.43)           (0.45)
Tot no. rooms in house               1.15             1.18             1.14              0.825              0.474         838 / 796 / 693
                                    (0.81)           (0.80)           (0.75)
Improved roof material               0.87             0.85             0.87              0.991              0.681         840 / 802 / 696
                                    (0.34)           (0.35)           (0.34)
Improved wall material               0.23             0.22             0.21              0.390              0.704         840 / 802 / 696
                                    (0.42)           (0.41)           (0.41)
Improved floor material              0.33             0.32             0.31              0.695              0.898         840 / 802 / 696
                                    (0.47)           (0.47)           (0.46)

Notes: This table presents the balance check on women characteristics by treatment arm for the sample of all mothers who were pregnant at
enrollment (2,338). T1 ("Cash+SBCC") refer to villages where cash transfers and SBCC activities were provided jointly; T2 ("CashOnly")
refer to villages where cash transfers only were provided; CG (control group) refer to villages where neither cash transfers nor SBCC took
place. Fixed effects per geographic strata (34) are included. Standard errors are clustered at the village cluster level. P-values from t-test
from the difference in means are reported. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                37
                             Table 2: Balance on village-level characteristics

                                                   T1           T2          CG        PV (T1-CG)         PV (T2-CG)        N(T1/T2/CG)
Tot. population (No. HH)                182.17                175.54       160.92          0.263             0.418         133 / 135 / 139
                                       (128.98)              (135.99)     (106.39)
Tot. literacy rate                       85.19                 85.50        83.58          0.384             0.247         133 / 135 / 139
                                        (13.45)               (12.50)      (12.87)
Main livelihood: Agriculture              0.92                  0.85         0.91          0.654             0.312         133 / 135 / 139
                                         (0.26)                (0.36)       (0.29)
Main livelihood: Livestock                0.29                  0.30         0.24          0.583             0.500         133 / 135 / 139
                                         (0.45)                (0.46)       (0.43)
Main livelihood: Casual Labor             0.77                  0.79         0.76          0.779             0.714         133 / 135 / 139
                                         (0.42)                (0.41)       (0.43)
Type land-dry land farming                0.53                  0.64         0.55          0.837             0.370         133 / 135 / 139
                                         (0.50)                (0.48)       (0.50)
Type land-flood plains or irrigated       0.47                  0.35         0.44          0.780             0.322         133 / 135 / 139
                                         (0.50)                (0.48)       (0.50)
Accessible by car/truck in all weather    0.79                  0.79         0.75          0.614             0.677         133 / 135 / 139
                                         (0.41)                (0.41)       (0.44)
Village has Gov electricity               0.24                  0.22         0.22          0.839             0.992         133 / 135 / 139
                                         (0.43)                (0.42)       (0.42)
Village has primary school                0.63                  0.58         0.59          0.544             0.832         133 / 135 / 139
                                         (0.48)                (0.50)       (0.49)
Village has small markets                 0.02                  0.05         0.03          0.735             0.352         133 / 135 / 139
                                         (0.15)                (0.22)       (0.17)
Village has home markets                  0.97                  0.96         0.96          0.773             0.729         133 / 135 / 139
                                         (0.17)                (0.21)       (0.19)
Distance to large market                 34.76                 32.96        40.24          0.310             0.150         133 / 135 / 139
                                        (24.83)               (20.05)      (26.39)
Distance to small markets                24.77                 20.46        28.07          0.487             0.084*        133 / 135 / 139
                                        (18.62)               (15.49)      (23.55)
Village has health facility               0.16                  0.19         0.19          0.269             0.803         133 / 135 / 139
                                         (0.37)                (0.39)       (0.40)
Village has midwife                       0.21                  0.21         0.24          0.358             0.269         133 / 135 / 139
                                         (0.41)                (0.41)       (0.43)
Water shortage past year                  0.42                  0.46         0.36          0.441             0.189         133 / 135 / 139
                                         (0.50)                (0.50)       (0.48)

Notes: This table presents the balance check on village characteristics by treatment arm for the sample of villages included in the analysis.
T1 ("Cash+SBCC") refer to villages where cash transfers and SBCC activities were provided jointly; T2 ("CashOnly") refer to villages
where cash transfers only were provided; CG (control group) refer to villages where neither cash transfers nor SBCC took place. Fixed
effects per geographic strata (34) are included. Standard errors are clustered at the village cluster level. P-values from t-test from the
difference in means are reported. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                  38
Table 3: Balance on woman-level characteristics for women sample followed-up at
endline

                                        T1              T2              CG          PV (T1-CG)        PV (T2-CG)         N(T1/T2/CG)
Resp married                          0.96             0.97             0.96             0.581             0.189        769 / 744 / 620
                                     (0.19)           (0.17)           (0.20)
Resp age                             32.07            31.41            31.39            0.082*             0.964        769 / 744 / 621
                                     (6.38)           (6.53)           (6.18)
Resp educ years                       5.71             5.84             6.09             0.134             0.339        769 / 744 / 621
                                     (3.17)           (3.32)           (3.36)
HH size                               4.92             4.99             4.83             0.418             0.164        769 / 744 / 621
                                     (1.69)           (1.80)           (1.63)
Tot. biological children U5           1.14             1.12             1.14             0.975             0.326        769 / 744 / 621
                                     (0.36)           (0.33)           (0.36)
HH head age                          40.46            39.76            39.94             0.605             0.864        769 / 744 / 621
                                    (13.98)          (13.37)          (14.43)
HH head female                        0.08             0.08             0.07             0.585             0.699        769 / 744 / 621
                                     (0.28)           (0.27)           (0.26)
HH head tot yrs educ                  5.47             5.81             6.04           0.032**             0.371        769 / 744 / 621
                                     (3.14)           (3.33)           (3.34)
HH head worked past 3m                0.89             0.83             0.86             0.642             0.426        769 / 744 / 621
                                     (0.65)           (0.38)           (0.60)
HH head income past 3mo            350743.23        335991.91        334404.03           0.654             0.967        768 / 742 / 620
                                  (466361.87)      (500633.62)      (483130.36)
Any electricity                       0.42             0.38             0.48             0.503             0.177        769 / 744 / 621
                                     (0.49)           (0.49)           (0.50)
Always electricity                    0.38             0.33             0.41             0.718             0.309        762 / 733 / 614
                                     (0.49)           (0.47)           (0.49)
Cooking fuel electricity              0.29             0.24             0.30             0.881             0.253        769 / 744 / 621
                                     (0.46)           (0.43)           (0.46)
Tot no. rooms in house                1.14             1.17             1.13             0.890             0.536        767 / 739 / 619
                                     (0.80)           (0.79)           (0.75)
Improved roof material                0.86             0.85             0.87             0.866             0.698        769 / 744 / 621
                                     (0.34)           (0.35)           (0.34)
Improved wall material                0.23             0.22             0.21             0.436             0.750        769 / 744 / 621
                                     (0.42)           (0.41)           (0.41)
Improved floor material               0.33             0.31             0.31             0.642             0.989        769 / 744 / 621
                                     (0.47)           (0.46)           (0.46)

Notes: This table presents the balance check on individual characteristics by treatment arm for the sample of mothers who were pregnant
at enrollment included in the analysis as followed-up at endline (2,134). T1 ("Cash+SBCC") refer to villages where cash transfers and
SBCC activities were provided jointly; T2 ("CashOnly") refer to villages where cash transfers only were provided; CG (control group)
refer to villages where neither cash transfers nor SBCC took place. Fixed effects per geographic strata (34) are included. Standard errors
are clustered at the village cluster level. P-values from t-test from the difference in means are reported. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                               39
                  Table 4: Fertility

                          (1)                 (2)
                       Pregnant            Tot no.
                                         pregnancies
                                        since start of
                                           program
Cash+SBCC                0.010               0.002
                        (0.009)             (0.018)
CashOnly                 0.001              -0.028*
                        (0.009)             (0.017)
Observations             2134                2134
Mean Control              .03                 1.14
Clusters                  102                 102

Notes: The table presents OLS estimates of the ef-
fects of the maternal cash transfer program interven-
tions on measures of fertility. "Cash+SBCC" indi-
cates T1 villages, where cash transfers and SBCC ac-
tivities were provided jointly; "CashOnly" indicates
T2 villages, where cash transfers only were provided;
the reference group are villages in the control group
(CG) where neither cash transfers nor SBCC took
place. Outcomes include whether the mother is cur-
rently pregnant at endline (1), and her total num-
ber of pregnancies between June 2016 and endline,
calculated from the household roster as the sum of
biological living children under 5 years old. Con-
trols include (i) individual demographic controls, in-
cluding mother's age and education, and household
head's age and education; (ii) village-level controls,
including distance to large and small markets, main
source of livelihood (agriculture, livestock, or casual
labor), availability of government provided electric-
ity, and participation in a concurrent WASH inter-
vention. Fixed effects per geographic strata (34) are
included. Standard errors are clustered at the village
cluster level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                           40
                        Table 5: Child underweight

                        (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)
                     Prop. of        Prop. of        Prop. of         WAH
                     children        children        children         score
                      under-         moder-          severely        (WHO)
                      weight           ately          under-
                                      under-          weight
                                      weight
Cash+SBCC             -0.003           0.005           -0.008          -0.074
                     (0.014)          (0.007)         (0.012)         (0.049)
CashOnly              -0.019           0.004          -0.023*          -0.050
                     (0.015)          (0.008)         (0.012)         (0.055)
Observations           2142            2142             2142            2142
Mean Control           0.11            0.02             0.10            -0.83
Clusters               102              102             102              102

Notes: The table presents OLS estimates of the effects of the mater-
nal cash transfer program interventions on measures of stunting for chil-
dren whose mothers were pregnant at enrollment, following WHO classifica-
tion."Cash+SBCC" indicates T1 villages, where cash transfers and SBCC ac-
tivities were provided jointly; "CashOnly" indicates T2 villages, where only
cash transfers were provided; the reference group are villages in the control
group where neither cash transfers nor SBCC took place. Outcomes include
the proportion of children underweight as children with Wight for Age Z score
(WAH) < -2 (1); the proportion of children moderately underweight as chil-
dren with WAH < -2 and >= -3 (2); the proportion of children severely un-
derweight as children with WAH < -3 (3); and, WAH (4). Controls include (i)
individual demographic controls, including child's sex and age, mother's age
and education, and household head's age and education; (ii) village-level con-
trols, including distance to large and small markets, main source of livelihood
(agriculture, livestock, or casual labor), availability of government provided
electricity, and participation in a concurrent WASH intervention. Fixed ef-
fects per geographic strata (34) are included. Standard errors are clustered at
the village cluster level. P-values from t-test from the difference in means are
reported. ***p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                       41
                           Table 6: Child wasting

                        (1)              (2)              (3)             (4)
                     Prop. of         Prop. of        Prop. of          WHZ
                     children         children        children          score
                      wasted          moder-          severely         (WHO)
                     (GAM)              ately          wasted
                                       wasted          (SAM)
                                      (MAM)
Cash+SBCC              -0.003           0.018           -0.021           -0.029
                      (0.025)          (0.012)         (0.022)          (0.052)
CashOnly                0.004           0.019           -0.015           -0.051
                      (0.027)          (0.013)         (0.023)          (0.058)
Observations            2145            2145             2145             2145
Mean Control            0.28             0.04            0.24             -1.43
Clusters                 102             102             102               102

Notes: The table presents OLS estimates of the effects of the mater-
nal cash transfer program interventions on measures of stunting for chil-
dren whose mothers were pregnant at enrollment, following WHO classifica-
tion."Cash+SBCC" indicates T1 villages, where cash transfers and SBCC ac-
tivities were provided jointly; "CashOnly" indicates T2 villages, where only
cash transfers were provided; the reference group are villages in the control
group where neither cash transfers nor SBCC took place. Outcomes include
the proportion of children wasted (global acute malnutrition, GAM) as children
with Weight for Height Z score (WHZ) < -2 (1); the proportion of children with
moderate acute malnutrition (MAM) as children with WHZ < -2 and >= -3 (2);
the proportion of children with severe acute malnutrition (SAM) as children
with WHZ < -3 (3); and, WHZ (4). Controls include (i) individual demographic
controls, including child's sex and age, mother's age and education, and house-
hold head's age and education; (ii) village-level controls, including distance to
large and small markets, main source of livelihood (agriculture, livestock, or
casual labor), availability of government provided electricity, and participation
in a concurrent WASH intervention. Fixed effects per geographic strata (34)
are included. Standard errors are clustered at the village cluster level. P-values
from t-test from the difference in means are reported. ***p<0.01, ** p<0.05,
* p<0.1.




                                        42
Table 7: Children stunting - by village socio-economic status (SES)

                        (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)
                     Prop. of        Prop. of         Prop. of       HAZ score
                     children        children         children        (WHO)
                     stunted         moder-           severely
                                      ately           stunted
                                     stunted
Panel A: Low SES Villages
Cash+SBCC            -0.093**        -0.093***         0.001          0.158**
                      (0.037)         (0.032)         (0.020)         (0.071)
CashOnly               -0.041          -0.055          0.014           -0.026
                      (0.038)         (0.035)         (0.020)         (0.070)
Observations            1051            1051           1051             1051
Mean Control            0.34            0.27           0.07             -1.57
Clusters                 92              92              92              92
Panel B: High SES Villages
Cash+SBCC              0.044           0.020           0.024            -0.036
                      (0.031)         (0.030)         (0.016)          (0.078)
CashOnly              0.057*           0.048           0.009            -0.069
                      (0.033)         (0.031)         (0.014)          (0.080)
Observations            961             961             961               961
Mean Control            0.34            0.27            0.07             -1.57
Clusters                 86              86              86                86

Notes: The table presents OLS estimates of the effects of the mater-
nal cash transfer program interventions on measures of stunting for chil-
dren whose mothers were pregnant at enrollment, following WHO classifica-
tion."Cash+SBCC" indicates T1 villages, where cash transfers and SBCC ac-
tivities were provided jointly; "CashOnly" indicates T2 villages, where only
cash transfers were provided; the reference group are villages in the control
group where neither cash transfers nor SBCC took place. Outcomes include
the proportion of children stunted as children with Height for Age Z score
(HAZ) ¡ -2 (1); the proportion of children moderately stunted as children with
HAZ < -2 and >= -3 (2); the proportion of children severely stunted as children
with HAZ < -3 (3); and, HAZ (4). Controls include (i) individual demographic
controls, including child's sex and age, mother's age and education, and house-
hold head's age and education; (ii) village-level controls, including distance to
large and small markets, main source of livelihood (agriculture, livestock, or
casual labor), availability of government provided electricity, and participation
in a concurrent WASH intervention. The analysis excludes the sample con-
taminated by the imperfect implementation (139 children). Low or high SES
is proxied by the average number of years of education attained by resident
women below or above the median.


                                       43
Table 8: Children stunting - by village socio-economic status (SES) and household
income

                                         (1)             (2)              (3)                (4)
                                     Prop. of         Prop. of        Prop. of        HAZ score
                                     children         children        children         (WHO)
                                     stunted          moder-          severely
                                                       ately          stunted
                                                      stunted
                Panel A: Low SES, Low income
                Cash+SBCC            -0.140***        -0.122**          -0.017            0.210**
                                      (0.050)          (0.047)         (0.029)            (0.099)
                CashOnly               -0.053           -0.034          -0.019             -0.010
                                      (0.056)          (0.052)         (0.030)            (0.104)
                Observations            544              544             544                 544
                Mean Control            0.43             0.35            0.08               -1.72
                Clusters                 89               89              89                 89
                Panel B: Low SES, High income
                Cash+SBCC              -0.028           -0.059          0.031               0.029
                                      (0.047)          (0.050)         (0.030)             (0.087)
                CashOnly               -0.012           -0.065         0.053*               -0.089
                                      (0.043)          (0.046)         (0.030)             (0.079)
                Observations            507              507             507                  507
                Mean Control            0.42             0.35            0.07                -1.69
                Clusters                 86               86              86                  86
                Panel C: High SES, Low Income
                Cash+SBCC              0.039            0.027           0.012                0.035
                                      (0.045)          (0.039)         (0.024)             (0.105)
                CashOnly               0.054            0.059           -0.005              -0.015
                                      (0.047)          (0.040)         (0.021)             (0.097)
                Observations            454              454             454                  454
                Mean Control            0.26             0.18            0.07                -1.50
                Clusters                 81               81              81                  81
                Panel D: High SES, High Income
                Cash+SBCC              0.029            0.003           0.025               -0.084
                                      (0.045)          (0.044)         (0.024)             (0.111)
                CashOnly               0.078            0.044           0.034               -0.178
                                      (0.053)          (0.053)         (0.025)             (0.132)
                Observations            507              507             507                  507
                Mean Control            0.27             0.22           0.05                 -1.39
                Clusters                 80               80              80                  80

                Notes: The table presents OLS estimates of the effects of the maternal cash transfer
                program interventions on measures of stunting for children whose mothers were preg-
                nant at enrollment, following WHO classification."Cash+SBCC" indicates T1 villages,
                where cash transfers and SBCC activities were provided jointly; "CashOnly" indicates
                T2 villages, where only cash transfers were provided; the reference group are villages
                in the control group where neither cash transfers nor SBCC took place. Outcomes
                include the proportion of children stunted as children with Height for Age Z score
                (HAZ) ¡ -2 (1); the proportion of children moderately stunted as children with HAZ
                < -2 and >= -3 (2); the proportion of children severely stunted as children with HAZ
                < -3 (3); and, HAZ (4). Controls include (i) individual demographic controls, includ-
                ing child's sex and age, mother's age and education, and household head's age and
                education; (ii) village-level controls, including distance to large and small markets,
                main source of livelihood (agriculture, livestock, or casual labor), availability of gov-
                ernment provided electricity, and participation in a concurrent WASH intervention.
                The analysis excludes the sample contaminated by the imperfect implementation (139
                children). Low or high SES is proxied by the average number of years of education
                attained by resident women below or above the median. Low or high income is de-
                fined as below or above the household median income. Fixed effects per geographic
                strata (34) are included. Standard errors are clustered at the village cluster level. ***
                p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
                                                          44
                                  Table 9: Women's decision-making

                                           (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)               (5)
                                        Mother          Mother          Mother           Mother           Mother
                                       decides on      decides on      decides on       decides on      decides on
                                          own            spouse          health           major            visit
                                        earnings        earnings                        purchases        relatives
Cash+SBCC                                 0.027           -0.004          0.047           0.043*              0.022
                                         (0.031)         (0.024)         (0.031)          (0.024)           (0.027)
CashOnly                                 0.045*            0.017          0.029            0.012             -0.014
                                         (0.027)         (0.024)         (0.028)          (0.025)           (0.029)
Observations                              1958             2088           2130             2130               2132
Mean Control                               0.34             0.23           0.24             0.18               0.23
Clusters                                   102              102            102              102                102
Cash+SBCC=CashOnly                         0.51             0.40           0.59            0.17               0.19

Notes: The table presents OLS estimates of the effects of the maternal cash transfer program interventions on measures
of decision-making. Outcomes include: the proportion of mothers who decide on own (1) or spouse's earnings (2); on
health (3); or on major household purchases (4) or visiting relatives (5). "Cash+SBCC" indicates T1 villages, where
cash transfers and SBCC activities were provided jointly; "CashOnly" indicates T2 villages, where cash transfers only
were provided; the reference group are villages in the control group where neither cash transfers nor SBCC took
place. Controls include (i) individual demographic controls, including child's sex and age, mother's age and education,
and household head's age and education for child-level analysis; mother's age and education, and household head's
age and education for mother-level analysis; (ii) village-level controls, including distance to large and small markets,
main source of livelihood (agriculture, livestock, or casual labor), availability of government provided electricity, and
participation in a concurrent WASH intervention. Fixed effects per geographic strata (34) are included. Standard
errors are clustered at the village cluster level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                          45
       Table 10: Children stunting - addressing contamination

                        (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)
                     Prop. of        Prop. of         Prop. of       HAZ score
                     children        children         children        (WHO)
                     stunted         moder-           severely
                                      ately           stunted
                                     stunted
Cash+SBCC            -0.050**        -0.057***         0.007            0.074
                      (0.022)         (0.018)         (0.011)          (0.047)
CashOnly               -0.002          -0.006          0.004            -0.031
                      (0.025)         (0.022)         (0.012)          (0.044)
Observations            2012            2012           2012              2012
Mean Control            0.34            0.27           0.07              -1.57
Clusters                102              102            102               102

Notes: The table presents OLS estimates of the effects of the mater-
nal cash transfer program interventions on measures of stunting for chil-
dren whose mothers were pregnant at enrollment, following WHO classifica-
tion.`Cash+SBCC" indicates T1 villages, where cash transfers and SBCC ac-
tivities were provided jointly; "CashOnly" indicates T2 villages, where only
cash transfers were provided; the reference group are villages in the control
group where neither cash transfers nor SBCC took place. Outcomes include
the proportion of children stunted as children with Height for Age Z score
(HAZ) ¡ -2 (1); the proportion of children moderately stunted as children with
HAZ < -2 and >= -3 (2); the proportion of children severely stunted as children
with HAZ < -3 (3); and, HAZ (4). Controls include (i) individual demographic
controls, including child's sex and age, mother's age and education, and house-
hold head's age and education; (ii) village-level controls, including distance to
large and small markets, main source of livelihood (agriculture, livestock, or
casual labor), availability of government provided electricity, and participation
in a concurrent WASH intervention. The analysis excludes the sample con-
taminated by the imperfect implementation (139 children). Fixed effects per
geographic strata (34) are included. Standard errors are clustered at the village
cluster level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                       46
           Table 11: Children stunting - endline full sample

                        (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)
                     Prop. of        Prop. of         Prop. of       HAZ score
                     children        children         children        (WHO)
                     stunted         moder-           severely
                                      ately           stunted
                                     stunted
Cash+SBCC            -0.038**        -0.042***         0.004           0.060*
                      (0.016)         (0.015)         (0.009)          (0.035)
CashOnly               -0.006          -0.009          0.003            -0.014
                      (0.017)         (0.016)         (0.009)          (0.035)
Observations            3176            3176           3176              3176
Mean Control            0.35            0.28           0.06              -1.58
Clusters                102              102            102               102

Notes: The table presents OLS estimates of the effects of the maternal
cash transfer program interventions on measures of stunting for children of
the full endline sample, following WHO classification."Cash+SBCC" indicates
T1 villages, where cash transfers and SBCC activities were provided jointly;
"CashOnly" indicates T2 villages, where only cash transfers were provided; the
reference group are villages in the control group where neither cash transfers
nor SBCC took place. Outcomes include the proportion of children stunted as
children with Height for Age Z score (HAZ) < -2 (1); the proportion of chil-
dren moderately stunted as children with HAZ < -2 and >= -3 (2); the pro-
portion of children severely stunted as children with HAZ < -3 (3); and, HAZ
(4). Controls include (i) individual demographic controls, including child's sex
and age, mother's age and education, and household head's age and educa-
tion; (ii) village-level controls, including distance to large and small markets,
main source of livelihood (agriculture, livestock, or casual labor), availability
of government provided electricity, and participation in a concurrent WASH
intervention. Fixed effects per geographic strata (34) are included. Standard
errors are clustered at the village cluster level. P-values from t-test from the
difference in means are reported. ***p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                       47
Table 12: Children stunting - standard errors clustered at village level

                         (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)
                      Prop. of        Prop. of         Prop. of       HAZ score
                      children        children         children        (WHO)
                      stunted         moder-           severely
                                       ately           stunted
                                      stunted
 Cash+SBCC             -0.046*        -0.053**          0.007            0.074
                       (0.025)         (0.023)         (0.014)          (0.054)
 CashOnly               -0.004          -0.008          0.004            -0.017
                       (0.026)         (0.024)         (0.014)          (0.051)
 Observations            2151            2151           2151              2151
 Mean Control            0.34            0.27            0.07             -1.57
 Clusters                407              407            407               407

 Notes: The table presents OLS estimates of the effects of the mater-
 nal cash transfer program interventions on measures of stunting for chil-
 dren whose mothers were pregnant at enrollment, following WHO classifica-
 tion.`Cash+SBCC" indicates T1 villages, where cash transfers and SBCC ac-
 tivities were provided jointly; "CashOnly" indicates T2 villages, where only
 cash transfers were provided; the reference group are villages in the control
 group where neither cash transfers nor SBCC took place. Outcomes include
 the proportion of children stunted as children with Height for Age Z score
 (HAZ) ¡ -2 (1); the proportion of children moderately stunted as children with
 HAZ < -2 and >= -3 (2); the proportion of children severely stunted as children
 with HAZ < -3 (3); and, HAZ (4). Controls include (i) individual demographic
 controls, including child's sex and age, mother's age and education, and house-
 hold head's age and education; (ii) village-level controls, including distance to
 large and small markets, main source of livelihood (agriculture, livestock, or
 casual labor), availability of government provided electricity, and participation
 in a concurrent WASH intervention. Fixed effects per geographic strata (34)
 are included. Standard errors are clustered at the village level. *** p<0.01, **
 p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                        48
                Table 13: Child stunting (w/o controls)

                       (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)
                    Prop. of        Prop. of        Prop. of      HAZ score
                    children        children        children       (WHO)
                    stunted         moder-          severely
                                     ately          stunted
                                    stunted
Cash+SBCC             -0.033        -0.046**         0.013           0.038
                     (0.026)         (0.021)        (0.011)         (0.059)
CashOnly              -0.006          -0.010         0.004           -0.030
                     (0.027)         (0.022)        (0.012)         (0.056)
Observations           2151            2151          2151             2151
Mean Control           0.34            0.27          0.07             -1.57
Clusters               102              102           102              102

Notes: The table presents OLS estimates of the effects of the mater-
nal cash transfer program interventions on measures of stunting for chil-
dren whose mothers were pregnant at enrollment, following WHO classifica-
tion."Cash+SBCC" indicates T1 villages, where cash transfers and SBCC ac-
tivities were provided jointly; "CashOnly" indicates T2 villages, where only
cash transfers were provided; the reference group are villages in the control
group where neither cash transfers nor SBCC took place. Outcomes include
the proportion of children stunted as children with Height for Age Z score
(HAZ) < -2 (1); the proportion of children moderately stunted as children
with HAZ < -2 and >= -3 (2); the proportion of children severely stunted as
children with HAZ < -3 (3); and, HAZ (4). Fixed effects per geographic strata
(34) are included. Standard errors are clustered at the village cluster level.
***p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                      49
Notes: This figure presents the profile of the randomized controlled trial.



     Figure 1: Profile of the Randomized Controlled Trial




                                    50
Notes: This figure presents the timeline of the data collection rounds (survey activity) and the
maternal cash transfer program rollout (program activity).



                                     Figure 2: Timeline




                                              51
