                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                FORECASTING THE U.S. DOLLAR IN THE 21ST CENTURY

                                         Charles Engel
                                      Steve Pak Yeung Wu

                                       Working Paper 28447
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28447


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2021




Engel acknowledges support from the National Science Foundation, grant award no. 1918430.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Charles Engel and Steve Pak Yeung Wu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Forecasting the U.S. Dollar in the 21st Century
Charles Engel and Steve Pak Yeung Wu
NBER Working Paper No. 28447
February 2021
JEL No. F31,F37,G15

                                           ABSTRACT

The level of the (log of) the exchange rate seems to have strong forecasting power for dollar
exchange rates against major currencies post-2000 at medium- to long-run horizons of 12-, 36-
and 60-months. We find that this is true using conventional asymptotic statistics correcting for
serial correlation biases. But correcting for small-sample bias using simulation methods, we find
little evidence to reject a random walk. This small sample bias arises because of near-spurious
correlation when the predictor variable is persistent and the horizon for exchange rate forecasts is
long. Similar problems of spurious correlation may arise when other persistent variables are used
to forecast changes in the exchange rate. We find, in fact, using asymptotic statistics, the level of
the exchange rate provides better forecasts than economic measures of "global risk", and the
measures of global risk do not improve the (possibly spurious) forecasting power of the level of
the exchange rate.


Charles Engel
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706-1393
and CEPR
and also NBER
cengel@ssc.wisc.edu

Steve Pak Yeung Wu
Vancouver School of Economics
University of British Columbia
6000 Iona Dr
Vancouver, BC V6T 1L4, Canada
Canada
steve.wu@wisc.edu
    1. Introduction
        The "gold standard" for testing exchange rate models is evidence of forecasts of changes
in the exchange rate that produce a lower mean-squared error than the random walk prediction of
no change. For many years, the literature has consistently found that macroeconomic variables are
not helpful in forecasting the U.S. dollar exchange rate change.1 However, in recent years, many
new studies have found evidence of predictability, particularly at medium-run horizons of 1- to 5-
years, especially using measures of global uncertainty to help forecast the dollar. The exchange
rates of the U.S. dollar in the 21st century relative to the other G10 currencies appears to be a
borderline stationary random variable, but very persistent.2 This behavior of these exchange rates,
presented in Figure 1, presents difficulties in assessing the power of economic models to forecast
the dollar.
        If dollar exchange rates truly are stationary, then changes in the exchange rate should be
easily forecastable ­ "beating" the random walk is not difficult. In fact, we find that the level of
the log of the exchange rate itself is a powerful predictor of changes in the exchange rate using the
same standards for measuring success as the literature has used. (Hereinafter, we will use simply
"exchange rate" to refer to the "log of the exchange rate.")
        However, it is easy to make mistaken inference in assessing forecasts at these horizons, as
a large literature has established, because of problems in serial correlation of forecast errors, small-
sample bias in parameter estimates and in establishing the correct statistical distribution of test
statistics when the exchange rate has a unit root under the null hypothesis (of a random walk) but
is stationary or cointegrated with other economic variables under the alternative. These problems
come into play in forecasting the dollar at medium horizons because the dollar is persistent but
"borderline" stationary. These G10 exchange rates are highly serially correlated, but, as we shall
show, it is unclear if they are the outcome of a unit root process. The R2 and asymptotic t-statistics
in long-horizon regressions are very high, and forecasts based on the level of the log exchange rate
performs well out-of-sample against the random walk using asymptotic statistics. On the other
hand, simulation-based tests indicate we may not be able to reject the simple hypothesis that the
exchange rates follow a random walk at standard significance levels.


1
 See the surveys and syntheses in Cheung et al. (2005, 2019).
2
 The non-dollar G10 currencies are the Australian dollar (AUD), Canadian dollar (CAD), Swiss franc (CHF), the
euro (EUR), U.K. pound sterling (GBP), Japanese yen (JPY), Norwegian krone (NOK), New Zealand dollar (NZD),
and Swedish krona (SWE).


                                                      2
       These findings pose a challenge for exchange rate forecasts based on economic models:
We find using standard asymptotic statistics that many of these variables do not forecast better
than the level of the exchange rate itself, and do not improve on the forecast made by the level of
the exchange rate, while keeping in mind that the seeming forecast power of the level of the
exchange rate is itself dubious. This leads us to conclude that the small-sample properties of
forecasts based on economic variables must be carefully investigated.
       Our approach is first to examine the univariate properties of the nominal exchange rate. As
is typical in the literature, we look at the statistical inference from in-sample and out-of-sample
medium-horizon forecasts that adjust for the serial correlation in forecast errors, but not for the
small-sample properties of these statistics. We compare the forecasting power of the level of the
exchange rate to forecasts that use measures of global risk.
       In-sample medium-horizon (12-month, 36-month and 60-month) forecasts of the change
in the exchange rate produce eye-popping R-squared values ­ that is, eye-popping if the small-
sample properties of such tests are ignored. At the 60-month horizon, the R-squared of the forecast
of the change in the dollar exchange rates, in which only the level of the exchange rate is used to
forecast future changes, is greater than 0.7 for six of the ten exchange rates, and greater than 0.6
for all but one of the currencies. These regressions produce highly statistically significant evidence
of forecastability when using asymptotic statistics, even when we carefully correct for serial
correlation in the forecast errors and when we allow for non-standard distribution of the parameters
under the null of a random walk.
       The literature on exchange rates pays special attention to out-of-sample forecasting power.
Studies often compare the forecasting power of an economic model to that of a random walk using
the Clark and West (2006) statistic for assessing forecasting power of nested models. While the
small-sample biases in the "long-horizon" regressions described in the previous paragraph have
been examined in depth, less attention has been paid to the problems with the Clark-West tests for
medium-horizon forecasts. We find that tests of out-of-sample forecasting power of the level of
the exchange rate based on rolling regressions produce large Clark-West statistics that, under the
asymptotic distribution (and corrected for serial correlation), are very highly significant for
medium-horizon forecasts.
       We also note that rolling regressions often generate high values for t-statistics and R2 in
some sub-samples. We demonstrate that the level of the exchange rate can produce very high



                                                  3
measures of fit for the subsequent change in the exchange rate over some subsamples in our data
for U.S. dollar exchange rates.
       Yet when we use simulation methods to correct for short-sample bias, we find that the in-
sample forecasting power of the univariate model is not generally significantly better than that of
a simple random walk at all the forecast horizons. However, we do find that when estimated as a
panel, the in-sample forecasting power at the 60-month horizon is marginally significant by one
measure, with a p-value of 0.05, even though the small-sample distribution of the test statistics is
vastly different than the asymptotic distribution. Our simulation methods show that the forecast
based on the level of the exchange rate does not significantly outperform the random walk in out-
of-sample forecasting exercises. And, the very high levels of goodness of fit that we find in rolling
regressions are within the bounds of what we would find if the exchange rate were not predictable
at all. In summary, while the level of the exchange rate appears to have great forecasting power
using conventional statistics, we cannot confidently say that the model beats a random walk.
       These findings have implications for the literature that has found that measures of global
risk are useful in forecasting dollar exchange rates at medium- and long-horizons. First, whether
or not the exchange rate has a unit root, our simulations indicate that the bias in inference from
medium- and long-run forecasts of exchange rates can be very large when the predictor variable is
persistent. It is imperative that researchers consider small-sample bias. Second, one might take a
stand and assume that the nominal exchange rate is indeed stationary, since a failure to reject a
random walk does not imply the null is true. Also, in some cases, the rejection is marginal. But we
show those global risk measures are apparently no better at forecasting future changes in the
exchange rate than the level of the exchange rate itself, and do not provide additional forecasting
power to that provided by the level of the exchange rate. If the exchange rate is stationary, an
interesting question is whether an economic model can improve on the forecast made only from
the level of the exchange rate.
       These comparisons between the forecasting power of the global risk variables and the level
of the exchange rate are made for in-sample forecasts and out-of-sample forecasting power, and
we also compare the goodness of fit of the models over subsamples. We do this for a dozen
measures of global risk, and we also make the comparison of the forecasting power of the nominal
exchange rate to that of the real exchange rate.




                                                   4
         We do not try to directly assess the small sample properties of forecasts of exchange rates
based on economic variables. We are making the indirect point that if the forecasting power using
the level of the exchange rate is questionable, then the literature ought to be investing more effort
in assessing the small sample properties of forecasts made using global risk and other variables.
Why do we not take this approach directly? The answer is that this task should be approached on
a case-by-case basis for each forecasting model. When the forecasting variable is the level of the
exchange rate, it is straightforward to construct the distribution of the exchange rate and the
forecasting variable under the null hypothesis of a random walk. 3 As the literature has shown, it
is not so easy when the forecasts are made using some other variable, call it xt . How should xt

be modeled when the null is that st + j - st is unforecastable? We could model xt as being

independent of st , but more plausibly innovations in xt are correlated with innovations in st ,

Measuring this correlation requires a model for innovations in xt .

         Moreover, there is the question of whether xt is stationary. For example, we find that the

linearly detrended value of the log S&P 500 index has some in-sample forecasting power for
changes in the exchange rate. But if this variable actually has a unit root, then our forecasting
models, based on regressions of st + j - st on xt are unbalanced. If we treat xt as an I(1) variable,

we not only need to consider whether or not its innovations are correlated with innovations in st

under the null hypothesis, but also whether or not it is cointegrated with st under the null and/or

the alternative hypotheses.4 We do offer one example of a possible assessment of small-sample
properties at the end of section 3 and we find weak evidence of forecasting power of xt , but that

analysis not a one-size-fits-all solution.
         Our purpose here is not to criticize any specific study that has demonstrated empirical
support for an exchange rate model, but instead to suggest that extra care be given in assessing the




3
  There are also analytic corrections for small-sample bias, but we rely on simulation methods because they are easy
to implement and the properties of such simulations are well established in the univariate case under the null of a
random walk.
4
  That is, there may plausibly be cointegration under both the null and the alternative, under neither the null nor the
alternative, or under the alternative but not the null.


                                                          5
goodness of fit of in-sample medium-run forecasts and the out-of-sample forecasting power of
models over medium horizons.5
         In section 2, we examine the forecasting power for changes in the exchange rate of the
level of the exchange rate and of measures of global risk, using standard asymptotic statistics
(corrected for serial correlation.) We also look at the forecasting power of global risk variables
and the real exchange rate. In section 3, we re-examine the univariate exchange rate model using
simulation methods. We offer some conclusions and suggestions in the final section.


2.       Dollar exchange rate forecasts
         The exchange rate, denoted as st , is the U.S. dollar price of a foreign currency. For the

whole empirical exercise, we use exchange rates sample from January 1999 to March 2020. The
data appendix reports the data sources and sample period for other relevant macro variables used.


2.a. Medium- and long-horizon forecasts


         We begin by assessing the fit of the h-period ahead forecasting equation using asymptotic
test statistics:


(1)      st + h - st =  h +  h st + ut + h


for forecasts horizons of h = 1,12,36,60 months. Table 1 presents the OLS estimates of  h with

Newey-West standard errors.6 The forecasting power of the level of the exchange rate is of interest
in part because if the level of the exchange rate can forecast future changes in the exchange rate,
it may be evidence that the exchange rate is stationary.7 Medium- and long-horizon forecasting
power might provide evidence that is not apparent in standard tests of a unit root which often rely



5
  Some recent papers are Adrian and Xie (2020), Ca'Zorzi and Rubaszek (2020), Darvas and Schepp (2020),
Eichenbaum et al. (2020), Evans (2020), Jiang et al. (2019), Lilley et al. (2019), Lustig et al. (2016), Liu and
Shaliastovich (2017) and Ma and Zhang (2020).
6
  We use h-1 lags for the Newey-West statistics. However, our findings are not very sensitive to the choice of lags as
we find very similar results using 5 lags only for all the forecast horizons. See the extended notes on estimation for
each table for more details.
7
  Lustig, et al. (2016), for example, have claimed recently that dollar exchange rates are stationary.


                                                          6
on the variable following a linear and low-order autoregressive or moving average process under
the null and the alternative.
           Test statistics for the null of  h = 0 have non-standard distributions because the exchange

rate has a unit root under the null. We use statistics based on the asymptotic distribution. employing
the Phillips and Perron (1988) test, allowing serial correlation of order h-1. In section 3, we use
simulation methods to assess the distributions, and we find that the inference based on the
simulated distributions is dramatically different than the asymptotic distribution. Similar problems
arise when using economic variables to forecast changes in the exchange rate, and section 3 cites
some of the voluminous literature on this point.
            st is not a good predictor of one-month ahead changes in the exchange rate. 1 is

insignificantly different from zero for all the currencies. The adjusted R2 values are all less than
0.01. We also estimate equation (1) in a panel form with country (i) fixed effect:


            si ,t + h - si ,t =  i ,h +  h st + ui ,t +h


The bottom row of Table 1 presents estimates with Driscoll and Kraay (1998) standard errors using
h-1 lags. The slope coefficient is not significant and the "within" R2 is only 0.003, so the evidence
of predictive power at the short horizon is very weak.8
           The picture changes substantially at the 12-, 36-, and 60-month horizons. At all these
horizons, the level of the exchange rate is significant at the one percent level for all the currencies.
The table also presents two measures of the overall (rather than currency-by-currency) forecasting
power. In one, we calculate the simple average of the exchange rates (labeled SA), and find
significant explanatory power of st for st +12 - st . In the second, we estimate a fixed-effect panel

and calculate standard errors using the Driskill-Kraay method, and again find the slope is
statistically significant. The R2 values for these two regressions at the 12-month horizon are both
0.11.
           Even more striking is the seeming forecasting power for the 36-month and 60-month
changes in the exchange rate. The R2 values are very high. At the 36-month horizon, most of the
R2 levels are above 0.4 and some are above 0.5. At 60 months, the R2 for example, is 0.78 for the

8
    As the extended notes detail, we use the unit root tests for panels of Choi (2001) to draw statistical inference.


                                                              7
dollar/euro rate, 0.76 for the simple average (SA) exchange rate, and 0.66 for the within R2 in the
panel regression.
         All these regressions indicate that the level of the exchange rate has strong and statistically
significant predictive power for changes in the exchange rate over medium horizons. However,
there are well-known problems arising from small-sample bias especially at longer horizons. We
shall return to these issues in section 3.


2.b      Out-of-Sample Forecasts


         The previous sub-section examined the "in-sample" forecasting power of the level of the
exchange rate. In recent years, the "gold standard" for evaluating the ability of a model to forecast
is the "out-of-sample" forecasting criterion.
         Specifically, the methodology that is widely adopted is to estimate equation (1) over sub-
samples of the data using rolling regressions (i.e., regressions with fixed sample sizes.) Here we
use sub-sample sizes of five years. We estimate (1) over the first five years of data, and then use
the estimated parameters to make forecasts 1-month, 12-months, 36-months and 60-months ahead.
We then drop the first observation in the sample and add the 61st observation, and re-estimate
equation, and produce one more forecast at each horizon. We continue this process until the data
is exhausted.
         We use the root mean-squared error as a measure of fit for the forecasts at each horizon,

st + h - st , for h = 1,12,36,60 . The literature has then used the random walk forecast of no change
in the exchange rate as the basis of comparison. This criterion stems from the seminal work of
Meese and Rogoff (1983) that use the forecast of "no change" in the exchange rate to evaluate
exchange rate models of the 1970s.9 The random walk, with no drift, is nested in the model of
equation (1) when  h = 0 and  h = 0 .10 The Clark and West (2006) statistic is commonly used to

evaluate the out-of-sample forecasting power of exchange rate models relative to a nested model.11

9
  Meese and Rogoff (1983) actually looked at the out-of-sample fit of the models compared to the random walk, rather
than using the models to make actual out-of-sample forecasts.
10
   Here, and throughout the rest of the paper, we take the null hypothesis to be the random walk with no drift, as is
typical in the literature. However, we have replicated all tests under the assumption of a null of a random walk with
non-zero drift equal to the mean drift in the sample, and in no case do our conclusions change. This partly is reflective
of the fact that for most of the exchange rates, the mean drift in this sample is quite small.
11
   We use a Newey-West correction for serial correlation.


                                                           8
The Clark-West statistic compares the mean squared errors of two nested models and accounts for
the larger estimation error of the larger model. A bigger positive Clark and West statistic indicates
the larger model performs better than the nested model.
         The Clark-West statistics reported in Table 2 are striking. At the one-month forecasting
horizon, the forecasting equation (1) does not produce significantly better forecasts than the
random walk, but for the 12-month, 36-month, and 60-month forecasts, the model's predictions
are significantly better for all currencies as well as for the simple average of the exchange rates
and for the panel. At the twelve-month horizon, the Clark-West statistic is significant at the five-
percent level in all but one case; at the 36-month horizon it is significant at the five percent level
for all exchange rates and at the one percent level for most; and, at the 60-month horizon the
significance level is one percent for all but two currencies.
         While it appears that model (1) can provide superior forecasts to the random walk, again
we must be aware of the small-sample bias, which we address in section 3.


2.c      Rolling Regressions


         Next, we make use of the same rolling regressions discussed in the previous sub-section to
make an observation about the fit of regressions over sub-samples. Most exchange rate studies
present regression results over various sub-samples, even in some cases estimating rolling
regressions, and then noting the very good fit of the model over certain periods.12 Table 3 displays
the sample distribution of adjusted R2 values from our rolling regressions.
         The R2 for the 1-period ahead forecasting regression is sometimes large, reaching a
maximum of 0.20 in at least one five-year period for seven of the nine currencies. However,
consistent with the results we have already presented, usually the fit of the forecasting regression
at this horizon is poor and not at all impressive.
         However, at the 12-month, 36-month and 60-month horizons, the forecasting equation has
a very tight fit over some sub-samples. In the case of the 12-month forecasts, the adjusted R2
reaches at least a value of 0.75 in one sub-sample for all nine of the exchange rates for the
individual currencies. In at least 10 percent of the sub-sample regressions, the R2 is as high as 0.64


12
  Lilley, et al. (2019) is an example of a paper that estimates a model over many sub-samples with rolling regressions
and notes the close fit over some samples.


                                                          9
for all nine. At the 36-month horizon, there is at least one sub-sample that has an R2 as high as 0.80
for all the currencies, and for half of them, there is a period in which the R2 rises to 0.90 With the
60-month forecasting equation, all nine of the currencies show an adjusted R2 of at least 0.77 during
one five-year sub-sample, and for several, the R2 in some sub-samples range well over 0.90.
Moreover, in 25% of the sub-samples for each currency, the R2 value is as high as 0.60 for all nine
exchange rates, and in some cases the 75th percentile of R2 values is much higher (including 0.94
for the dollar/Swiss franc.)
           One might be tempted to conclude from this that the simple forecasting equation (1) is a
sure winner over at least some time periods in the 21st century. However, there is always the
temptation with any pair of variables to look over sub-samples and find correlation. In section 3,
we evaluate the extent to which these high correlations are spurious.


2.d        Forecasting using measures of global risk


           As we have seen, the apparent forecasting power of the level of the exchange rate is quite
strong. In this section, we will compare its forecasting power to that of various measures of global
risk. Recent studies have linked the dollar's behavior to global risk, noting that the U.S. dollar
strengthens during periods of global stress. Our purpose in making these comparisons is not to set
up a horse race between the global risk measures and the level of the exchange rate for which
makes better forecasts. We only want to note that the global risk variables do not appear to have
clearly stronger forecasting power than the level of the exchange rate, so our concerns about the
small-sample properties of forecasting equations based on the level of the exchange rate ought to
also lead researchers to have similar concerns about forecasting equations based on measures of
global risk.13
           We shall see that while, at medium and longer horizons, forecasts based on the measures
of global risk can often "beat" the random walk, they are less successful at beating the forecasts
based on st . We call this a "preliminary look" because we use standard asymptotic statistics to

perform these tests, while a more rigorous testing procedure would consider small-sample bias
(which we do not undertake for reasons outlined above in the introductory section.)


13
     Many of these measures are highly persistent, see Appendix Table 2 for the summary statistics.


                                                          10
         We examine the forecasting power of 12 macro variables that are used in the recent
literature to explain or predict exchange rate movements. These variables i nclude 1) the "US
Treasury Premium", which is the one-year covered interest parity deviation of government yield
between US and a foreign country. 2) the "MAR global factor" is the global factor that is extracted
from a dynamic factor model of a wide range of world asset price series. This is constructed by
Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2020). 3) the "GZ spread" is a simple un-weighted cross-sectional
average of US corporate non-financial credit spreads, which is obtained from Gilchrist and
Zakrajsek (2012). 4) the linearly detrended "log of S&P500 Index". 5) the "log of VIX Index",
which measures the equity market's expectation of 30-day forward-looking volatility. 6) the "Term
spread (5y-FF)" is difference between 5-year US Treasury yield and overnight Fed Fund rate. 7)
the "Term spread (10y-2y)" is yield difference between 10-year US Treasury and 2-year US
Treasury. 8) "TED" is the yield difference between US dollar LIBOR rate and US Treasury at 3 -
month horizon. 9) the "Intermediary capital ratio" is the market capitalization-weighted average
of New York Fed primary dealers' equity to asset ratio, which is constructed by He et al (2017).
10) the "Intermediary weighted return" is the market capitalization-weighted equity return of the
holding companies of the primary dealer of New York Fed, which is constructed by He et al (2017).
11) "Repo" is the linearly detrended log of Overnight Repo outstanding of the primary dealers. 12)
"Commercial Paper" is the linearly detrended log of Financial Commercial Paper outstanding of
the primary dealers. 14 The data appendix provides the data source, the sample period, and the
summary statistics of these macro variables.15
         We examine forecasts from four models ­ a model using both the level of the exchange
rate and the global risk variable to make forecasts, models using only the level of the exchange
rate or only the global economic variable, and the random walk model. These models can be
summarized in these four equations:



14
   US Treasury Premium is used in Du et al (2018), Engel and Wu (2020) and Jiang et al (2019). MAR global factor
and GZ spread are used in Lilley et al (2020). SP500 Index is used Lilley and Rinaldi (2020). VIX is used in
Brunnermeier et al (2009), Habib and Stracca (2012), Sarno et al (2012), Bussière et al (2018), Husted et al (2018)
and Kalemli-Özcan and Varela (2019). Term structure is used in Chen and Tsang (2013). TED is used in Cheung et
al (2019). Intermediary capital ratio is used in Fang and Liu (2020) and is the core friction is Gabaix Maggiori (2015).
Intermediary weighted return is used in Lilley et al (2020). Repo and commercial paper are used in Adrian, Etula,
Shin (2015)
15
   When detrending the S&P500 Index, Outstanding Repo and Financial commercial papers, for in sample forecasting,
we detrended the variable using the whole sample. For out-of-sample forecasting, we detrended the variable using the
60 observations within the window.


                                                          11
(2)      st + h - st =  +  XX X t +  SS st + ut + h

(3)      st + h - st =  +  S st + ut + h .

(4)      st + h - st =  +  X X t + ut + h

(5)      st + h - st = ut + h .16

We consider forecasts horizons of h = 1,12,36,60 months.


Within-sample forecasts


         Table 4 summarizes the regression results for the simple average of the dollar exchange
rate of the G10 currencies. The left-most four columns of statistics in Table 4 directly compare the
univariate in-sample forecasting power of the nominal exchange rate to the economic variables
(model (3) and model (4).) The straightforward conclusion is that the sample forecasting power of
the level of the exchange rate is greater than for any of the economic variables. The goodness of
fit measure is higher ­ usually much higher ­ for the forecast horizons of 12-, 36- and 60-months.
Neither the level of the exchange rate nor the economic variables demonstrate forecasting power
at the 1-month horizon.17
         The right-most two columns report the forecasting equation for the average exchange rate
based on an OLS regression in which both the current exchange rate and one of the measures of
global risk are included as regressors (model (2)). At the one-month horizon, as was the case in
the univariate in-sample forecasts, the level of the exchange rate is not statistically significant.
There is some evidence that some of the measures of global risk are helpful in forecasting at the
one-month horizon. The detrended S&P 500 level, the Repo outstanding for primary dealers and
the 10-year to 2-year U.S. term spread are significant at the 5 percent level and intermediary
leverage at the 10 percent level.18
         At the medium horizons of 12-, 36- and 60-months, the exchange rate is always statistically
significant at the one percent level when any other economic variable is included in the regression.
There is less evidence of forecasting power for the measures of global risk. The log of the repo


16
   As we have noted previously, the findings are not changed if we include an intercept in this equation.
17
   An exception is that the detrended log S&P 500 shows significant forecast power at the one-month horizon.
18
   The inference on significance is based on the t-distribution for the economic variables, and on the Phillips-Perron
statistic for the exchange rate.


                                                         12
rate is a strong predictor of exchange rate changes at all the horizons, in that it is statistically
significant at the one percent level. Other variables show forecasting power at some horizons but
not others. For example, the detrended S&P 500 is significant at the 12-month and 36-month
horizons, but not at the 60-month, and the GZ spread at the 12- and 35-months horizons.
Intermediary leverage is highly significant in the one-year forecasts, but not so for longer horizons.
On the other hand, commercial paper is significant at the longer horizons (36- and 60-month) but
not at the shorter horizons. Some other variables show up as significant at only one of the horizons
(e.g., the TED spread at the 60-month horizon.)
         An interesting aspect of these bivariate regressions is that in many cases, global risk
variables that are not statistically significant in univariate forecasts become strongly significant in
the bivariate regressions. For example, at the 60-month horizon, three variables are significant at
the one percent level ­ the TED spread, primary dealer repo, and commercial paper ­ that are not
significant in the univariate regression. On the other hand, 10-year-2-year U.S. term spread and
the measure of intermediary leverage are significant in the univariate regression but not in the
bivariate regression at the 60-month horizon. If the nominal exchange rate is stationary, this
suggests that the univariate regressions are misspecified and that the current exchange rate should
be included along with the measure of global uncertainty.
         Table 5 summarizes the findings for the univariate and bivariate regressions for the nine
individual currencies. We count the number of currencies that have a significant slope coefficient
at 5 percent significance level. The findings are similar to the conclusions from the average
exchange rate. Some of the economic variables are significant at the 5 percent level in univariate
exchange rate regressions at all horizons, though none is significant for all of the exchange rates.19
This can be compared to Table 1, which shows the level of the exchange rate is significant at the
one percent level for all of the horizons greater than or equal to 12 months. In the bivariate
regressions, the exchange rate continues to be significant at the 5 percent level at all horizons
according to Table 4b.20 In these regressions, different measures of global risk turn out to be
significant for some of the exchange rates at some of the horizons. Primary dealer repo is

19
   Intermediary leverage is significant for all nine currencies at the 60-month horizon the S&P 500 return is significant
for all nine of the currencies at the 12-month horizon, and the GZ spread is significant at the 36-month horizon for
eight currencies.
20
   At all of the horizons greater than or equal to 12 months, the exchange rate is a significant predictor for all of the
currencies, except at the 12-month horizon where it is significant for eight of the nine exchange rates and at the 36-
month horizon for seven exchange rates.


                                                          13
significant for all but a couple of currencies at all of the medium-run horizons. For other variables,
there is significance for a large number of currencies at some horizons, but not at all horizons.
Again, also, we see the pattern that variables that do not perform particularly well in univariate
regressions might do well in the bivariate regressions, and vice-versa.
        The overall picture is that there is some evidence, using asymptotic statistics, that some
economic variables are significant predictors using these within-sample tests. None perform as
well as the level of the exchange rate itself, and, in any case, the evidence points toward including
the level of the exchange rate with the measure of global risk in the econometric model for
forecasting changes in the exchange rates at medium horizons. We also note that the two variables
that appear to be the best at forecasting exchange rates overall ­ linearly detrended S&P 500 and
linearly detrended log of overnight repo outstanding of primary dealers ­ are variables that in fact
may not be stationary themselves. If they instead have a unit root, then the analysis here, based on
the assumption of stationarity, is not valid.
        Tables 6 and 7 examine the special case in which the economic variable (the X t variable

in equations (2) and (4)) is the log of the real exchange rate, qt .21 There are many studies that have

found that the real exchange rate, as a measure of the deviation from long-run purchasing power
parity, is helpful in forecasting future changes in the nominal exchange rate, many of which are
based on data prior to 2000.22 Table 6 confirms the forecasting power of the real exchange rate,
using standard asymptotic statistics (corrected for problems of serial correlation.) While there is
little predictive power at the 1-month horizon, the real exchange rate appears to have significant
forecasting efficacy at the 12-month, 36-month, and 60-month horizons. In many cases, the
adjusted R 2 values are quite high. However, we note that with very few exceptions at these
horizons, the adjusted R 2 values using the nominal exchange rate as the predictor, as reported in
Table 1, are higher than the values for the real exchange rate.
        Table 7 provides, in the first two panels, a side-by-side comparison of these measures of
goodness of fit. In the third (rightmost) panel, we present a forecasting model that uses both the
nominal and real exchange rate to predict future changes in the exchange rate. It is well known


21
   We use CPI measured real exchange rates, since CPI for AUD and NZD are only available at quarterly frequency,
we use the last available quarterly CPI for the construction of monthly real exchange rates.
22
   See, for example, Mark (1995), Mark and Choi (1997), Engel et al. (2008), Jordá and Taylor (2012), and
Eichenbaum et al. (2020).


                                                      14
that these variables are highly correlated, so there will be a high level of multicollinearity in these
regressions, which will tend to increase the standard errors of the slope coefficient estimates for
both the nominal and real exchange rate. Nonetheless, and surprisingly, at the 12-, 36-, and 60-
month horizons, the nominal exchange rate is always highly statistically significant for each of the
nine currencies, as well as for the simple average and in the panel. In comparison, the real exchange
rate only retains predictive power for a few currencies at each horizon, and generally for different
currencies at the different horizons. This indicates that the high values we found for t-statistics and
adjusted R 2 in Table 1 are not arising simply because the nominal exchange rate is a proxy for the
real exchange rate. That is, the regressions there appear to represent some form of stationarity of
the nominal exchange rate itself, though we reassess this conclusion in section 3 using simulation
methods.


Out-of-sample forecasts


        We next turn to evaluating out-of-sample forecasts. The procedure for producing forecasts
is the same as the one described above when the level of the exchange rate is used to forecast. We
estimate a model over a fixed sample size (60 months) and produce an h-period ahead forecast.
We use the first 60 observations to produce the first set of h-period ahead forecasts. That is, we
forecast s61+ h - s61 for h = 1,12,36,60 . We then add one month of data to the sample, drop the first

observation and re-estimate the model and produce forecasts of s62+ h - s62 for h = 1,12,36,60 . We

continue this process until the data is exhausted. We then compare forecasts of various models.
        First, we directly compare the forecasts of the change in the exchange rate based on the
level of the exchange rate to forecasts based on each of the measures of global risk, individually.
Here we use the test proposed by Diebold and Mariano (1995) and West (1996),23 which is
appropriate because the forecasting models (models (3) and (4)) are not nested.
        These comparisons for the simple average exchange rate are presented in Table 8, in the
first column. A positive value for the statistic means that the forecast based on the exchange rate
has a lower out of sample root mean squared error (RMSE) than the one produced by the economic
variable.

23
   Diebold and Mariano (1995) and West (1996) compare the forecasting ability of two non-nested model and conduct
statistical inferences based on mean squared prediction errors.


                                                       15
        At the one-month horizon, there is no statistically significant difference in the forecasting
power of the two models. The level of the exchange rate usually produces the lower RMSE, but
there are two exceptions. At the longer horizons of 12-, 36- and 60-months, the forecast based on
the level of the exchange rate has a lower RMSE than any of the economic variables in all cases.
In all but a few cases these differences are significant at the 36-month horizon, and they are
significantly different at the one percent level in all cases at the 60-month horizon.24
        More generally, we can ask whether we can use the level of the exchange rate alongside
one of the measures of global economic risk to produce better forecasts (or use the global measure
to improve the forecast from the level of the exchange rate.) Those are the questions addressed in
the second and third columns of Table 8 for the average exchange rate. In the second column we
ask whether the bivariate model (the one in which both the exchange rate and one economic
variable are used to generate forecasts, as in equation (2)) produces significantly lower RMSE than
the univariate model which includes only the economic measure of global risk (equation (4).) Here
the appropriate test is the one proposed by Clark and West (2006) for nested models. We see that
at the one-month horizon, while the addition of the exchange rate almost always produces better
forecasts (lower RMSE), the difference is not significant.                  However, the picture changes
dramatically at the 12-, 36- and 60-month horizons. In almost all cases, the forecasts of the
bivariate model are significantly better at the ten percent than the univariate model that uses only
the measure of global risk, and at the 60-month horizon the confidence level is greater than 99
percent in all cases.
        The third column of Table 8 shows the Clark-West statistics for the test of whether the
bivariate model (equation (2)) improves on the forecasts of the univariate model that uses the level
of the exchange rate only (equation (3).) We see that in some of the cases, particularly at the 1-
year horizon, the addition of the global risk variable does significantly improve the forecast.
        The final column of Table 8 tests whether the univariate forecasting model based on the
global risk variable (model (4)) can produce forecasts with lower mean-squared error than the
random walk model (model (5).) At the longer horizons of 36- and 60- months, all these variables




24
  The exception is for the measure of commercial paper held by primary dealers. The forecasts based on the
exchange rate are significantly better at only the five percent level in this case.


                                                       16
improve on the random walk forecast.25 The models compared here ((4) and (5)) are restricted
versions of the ones mentioned in the previous paragraph ((2) and (3)), in that they restrict the
coefficient on the level of the exchange rate to be zero.
         If the nominal exchange rate is stationary, researchers ought to consider testing their model
including the level of the nominal exchange rate as in equation (2) against the null of equation (3)
rather than the typical approach that tests equation (4) compared to the null of equation (5). We
propose this alternative tack because the evidence presented so far indicates that the level of the
exchange rate has forecasting power. The small-sample statistics presented in section 3 greatly
moderate that conclusion, but still leave room for the possibility that the exchange rate is stationary
and useful in forecasting future changes in the exchange rate.
         Table 8 reports detailed forecasting results for the simple average exchange rate. Table 9
summarizes the forecasting outcomes for the nine individual exchange rates. We count the number
of currencies that have a significant statistic at 5 percent significance level. The conclusions are
very similar from these exchange rates as for the average exchange rate. In direct comparisons
between the forecasting power of the exchange-rate level versus the global risk variable, there are
essentially no significant differences at the 1- and 12-month horizons, but at the 36- and 60-month
horizons the level of the exchange rate is often significantly better. It is almost always true at the
12-, 36-, and 60-month horizons that the bivariate model (such as (2)) produces significantly better
forecasts than the model based only on the global risk variable (as in (4).) For some of the
currencies, the bivariate model also outforecasts the model based only on the level of the exchange
rate (equation (3).) But for all but a few currencies, the global risk model beats the random walk
(model (4) versus (5).)
         Tables 10 and 11 examine the special case in which the real exchange rate is used to
forecast changes in the nominal exchange rate ­ that is, the case in which qt is the measure of the

economic variable X t that appears in equations (2) and (4). Table 10 shows that the real exchange

rate has significant forecasting power (using the asymptotic distribution of the Clark-West statistic,
correcting for serial correlation) for changes in the nominal exchange rate at the 12-, 36- and 60-
month horizons (but not at the one month), which is consistent with much of the earlier literature.


25
  The test statistics in the fourth column are slightly different across rows in the table with in each forecast horizon
when the exchange rate is used as the predictor because the sample period is changed to match the period for which
data is available for the global risk variable.


                                                           17
       Table 11 then compares the forecasting power for st + h - st , h = 1,12, 26,60 of st and qt .

The first column of Table 11 makes the non-nested comparison of the univariate forecasting
models. As indicated by the positive values for the Diebold Mariano West statistics, the nominal
exchange rate almost always produces a lower out of sample mean-squared forecast error than the
real exchange rate. However, it is significantly better in only a few cases at the 36- and 60-month
horizons.
       The second column of Table 11 looks at how the bivariate regression (including both st

and qt as regressors) might improve on the univariate models. While there is not much statistical

significance at the 1-month horizon, at the longer horizons (12-, 36-, and 60-month), the bivariate
model in general is better than either univariate model. That is, using each of the univariate models
as the null model, nested in the bivariate model, we find that the more general model outperforms
the null model by the Clark-West metric. At the 60-month horizon, the bivariate model rejects at
the 5 percent level the univariate model that uses only qt as the predictor for six of the nine

currencies, but the bivariate model rejects the univariate model using only st at this level for only

three currencies.
       The final column compares the out-of-sample tests of each univariate model against the
random walk. Here we see that for almost all cases, both univariate models significantly
outforecast the random walk according to the Clark-West statistic at the longer horizons, but none
do at the 1-month horizon. Again, we note that if we are interested in gauging the forecasting
power of the real exchange rate and assume both the real and nominal exchange rate are stationary,
we might supplement the usual test (the univariate forecast model based on qt relative to the

random walk, reported in column (5) of Table 11), with the model that sets the null as equation (3)
and asks whether adding the real exchange rate as an additional predictor improves the forecasts
(as reported in column (3) of Table 11).


Rolling Regressions


       In Table 12, we display the sample distribution of R 2 values for the forecasting models
based on the level of the exchange rate and based on the twelve global risk variables, for the simple




                                                 18
average exchange rate.26 Because it is common for exchange-rate papers to report sub-sample
findings, we merely note here that while some of the models based on global measures of
uncertainty produce very good fits over some subsamples, the forecasting model based on the level
of the exchange rate generally produces even better ones. Table 13 presents a currency-by-
currency table of the distribution of the R 2 values when the real exchange rate is the predictor.
        The main takeaway, for now, from these tables is that while some of the values of the
economic variables produce very good levels of in-sample fit over some periods, these
distributions still do not look as "impressive" as the analogous table (Table 3) when the level of
the nominal exchange rate is the variable used for making predictions. We shall see in the next
section, however, that even Table 3 may be misleading ­ that such seeming strong predictive power
over certain sub-samples can arise even when the exchange rate is a pure random walk.


2.e     Economic Theory
        It is theoretically more plausible that the nominal exchange rate incorporates a unit root,
rather than being stationary. Most advanced countries are perceived as targeting inflation, usually
at a level of around two percent per year, and the target is independent of inflation rates in other
countries, and independent of the nominal exchange rate. Benigno and Benigno (2008) show in a
standard two-country New Keynesian open-economy model in which monetary policymakers
follow an instrument rule in which the interest rate in each country responds to the country's own
inflation rate and output gap, and which may include an interest-rate smoothing term, the nominal
exchange rate must have a unit root. Only if one of the policy rules explicitly target the nominal
exchange rate will the possibility of stationary nominal exchange rates arise. Intuitively, in the
floating exchange rate model, if the real exchange rate is stationary, the nominal exchange rate has
a permanent component that is equal to the difference in the permanent components of prices in
the two countries. If the real exchange rate is stationary, the nominal exchange rate tends to adjust
to the price level differentials to bring the economy toward the long-run real exchange rate, which
is reflected in the transitory component of the nominal exchange rate.
        The countries in our sample avowedly do not target nominal exchange rates, so theory
supplies us with a strong prior that these exchange rates have a unit root.


26
 The conclusions from the individual exchange rates, not displayed in order to save space, deliver a very similar
message as for the simple average exchange rate.


                                                        19
        In fact, Engel and West (2005) have demonstrated that a large range of exchange rate
models have the further implication that changes in the nominal exchange rate are nearly
unpredictable. That is, not only does the nominal exchange rate have a unit root, but it is not
distinguishable in typical sample sizes from a pure random walk.


3.      Small-Sample Test Statistics using Simulation Methods
        The small-sample bias for long-horizon forecasts has been extensively studied, but we find
that this bias is unusually large for U.S. dollar exchange rates since 2000.27 Very large t-statistics
and very high R2 values are nonetheless not statistically significant at standard significance levels,
once we have accounted for small-sample biases. Tables 14, 15, and 16 present distributions of the
statistics displayed in Tables 1, 2, and 3, respectively, but using simulations methods to account
for small-sample biases.
        As we noted at the outset, it is particularly easy to simulate the distribution of our test
statistics under the null of a random walk in the exchange rate, or st +1 - st =  t +1 , where  t +1 is an

i.i.d. random variable that is not forecastable at time t.28 Our methods of simulations are standard
and described in detail in the appendix. In short, for the univariate regressions, we take the sample
distribution of st +1 - st for each exchange rate. For Monte Carlo simulations, we construct artificial

i.i.d. data that has the same variance as the variance of the sample data and is drawn from a Normal
distribution. For bootstraps, we sample randomly from the empirical distribution, and construct
artificial data. In the case of the panel regressions, for the Monte Carlo simulations, we construct
vectors of Normal i.i.d. random variables that have the same covariance matrix as the data. For the
bootstrap exercises, we draw randomly from the empirical distribution of the vector of exchange
rate changes.
        For each artificial sample, we start with st equal to its mean value in the data, then we

discard the first 2000 values of st +1 - st to eliminate start-up bias. We then construct T values of

st that we use in the simulations. We run 5000 simulations for each exchange rate (and for the

panels) for the Monte Carlo and bootstrap exercises in order to construct the distributions of the


27
   See, for example, in the economics and finance literature, Richardson and Stock (1989), Kim et al. (1991),
Hodrick (1992), Richardson (1993), Mark (1995), Berkowitz and Giorgianni (2001), Rossi (2005, 2013), Campbell
and Yogo (2006), Ang and Bekaert (2007), Boudouhkh et al. (2008, 2020) and many others.
28
   Except up to a constant, which is immaterial here.


                                                     20
statistics we report in Tables 14-16. We note here that there is very little difference in the inferences
based on the Monte Carlo compared to the bootstrap.


Within-sample Forecasts


           Table 14 reports the simulated distribution for the results reported in Table 1. For each of
the 1-month, 12-month, 36-month, and 60-month horizons, the table reports the slope coefficient
estimate, the t-statistic and the R 2 from regression (1) that are reported in Table 1. It then presents
the p-values for one-sided tests (negative slope coefficient, positive R 2 ), meaning the critical value
at which the null hypothesis of a random walk would be rejected.29
           In Table 1, the null hypothesis of a random walk appears to be rejected strongly at the
horizons longer than one month. However, Table 14 shows that in the simulated distributions,
there is not strong evidence against the random walk. At the 1-month horizon, the p-values reported
are all quite large. The smallest is around 0.40, and most are greater than 0.50. That accords with
our conclusions using asymptotic statistics, that there is little predictability at the 1-month horizon.
           In contrast to our conclusions from Table 1, we find little strong evidence of predictability
at the longer horizons in the simulated distributions. There are no currencies at the 12-month for
which the p-value is less than 0.20, or at the 36-month horizons for which the smallest p-value is
0.12. Most are much larger than these values. The p-value for the adjusted R 2 for the panel
regression at the 36-month horizon is 0.11, which is smaller than any of the p-values reported for
the individual currencies, and we note that this p-value is considerably smaller than even the
corresponding values for the slope coefficient and for the t-statistic for the panel regression.
           At the 60-month horizon, again, in the overwhelming majority of cases there is little
evidence against the random walk. The smallest p-value for the coefficient estimate is 0.14 for the
Japanese yen. For the t-statistic, the p-value for the New Zealand dollar is 0.05 and 0.08 for the
euro, but the rest are all greater than 0.15. Looking at the R 2 , again for the New Zealand dollar
and also for the simple average exchange rate, the p-value is on the smaller side, at 0.09, and the
p-value is 0.07 for the euro. We find that the R 2 for the panel data is marginally significant at




29
     The p-values for two-sided tests on the slope coefficient and t-statistic would be approximately doubled.


                                                            21
standard levels using the small-sample distribution, with a p-value of 0.05, but the slope coefficient
and t statistic are not significant.
        On the whole, we can conclude that there is little strong evidence to reject the null of a
random walk. If one were willing to consider rejection levels higher than is standard, such as 0.20,
then there is more evidence that the level of the exchange rate can predict changes in the exchange
rate at the 60-month horizon. That is, we hesitate to say that the in-sample evidence random walk
is definitive, though our priors based on economic theory and based on the literature that has
looked at pre-2000 data incline us not to reject the random walk null.


Out-of-Sample Forecasts


        Table 15 reports the p-values for the Clark-West statistics from Table 2, using the simulated
distribution. Here, again, we see that there is a noteworthy small-sample bias. In Table 2, the out-
of-sample test rejected a random walk at all horizons longer than 1 month. But the p-values from
the sample distribution do not show evidence of exchange-rate forecastability.
        At all horizons, the p-values for the Clark-West statistic in the simulated data are large,
with the exception of the euro. At horizons of 1-, 12-, and 36-months, all of these values are greater
than 0.30, except for the Canadian dollar at the 12- and 36-month horizon (0.24 and 0.29,
respectively) and the euro at those same horizons (0.23 and 0.05, respectively.) At the 60-month
horizon, the p-values are still high, the lowest being for the Japanese yen (0.25), the Australian
dollar (0.20), the British pound (0.25) and the euro (0.03). Only for the dollar/euro rate would we
reject the null of the random walk at conventional levels.
        Moreover, note that our in-sample forecast evidence rejects the random walk only for the
New Zealand dollar at standard levels, while the out-of-sample case is for the euro. The random
walk is not close to being rejected out-of-sample for the New Zealand dollar. We note also that
while within-sample, the panel model seemed to offer relatively strong evidence against the
random walk, that finding does not carry over to the out-of-sample forecasts.
        We conclude that, generally we cannot reject the random walk hypothesis, though there is
marginal evidence of predictability both in-sample and out-of-sample for the dollar/euro exchange
rate.




                                                 22
Rolling R-squared


           Finally, Table 16 demonstrates the fallacy in drawing conclusions from subs-samples of
the data. That is, the model might fit well over sub-samples by random chance, but a great deal of
care should be taken in drawing conclusions from such a finding. The table reports the 95 th and
90th percentile of the R 2 values from the rolling regressions used to construct the Clark-West
statistic. We showed in Table 3 that for many currencies, these sub-sample R 2 values could be
very large. However, Table 16 exhibits the corresponding R 2 values when the data is generated
under a random walk ­ and there is no systematic difference than in the actual data. That is, the
high R 2 reported in some sub-samples of the true data could easily have occurred even though the
true R 2 is zero. The sole exception to this, interestingly, is at the 1-month horizon, where the 95th
percentile of the R 2 values from the panel model are unlikely to have been generated by an
exchange rate that follows a pure random walk.


An Example of Bias in Forecast based on Measure of Risk


           Here we present an example of an assessment of small-sample bias for forecasts based on
one of the economic measures of global risk that we have examined, the GZ spread. We choose
this measure because it is one that performs reasonably well in a univariate model of exchange rate
forecasts.
           As we have noted, there are many ways to approach the small-sample assessment of these

forecasts. In brief, our procedure is to estimate a vector autoregression for yt = ( st , xt ) where xt

is the GZ spread. We can write the VAR as:
(6)         yt =  0 + 1 yt -1 +      k yt -k + et .30

As Hamilton (1994, pp. 579-580) discusses, the parameters of this VAR are consistently estimated
whether or not st and xt have unit roots, and if they do have unit roots, whether or not they are

cointegrated. We then attempt to correct for small sample bias in these VAR estimates using the
bootstrap-after-bootstrap procedure of Kilian (1998).


30
     In our application, we choose a lag length of two based on the AIC. See Appendix 3 for the estimation details.


                                                           23
        Our simulation procedure then creates artificial data for st by Monte Carlo methods as

described above, assuming the exchange rate is generated by a driftless random walk with variance
given by the sample variance of the change in the exchange rate. We create artificial data for xt

based on the estimated VAR from (6), using the estimated parameters for the xt process and the

estimated covariance matrix of et .

        Table 17 reports the outcome of this exercise, using the GZ variable to forecast the simple
average of the exchange rates. The first panel assesses the p-value for the estimated slope
coefficient, t-statistic and adjusted R 2 for the in-sample forecasts based on the GZ spread. We see
that none are significant at the five percent level for any of the forecast horizons.
        The second panel looks at the Clark-West statistic using 5-year rolling samples to forecast
at the horizons of 1, 12, 36, and 60 months. Again, we see that the p-values for the actual CW
statistics from the data are all greater than 0.05, although at the 36-month horizon the p-value is
0.07.
        The final panel examines the in-sample goodness of fit of the rolling regressions that were
used for out-of-sample forecasting in the previous exercise. Although some of the R 2 values
estimated from the data are quite high, we find that they are consistent with what we find if the
exchange rate is a random walk, in that the p-values are all greater than five percent (for the 90th
and 95th percentile of estimated R 2 values from the rolling regressions.)
        So, using asymptotic inference, it appeared that the GZ variable had significant predictive
power for changes in exchange rates at medium horizons, but that conclusion does not hold up when
compared to the findings from the probability distributions from our simulations.


4.      Conclusions
        To reiterate, there are two main conclusions. First, based on small-sample distributions
generated from simulations, there is little conclusive evidence that the level of the exchange rate
helps to forecast future changes. This should give researchers some reason to pause, since the level
of the exchange rate seems to have greater forecasting power than measures of global risk that are
alleged to forecast the dollar in the 21st century. It is important to investigate the small-sample
properties of medium- and long-run forecasting models.




                                                  24
       Second, it is difficult to distinguish with certainty whether the nominal exchange rate or
any other variable has a unit root versus the alternative that it is stationary but very persistent.
However, we find that persistent global risk variables do not seem to have additional forecasting
power when the level exchange rate is included as a predictor.




                                                25
                                         References


Adrian, Tobias; Erkko Etula; and, Hyun Song Shin. 2018. "Risk Appetite and Exchange Rates."
       Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Staff Report no. 361 (updated).

Adrian, Tobias and Peichu Xie. 2020. "The Non-U.S. Bank Demand for U.S. Dollar Assets."
       CEPR Discussion Paper No. DP14437.

Ang, Andrew, and Geert Bekaert. 2007. "Stock Return Predictability: Is It There?" Review of
      Financial Studies 20, 651-707.

Benigno, Gianluca, and Pierpaolo Benigno. 2008. "Exchange Rate Determination under Interest
      Rate Rules." Journal of International Money and Finance 27, 971-993.

Berkowitz, Jeremy, and Lorenzo Giorgianni. 2001. "Long-Horizon Exchange Rate
      Predictability?" Review of Economics and Statistics 83, 81-91.

Boudoukh, Jacob, Matthew Richardson, and Robert F. Whitelaw. 2008 "The myth of long-horizon
      predictability." Review of Financial Studies 21, 1577-1605.

Boudoukh, Jacob; Ronen Israel; and, Matthew P. Richardson. 2020. "Biases in Long-Horizon
      Predictive Regressions." NBER Working Paper No. 27410.

Brunnermeier, Markus, Stefan Nagel, and Lasse H. Pedersen. 2009. "Carry Trades and Currency
      Crashes." NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2008 23, 312-347.

Bussière. Matthieu; Menzie D. Chinn; Laurent Ferrara; and, Jonas Heipertz. 2018. "The New Fama
       Puzzle." National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper 24342.

Ca'Zorzi, Michele, and Michal Rubaszek. 2020. "Exchange-Rate Forecasting on a Napkin."
      Journal of International Money and Finance 104.

Campbell, John Y., and Motohiro Yogo. 2006. "Efficient Tests of Stock Return Predictability."
     Journal of Financial Economics 81, 27-60.

Chen, Yu-chin, and Kwok Ping Tsang. 2013. "What Does the Yield Curve Tell Us about Exchange
       Rate Predictability?" Review of Economics and Statistics 95, 185-205.

Cheung, Yin-Wong; Menzie D. Chinn; and, Antonio Garcia Pascual. 2005. "Empirical Exchange
      Rate Models of the Nineties: Are Any Fit to Survive?" Journal of International Money and
      Finance 95, 332-362.

Cheung, Yin-Wong; Menzie D. Chinn; Antonio Garcia Pascual; and, Yi Zhang. 2019. "Exchange
      Rate Prediction Redux: New Models, New Data, New Currencies." Journal of International
      Money and Finance 24, 1150-1175.



                                             26
Choi, Im. 2001. "Unit Root Tests for Panel Data." Journal of International Money and Finance 29,
       249-272.

Clark, Todd E., and Kenneth D. West. 2006. "Using Out-of-Sample Mean Squared Prediction
       Errors to Test the Martingale Difference Hypothesis." Journal of Econometrics 135, 155-
       186.

Darvas, Zsolt, and Zoltán Schepp. 2020. "Forecasting Exchange Rates of Major Currencies with
       Long Maturity Forward Rates." Bruegel Working Paper, I ssue 02.

Diebold, Francis X., and Roberto Mariano. 1995. "Comparing Predictive Accuracy." Journal of
       Business and Economic Statistics 13, 253­263.

Driscoll, John C., and Aart C. Kraay. 1998. "Consistent Covariance Matrix Estimation with
       Spatially Dependent Data." Review of Economics and Statistics 80, 549-560.

Du, Wenxin; Joanne Im; and Jesse Schreger. 2018a. "US Treasury Premium." Journal of
     International Economics 112, 167-181.

Eichenbaum, Martin; Benjamin K. Johannsen; and, Sergio Rebelo. 2020. "Monetary Policy and
      the Predictability of Nominal Exchange Rates." Review of Economic Studies,
      forthcoming.

Engel, Charles, and Kenneth D. West. 2005. "Exchange Rates and Fundamentals." Journal of
       Political Economy 113, 485-517.

Engel, Charles; Nelson C. Mark; and, Kenneth D. West. 2008. "Exchange Rate Models Are Not
       as Bad as You Think." NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2007 22, 381-441.

Engel, Charles, and Steve Pak Yeung Wu. 2020. "Liquidity and Exchange Rates: An Empirical
       Investigation." National Bureau of Economic Research, working paper no. 25397.

Evans, Martin D.D. 2020. "FX Trading and the Exchange Rate Disconnect Puzzle." Georgetown
       University, working paper.

Fang, Xiang and Yang Liu. Forthcoming. "Volatility, Intermediaries, and Exchange Rates."
      Journal of Financial Economics.

Gabaix, Xavier, and Matteo Maggiori. 2015. "International Liquidity and Exchange Rate
      Dynamics." Quarterly Journal of Economics 130, 1369-1420.

Gilchrist, Simon, and Egon Zakrajsek. 2012. "Credit Spreads and Business Cycle Fluctuations."
       American Economic Review 102, 1692-1720.




                                              27
Habib, Maurizio M., and Livio Stracca. 2012. "Getting beyond carry trade: What makes a safe
       haven currency?" Journal of International Economics 87, 50-64.

Hamilton, James D. 1994. Time Series Analysis (Princeton University Press).

He, Zhiguo, Bryan Kelly, and Asaf Manela. 2017. "Intermediary Asset Pricing: New Evidence
      from Many Asset Classes." Journal of Financial Economics 126, 1-35.

Hodrick, Robert J. 1992. "Dividend Yields and Expected Stock Returns: Alternative Procedures
      for Inference and Measurement." Review of Financial Studies 5, 357-386.

Husted, Lucas, John H. Rogers, and Bo Sun. 2018, "Uncertainty, Currency Excess Returns, and
       Risk Reversals." Journal of International Money and Finance 88(C), 228-241.

Kilian, Lutz. 1998. "Small-Sample Confidence Intervals for Impulse Response Functions."
       Review of Economics and Statistics 80, 218-230.

Jiang, Zhengyang; Arvind Krishnamurthy; and, Hanno Lustig. 2019. "Foreign Safe Asset Demand
        and the Dollar Exchange Rate." NBER Working Paper No. 24439.

Jordá, Òscar, and Alan M. Taylor. 2012. "The Carry Trade and Fundamentals: Nothing to Fear but
       FEER Itself." Journal of International Economics 88, 74-90.

Kalemli-Ozcan, Sebnem, and Liliana Varela. 2019. "Exchange Rate and Interest Rate Disconnect:
      The Role of Capital Flows, Currency Risk and Default Risk. " Society for Economic
      Dynamic Meeting Papers. Vol. 351.

Kim, Myung Jig; Charles R. Nelson; and, Richard Startz. 1991. "Mean Reversion in Stock Prices?
      A Reappraisal of the Evidence." Review of Economic Studies 58, 515-528.

Lilley, Andrew; Matteo Maggiori; Brent Neiman; and, Jesse Schreger. 2019. "Exchange Rate
        Reconnect." NBER Working Paper No. 26046.

Lilley, Andrew, and Gianluca Rinaldi. 2020. "Currency Risk and Central Banks." Available at
        SSRN 3262313 (2018).

Liu, Yang, and Ivan Shaliastovich. 2017. "Government Policy Approval and Exchange Rates."
       Working paper, The University of Hong Kong.

Lustig, Hanno; Andreas Stathopolous; and, Adrien Verdelhan. 2016. "Nominal Exchange Rate
        Stationarity and Long-Term Bond Returns." Stanford University, working paper.

Ma, Sai, and Shaojun Zhang. 2020. "Housing Cycles and Exchange Rates." Working paper, The
      Ohio State University.




                                             28
Mark, Nelson. 1995. "Exchange Rates and Fundamentals: Evidence on Long -Run Predictability."
      American Economic Review 85, 201-218.

Mark, Nelson C., and Doo-Yull Choi. 1997. "Real Exchange-Rate Prediction over Long
      Horizons." Journal of International Economics 43, 29-60.

Meese, Richard A., and Kenneth Rogoff. 1983. "Empirical Exchange Rate Models of the
      Seventies: Do They Fit Out of Sample?" Journal of International Economics 14, 3-24.

Miranda-Agrippino, Silvia, and Hélène Rey. 2020. "U.S. Monetary Policy and the Global
      Financial Cycle." Review of Economic Studies, forthcoming.

Phillips, Peter C.B., and Pierre Perron. 1988. "Testing for a Unit Root in Time Series Regression."
        Biometrika 75, 335-346.

Richardson, Matthew. 1993. "Temporary Components of Stock Prices: A Skeptic's View." Journal
       of Business and Economics Statistics 11, 199-207.

Richardson, Matthew, and James Stock. 1989. "Drawing Inferences from Statistics Based on
       Multi-Year Asset Returns." Journal of Financial Economics 25, 323-348.

Rossi, Barbara. 2005. "Testing Long-Horizon Predictive Ability with High Persistence, and the
       Meese­ Rogoff Puzzle." International Economic Review 46, 61­92.

Rossi, Barbara. 2013. "Exchange Rate Predictability." Journal of Economic Literature 51, 1063-
       1119.

Sarno, Lucio; Paul Schneider; and, Christian Wagner. 2012. "Properties of Foreign Exchange Risk
       Premiums." Journal of Financial Economics 105, 279-310.

West, Kenneth D. 1996.      "Asymptotic Inference About Predictive Ability." Econometrica 64,
      1067-1084.




                                                29
Table 1: Regression statistics of in sample forecasting: st + h - st =  +  st + et +h

                         1-month horizon forecast                1-year horizon forecast                 3-year horizon forecast                 5-year horizon forecast
                                  (h=1)                                   (h=12)                                  (h=36)                                  (h=60)
                            Beta      Adjusted R2                  Beta       Adjusted R2                  Beta       Adjusted R2                  Beta       Adjusted R2
  Currency                   (1)          (2)                       (3)           (4)                       (3)           (4)                       (5)           (6)
  AUD                      -0.016        0.004                  -0.224***        0.113                  -0.672***        0.453                  -1.030***        0.727
                          (0.011)                                 (0.110)                                 (0.142)                                 (0.138)
  CAD                      -0.017        0.006                  -0.191***        0.111                  -0.622***        0.401                  -1.125***        0.732
                          (0.010)                                 (0.091)                                 (0.204)                                 (0.178)
  CHF                      -0.011        0.002                  -0.123***        0.084                  -0.404***        0.478                  -0.606***        0.710
                          (0.009)                                 (0.074)                                 (0.079)                                 (0.099)
  EUR                      -0.019        0.005                  -0.257***        0.131                  -0.733***        0.517                  -1.122***        0.776
                          (0.013)                                 (0.118)                                 (0.143)                                 (0.105)
  GBP                      -0.013        0.000                  -0.216***        0.075                  -0.618***        0.217                  -1.250***        0.436
                          (0.011)                                 (0.153)                                 (0.298)                                 (0.342)
  JPY                      -0.023        0.008                  -0.283***        0.143                  -0.946***        0.490                  -1.283***        0.682
                          (0.013)                                 (0.140)                                 (0.198)                                 (0.263)
  NOK                      -0.008       -0.002                  -0.193***        0.073                  -0.652***        0.328                  -1.262***        0.600
                          (0.012)                                 (0.112)                                 (0.240)                                 (0.217)
  NZD                      -0.020        0.007                  -0.252***        0.139                  -0.712***        0.570                  -0.964***        0.817
                          (0.012)                                 (0.129)                                 (0.121)                                 (0.073)
  SEK                      -0.018        0.003                  -0.301***        0.127                  -0.764***        0.417                  -1.244***        0.689
                          (0.012)                                 (0.141)                                 (0.206)                                 (0.174)
  SA                       -0.014        0.002                  -0.219***        0.111                  -0.689***        0.475                  -1.111***        0.759
                          (0.011)                                 (0.114)                                 (0.169)                                 (0.152)
  Panel                    -0.015        0.003                  -0.217***        0.107                  -0.657***        0.419                  -1.030***        0.661
                          (0.008)                                 (0.091)                                 (0.125)                                 (0.097)
  Observations
  Single                    254                                     243                                     219                                     195
  Panel                     2286                                    2187                                    1971                                    1755
Notes: SA is the regression with simple average of all nine currencies. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01 for one-sided test based on Phillips Perron (1988) test statistics compared
with Dickey Fuller distribution without drift (population value of  = 0) and Choi (2001) test statistics for panel regressions. Panel regressions include country fixed effect. Newey-
West standard errors and Driscoll Kraay (1998) standard errors (for panel regression) with h-1 lags in parentheses.


                                                                                                                                                                                  30
Table 2: 5 year rolling window out-of-sample prediction error: st + h - st =  +  t -60,t st vs random walk model ( st + h - st = 0 )
          Clark West Statistics              1-month horizon                  1-year horizon                  3-year horizon                  5-year horizon
                                              forecast (h=1)                  forecast (h=12)                 forecast (h=36)                 forecast (h=60)
          Currency                                  (1)                              (2)                             (3)                             (3)
          AUD                                     -1.067                          1.292*                         2.927***                        4.476***
          CAD                                     -0.127                         2.896***                        3.861***                        3.066***
          CHF                                     -0.024                         2.813***                         2.257**                        2.756***
          EUR                                      0.043                         3.988***                        3.833***                        7.981***
          GBP                                     -1.501                          2.275**                         2.192**                        4.101***
          JPY                                     -0.903                          1.839**                        2.355***                        3.918***
          NOK                                     -1.360                         2.495***                        2.769***                         2.087**
          NZD                                     -0.438                          1.693**                         2.289**                        3.830***
          SEK                                     -0.679                          2.102**                         2.311**                         1.988**
          SA                                      -0.975                          1.848**                        3.444***                        2.957***
          Panel                                   -0.493                          2.001**                        4.300***                        5.018***
Notes: SA is the regression with simple average of all nine currencies. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01 for one-sided test. Panel regressions include country fixed effect. Newey-
West standard errors and Driscoll Kraay (1998) standard errors (for panel regression) with h-1 lags in parentheses.




                                                                                                                                                                             31
Table3
Summary of rolling window R2 of out-of-sample forecasting (5-year rolling window): st + h - st =  + t -61,t -1st + et + h
                                              min       25%tile        50%tile 75%tile 90%tile                     95%tile       99%tile            max
                          Currency            (1)         (2)            (3)        (4)        (5)                   (6)           (7)              (8)
                                                                         1-month horizon forecast
                          AUD                -0.02         0.00         0.02       0.04       0.08                   0.10           0.16            0.20
                          CAD                -0.02        -0.01         0.02       0.04       0.07                   0.15           0.22            0.26
                          CHF                -0.02         0.02         0.04       0.07       0.13                   0.21           0.24            0.25
                          EUR                -0.02         0.00         0.02       0.08       0.10                   0.13           0.15            0.17
                          GBP                -0.02        -0.01         0.01       0.05       0.10                   0.14           0.21            0.27
                          JPY                -0.02        -0.01         0.02       0.04       0.06                   0.08           0.14            0.15
                          NOK                -0.02        -0.01         0.02       0.05       0.13                   0.15           0.20            0.21
                          NZD                -0.02         0.02         0.03       0.06       0.10                   0.12           0.17            0.24
                          SEK                -0.02        -0.01         0.02       0.04       0.08                   0.09           0.13            0.20
                          SA                 -0.02         0.00         0.02       0.03       0.09                   0.13           0.20            0.20
                          Panel              -0.02         0.00         0.02       0.04       0.06                   0.09           0.12            0.14
                                                                          1-year horizon forecast
                          AUD                -0.02        0.18          0.38       0.51       0.64                   0.70           0.75            0.75
                          CAD                -0.02        0.04          0.39       0.59       0.66                   0.72           0.83            0.84
                          CHF                -0.02        0.21          0.34       0.53       0.70                   0.78           0.84            0.85
                          EUR                -0.01        0.20          0.41       0.66       0.71                   0.74           0.84            0.85
                          GBP                -0.02        0.18          0.33       0.50       0.76                   0.79           0.90            0.90
                          JPY                -0.02        0.05          0.38       0.51       0.68                   0.72           0.77            0.77
                          NOK                -0.02        0.06          0.45       0.69       0.75                   0.79           0.83            0.83
                          NZD                -0.02        0.33          0.52       0.64       0.71                   0.72           0.76            0.77
                          SEK                 0.02        0.22          0.52       0.62       0.64                   0.66           0.70            0.71
                          SA                 -0.02        0.17          0.50       0.57       0.64                   0.70           0.82            0.83
                          Panel               0.03        0.24          0.40       0.49       0.57                   0.62           0.71            0.72
Notes: SA is the regression with simple average of all nine currencies. Adjusted R2 are reported. Panel regressions include country fixed effect.




                                                                                                                                                           32
Table3 (continued)
Summary of rolling window R2 of out-of-sample forecasting (5-year rolling window): st + h - st =  + t -61,t -1st + et + h
                                              min       25%tile        50%tile 75%tile 90%tile                     95%tile       99%tile            max
                          Currency            (1)         (2)            (3)        (4)        (5)                   (6)           (7)              (8)
                                                                          3-year horizon forecast
                          AUD                -0.02        0.24          0.58       0.76       0.83                   0.85           0.89            0.89
                          CAD                 0.00        0.25          0.51       0.63       0.77                   0.83           0.94            0.94
                          CHF                -0.02        0.05          0.62       0.76       0.83                   0.85           0.87            0.88
                          EUR                -0.01        0.22          0.57       0.65       0.71                   0.81           0.91            0.91
                          GBP                 0.07        0.29          0.44       0.67       0.91                   0.93           0.93            0.93
                          JPY                 0.07        0.43          0.70       0.86       0.91                   0.95           0.96            0.96
                          NOK                 0.00        0.28          0.42       0.55       0.71                   0.81           0.92            0.92
                          NZD                 0.03        0.39          0.63       0.77       0.81                   0.84           0.88            0.89
                          SEK                 0.16        0.32          0.46       0.65       0.71                   0.73           0.81            0.81
                          SA                  0.06        0.20          0.54       0.68       0.75                   0.80           0.91            0.91
                          Panel               0.35        0.48          0.62       0.71       0.78                   0.81           0.86            0.87
                                                                          5-year horizon forecast
                          AUD                 0.02        0.46          0.63       0.72       0.83                   0.91           0.92            0.93
                          CAD                 0.31        0.51          0.58       0.66       0.75                   0.82           0.87            0.88
                          CHF                 0.00        0.29          0.69       0.94       0.95                   0.95           0.96            0.96
                          EUR                 0.09        0.27          0.65       0.78       0.80                   0.81           0.84            0.84
                          GBP                 0.11        0.51          0.79       0.89       0.93                   0.94           0.94            0.94
                          JPY                -0.02        0.08          0.79       0.91       0.96                   0.96           0.97            0.97
                          NOK                 0.20        0.33          0.47       0.60       0.67                   0.73           0.76            0.77
                          NZD                 0.01        0.67          0.77       0.80       0.85                   0.89           0.90            0.90
                          SEK                 0.27        0.44          0.59       0.72       0.76                   0.78           0.81            0.81
                          SA                  0.24        0.56          0.63       0.71       0.75                   0.83           0.86            0.87
                          Panel               0.58        0.67          0.70       0.77       0.82                   0.84           0.85            0.85
Notes: SA is the regression with simple average of all nine currencies. Adjusted R2 are reported. Panel regressions include country fixed effect.




                                                                                                                                                           33
Table 4
Regression statistics of in sample forecasting using simple average of exchange rate:
st + h - st =  +  X X t + et + h , st + h - st =  +  s st + et + h and st + h - st =  +  XX X t +  ss st + et + h
                                                       Univariate model                   Univariate model                               Bivariate model
                                                         X        Adjusted R2               s          Adjusted R2            XX
                                                                                                                                              ss             Adjusted R2

                 Independent variables                (1)              (2)              (3)                (4)              (5)              (6)                 (7)
                 US Treasury premium                 -0.539          0.008             -0.015             0.004             -0.763          -0.024              0.021
                 MAR global factor                   -0.001          0.000             -0.014             0.003             -0.000          -0.012              0.001
                 GZ spread                            0.000          -0.003            -0.014             0.002              0.000          -0.013             -0.001
                 Log SP500                         -0.008**          0.025             -0.014             0.002          -0.013***        -0.036**              0.057
     1-month     Log VIX                              0.001          -0.002            -0.014             0.002              0.001          -0.013             -0.001
     horizon     US Term spread (5y-FF)               0.001          0.003             -0.014             0.002              0.001          -0.015              0.006
     forecast    US Term spread (10y-2y)              0.001          0.004             -0.014             0.002            0.002**          -0.022              0.015
      (h=1)      TED                                 -0.003          0.009             -0.014             0.002             -0.003          -0.013              0.011
                 Intermediary leverage               -0.008          -0.004            -0.015             0.004            -0.081*          -0.038              0.015
                 Interm. weighted return             -0.004          -0.004            -0.015             0.004             -0.003          -0.015             -0.000
                 Log Repo                             0.002          0.001             -0.014             0.003            0.006**         -0.038*              0.026
                 Log Commercial Paper                -0.007          0.006             -0.021             0.009             -0.006          -0.017              0.010
                 US Treasury premium                 -0.388          -0.004          -0.227***            0.121             -2.823       -0.258***              0.137
                 MAR global factor                   -0.010          0.060           -0.219***            0.111             -0.006       -0.183***              0.127
                 GZ spread                          0.011**          0.086           -0.219***            0.111            0.010**       -0.193***              0.170
                 Log SP500                        -0.076***          0.166           -0.219***            0.111          -0.138***       -0.446***              0.536
      1-year     Log VIX                              0.025          0.045           -0.219***            0.111              0.017       -0.196***              0.130
     horizon     US Term spread (5y-FF)               0.010          0.049           -0.219***            0.111              0.011       -0.226***              0.169
     forecast    US Term spread (10y-2y)              0.007          0.024           -0.219***            0.111              0.014       -0.292***              0.202
      (h=12)     TED                                 -0.015          0.018           -0.219***            0.111             -0.014       -0.218***              0.129
                 Intermediary leverage               -0.020          -0.004          -0.222***            0.114           -0.98***       -0.505***              0.270
                 Interm. weighted return             -0.027          -0.002          -0.222***            0.114             -0.023       -0.221***              0.112
                 Log Repo                             0.015          0.017           -0.237***            0.130          0.069***        -0.533***              0.396
                 Log Commercial Paper                -0.067          0.055           -0.355***            0.271             -0.025       -0.337***              0.276
Notes: Inferences are based on Newey West standard errors with h-1 lags. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01 for one-sided test based on Phillips Perron test statistics compared with
Dickey Fuller distribution without drift (population value of  = 0) for  and two-sidedd test based on t-distribution for macro variables. Regressions with  matches the sample
period of each global variable. Log SP500, Log Repo and Log Commercial Paper are log linearly detrended. MAR global factor is Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2020) global factor.
GZ spread is U.S. corporate bond credit spread taken from Gilchrist and Zakrajsek (2012). Intermediary leverage ratio and Int ermediary weighted return are taken from He et al.
(2017). TED is the 3-month Treasury Eurodollar spread.  reported here is the simple average exchange rate. Refer to the Data Appendix for the number of observations.




                                                                                                                                                                             34
Table 4 (continued)
Regression statistics of in sample forecasting using simple average of exchange rate:
st + h - st =  +  X X t + et + h , st + h - st =  +  s st + et + h and st + h - st =  +  XX X t +  ss st + et + h

                                                      Univariate model                    Univariate model                               Bivariate model
                                                         X        Adjusted R2              s           Adjusted R2            XX
                                                                                                                                              ss             Adjusted R2

                 Independent variables                (1)              (2)              (3)                (4)              (5)              (6)                 (7)
                 US Treasury premium                  5.480          0.030           -0.689***            0.475           -1.167         -0.701***              0.474
                 MAR global factor                   -0.011          0.023           -0.689***            0.475            0.006         -0.720***              0.479
                 GZ spread                          0.027**          0.194           -0.689***            0.475         0.020***         -0.626***              0.573
                 Log SP500                           -0.001          -0.005          -0.689***            0.475         -0.130***        -0.892***              0.615
      3-year     Log VIX                            0.069**          0.136           -0.689***            0.475            0.038         -0.634***              0.512
     horizon     US Term spread (5y-FF)               0.008          0.009           -0.689***            0.475            0.009         -0.693***              0.492
     forecast    US Term spread (10y-2y)             -0.005          0.000           -0.689***            0.475            0.013         -0.750***              0.502
      (h=36)     TED                                  0.018          0.010           -0.689***            0.475            0.018         -0.688***              0.487
                 Intermediary leverage                0.937          0.130           -0.689***            0.475           -0.844         -0.933***              0.521
                 Interm. weighted return           -0.099**          0.006           -0.689***            0.475          -0.087**        -0.687***              0.481
                 Log Repo                            -0.021          0.014           -0.741***            0.553         0.098***         -1.151***              0.775
                 Log Commercial Paper                 0.008          -0.005          -0.819***            0.590         0.121***         -0.911***              0.661
                 UST premium                        10.590*          0.073           -1.111***            0.759            0.255         -1.108***              0.757
                 MAR global factor                   -0.011          0.011           -1.111***            0.759           0.016*         -1.186***              0.787
                 GZ spread                            0.022          0.071           -1.111***            0.759            0.007         -1.086***              0.766
                 Log SP500                          0.129**          0.105           -1.111***            0.759           -0.038         -1.169***              0.765
      5-year     Log VIX                              0.067          0.070           -1.111***            0.759            0.001         -1.110***              0.757
     horizon     US Term spread (5y-FF)              -0.014          0.020           -1.111***            0.759           -0.010         -1.104***              0.772
     forecast    US Term spread (10y-2y)           -0.038**          0.179           -1.111***            0.759           -0.014         -1.045***              0.780
      (h=60)     TED                                  0.037          0.031           -1.111***            0.759         0.035***         -1.109***              0.791
                 Intermediary leverage             2.157***          0.431           -1.111***            0.759           -0.135         -1.152***              0.758
                 Interm. weighted return             -0.010          -0.005          -1.111***            0.759            0.010         -1.111***              0.758
                 Log Repo                            -0.065          0.089           -1.129***            0.763         0.099***         -1.525***              0.888
                 Log Commercial Paper                 0.014          -0.005          -1.190***            0.751         0.167***         -1.305***              0.830
Notes: Inferences are based on Newey West standard errors with h-1 lags. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01 for one-sided test based on Phillips Perron test statistics compared with
Dickey Fuller distribution without drift (population value of  = 0) for  and two-sided test based on t-distribution for macro variables. Regressions with  matches the sample
period of each global variable. Log SP500, Log Repo and Log Commercial Paper are log linearly detrended. MAR global factor is Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2020) global factor.
GZ spread is U.S. corporate bond credit spread taken from Gilchrist and Zakrajsek (2012). Intermediary leverage ratio and Int ermediary weighted return are taken from He et al.
(2017). TED is the 3-month Treasury Eurodollar spread.  reported here is the simple average exchange rate. Refer to the Data Appendix for the number of observations. Log SP500,
Log Repo and Log Commercial Paper are linearly detrended.




                                                                                                                                                                             35
Table 5
Summary of regression statistics of in sample forecasting for each currency: For each horizon, we run regressions of + -  =  +    +
+ and + -  =  +    +    + + for each currency. we Log Report the count of significant coefficients of the first regression in
the first column, and the count of significant coefficients of the second regression in the second column in the format of   -   .
                                                           Univariate model          Bivariate model                                Univariate model             Bivariate model
                                                                     X
                                                                                           XX
                                                                                                -   ss
                                                                                                                                               X
                                                                                                                                                                    XX -  ss
Independent variables                                              (1)                      (2)                                             (1)                         (2)
US Treasury premium                                                 2                      3-1                                               4                         1­9
MAR global factor                                                   1                      0-0                                               2                         0­9
GZ spread                                                           0                      0-0                                               8                         7­8
Log SP500                                                           5                      8-4                                               1                         7-7
Log VIX                                                             0                      0-0                                               7                         1­9
                                   1-month horizon                                                           3-year horizon
US Term spread (5y-FF)                                              1                      1-0                                               0                         1­9
                                      forecast                                                                  forecast
US Term spread (10y-2y)
                                       (h=1)                        2                      5-0                   (h=36)                      2                         1­9
TED                                                                 2                      2-0                                               2                         2­9
Intermediary leverage                                               0                      5-0                                               3                         5­9
Interm. weighted return                                             0                      0-0                                               6                         6­9
Log Repo                                                            0                      6-3                                               0                         8­9
Log Commercial Paper                                                2                      1-0                                               3                         8-9
US Treasury premium                                                 1                      1­9                                               5                         0-9
MAR global factor                                                   1                      0-9                                               3                         5-9
GZ spread                                                           7                      5­9                                               3                         2-9
Log SP500                                                           8                      9-8                                               6                         3-9
Log VIX                                                             3                      1­9                                               4                         2-9
                                    1-year horizon                                                           5-year horizon
US Term spread (5y-FF)                                              2                      2­9                                               2                         1-9
                                       forecast                                                                 forecast
US Term spread (10y-2y)
                                        (h=12)                      1                      4­9                   (h=60)                      7                         2-9
TED                                                                 1                      1­9                                               3                         7-9
Intermediary leverage                                               0                      7­9                                               9                         5-9
Interm. weighted return                                             0                      0­9                                               0                         0-9
Log Repo                                                            0                      7­9                                               2                         8-9
Log Commercial Paper                                                4                      2-9                                               2                         7-9
Notes: Nine sample countries in total. We count the coefficient that is above 5% significance level (one-sided test based on Phillips Perron test statistics compared with Dickey Fuller
distribution without drift (population value of  = 0) for  and two-sidedd test based on t-distribution for macro variables). Significance are based on Newey West standard errors
with h-1 lags. Regressions with  matches the sample period of each global variable. Log SP500, Log Repo and Log Commercial Paper are log linearly detrended. MAR global
factor is Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2020) global factor. GZ spread is U.S. corporate bond credit spread taken from Gilchrist and Zakrajsek (20 12). Intermediary leverage ratio
and Intermediary weighted return are taken from He et al. (2017). TED is the 3-month Treasury Eurodollar spread. Log SP500, Log Repo and Log Commercial Paper are linearly
detrended.

                                                                                                                                                                                    36
Table 6
Regression statistics of in sample forecasting using real exchange rate: st + h - st =  +  qt + et + h
                   1-month horizon forecast       1-year horizon forecast           3-year horizon forecast                                                      5-year horizon forecast
                              (h=1)                        (h=12)                            (h=36)                                                                       (h=60)
                      Beta        Adjusted R2       Beta       Adjusted R2            Beta       Adjusted R2                                                       Beta       Adjusted R2
 Currency              (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)                 (3)              (4)                                                         (5)            (6)
 AUD                 -0.011          0.002       -0.157***        0.080            -0.553***           0.440                                                    -0.886***         0.765
                    (0.009)                        (0.100)                           (0.145)                                                                      (0.124)
 CAD                 -0.015          0.001       -0.183***        0.064            -0.708***           0.314                                                    -1.422***         0.662
                    (0.012)                        (0.106)                           (0.237)                                                                      (0.239)
 CHF                 -0.021          0.003       -0.181***        0.047            -0.468***           0.118                                                    -1.099***         0.318
                    (0.016)                        (0.122)                           (0.382)                                                                      (0.184)
 EUR                 -0.016          0.002       -0.256***        0.106            -0.766***           0.429                                                    -1.266***         0.654
                    (0.013)                        (0.108)                           (0.208)                                                                      (0.117)
 GBP                 -0.014         -0.001       -0.301***        0.094            -0.738***           0.191                                                    -1.364***         0.294
                    (0.014)                        (0.154)                           (0.370)                                                                      (0.357)
 JPY                 -0.002         -0.004       -0.038***        0.006            -0.150***           0.032                                                    -0.036***        -0.004
                    (0.006)                        (0.057)                           (0.090)                                                                      (0.174)
 NOK                 -0.007         -0.003       -0.230***        0.055            -0.704***           0.202                                                    -1.615***         0.471
                    (0.016)                        (0.145)                           (0.337)                                                                      (0.262)
 NZD                 -0.015          0.003       -0.208***        0.106            -0.656***           0.549                                                    -0.913***         0.829
                    (0.011)                        (0.116)                           (0.117)                                                                      (0.052)
 SEK                 -0.004         -0.004       -0.115***        0.019            -0.267***           0.040                                                    -0.827***         0.140
                    (0.010)                        (0.115)                           (0.332)                                                                      (0.391)
 SA                  -0.007         -0.003       -0.224***        0.067            -0.809***           0.319                                                    -1.616***         0.631
                    (0.012)                        (0.123)                           (0.324)                                                                      (0.206)
 Panel               -0.009          0.003       -0.151***        0.052            -0.497***           0.230                                                    -0.849***         0.383
                    (0.006)                        (0.064)                           (0.128)                                                                      (0.095)
 Observations
 Single               254                            243                               219                                                                          195
 Panel                2286                          2187                              1971                                                                          1755
Notes: SA is the regression with simple average of all nine currencies. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01 for one-sided test based on Phillips Perron test statistics compared with Dickey Fuller distribution
without drift (population value of  = 0). Panel regressions include country fixed effect. Newey-West standard errors and Driscoll Kraay (1998) standard errors (for panel regression) with h-1 lags in
parentheses.


                                                                                                                                                                                                       37
Table 7
Regression statistics of in sample forecasting using real exchange rate:
st + h - st =  +  q qt + et + h , st + h - st =  +  s st + et + h and st + h - st =  +  qq qt +  ss st + et + h
                                           Univariate model                      Univariate model                                                     Bivariate model
                                              q
                                                     Adjusted R      2
                                                                                 s         Adjusted R2              qq                                        ss      Adjusted R2
                  Currencies               (1)             (2)                   (3)            (4)                (5)                                       (6)          (7)
                  AUD                    -0.011           0.002               -0.016           0.004              0.018                                    -0.037        0.001
                  CAD                    -0.015           0.001               -0.017           0.006              0.072                                  -0.073**        0.010
                  CHF                    -0.021           0.003               -0.011           0.002             -0.021                                    -0.011        0.005
                  EUR                    -0.016           0.002               -0.019           0.005              0.013                                    -0.030        0.002
        1-month GBP                      -0.014          -0.001               -0.013           0.000              0.006                                    -0.017       -0.004
         horizon
         forecast
                  JPY                    -0.002          -0.004               -0.023           0.008             -0.001                                   -0.023*        0.004
           (h=1)  NOK                    -0.007          -0.003               -0.008          -0.002              0.042                                    -0.038       -0.004
                  NZD                    -0.015           0.003               -0.020           0.007            0.174**                                  -0.204**        0.021
                  SEK                    -0.004          -0.004               -0.018           0.003              0.014                                   -0.029*        0.002
                  SA                     -0.007          -0.003               -0.014           0.002              0.019                                    -0.026        0.001
                  Panel                  -0.009           0.003               -0.015           0.003              0.001                                   -0.016*        0.006
                  AUD                 -0.157***           0.080             -0.224***          0.113              0.273                                 -0.540***        0.128
                  CAD                 -0.183***           0.064             -0.191***          0.111            0.716**                                 -0.745***        0.177
                  CHF                 -0.181***           0.047             -0.123***          0.084             -0.164                                 -0.117***        0.122
                  EUR                 -0.256***           0.106             -0.257***          0.131              0.063                                 -0.310***        0.129
          1-year  GBP                 -0.301***           0.094             -0.216***          0.075             -0.352                                  0.044***        0.091
         horizon
         forecast
                  JPY                 -0.038***           0.006             -0.283***          0.143             -0.029                                  -0.280**        0.146
          (h=12)  NOK                 -0.230***           0.055             -0.193***          0.073              0.266                                 -0.381***        0.075
                  NZD                 -0.208***           0.106             -0.252***          0.139            1.361**                                 -1.685***        0.226
                  SEK                 -0.115***           0.019             -0.301***          0.127              0.119                                 -0.387***        0.137
                  SA                  -0.224***           0.067             -0.219***          0.111              0.053                                 -0.252***        0.109
                  Panel               -0.151***           0.052             -0.217***          0.107             -0.013                                  -0.209**        0.106
Notes: * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01 for one-sided test based on Phillips Perron test statistics compared with Dickey Fuller distribution without drift (population value of  = 0). Significance inference
for  is based on Phillips Perron test statistics and compare to the Dickey Fuller distribution. Significance inference for  is based on Phillips Perron test statistics and compared to the Dickey Fuller
distribution in the univariate regression (column 3-4). Significance inference for  is based on usual t statistics in the bivariate regression (column 5-7).




                                                                                                                                                                                                       38
Table 7 (continued)
Regression statistics of in sample forecasting using real exchange rate:
st + h - st =  +  q qt + et + h , st + h - st =  +  s st + et + h and st + h - st =  +  qq qt +  ss st + et + h
                                           Univariate model                      Univariate model                                             Bivariate model
                                              q
                                                     Adjusted R      2
                                                                                 s         Adjusted R2                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                      ss      Adjusted R2
                  Currencies               (1)             (2)                   (3)             (4)                                     (5)         (6)          (7)
                  AUD                 -0.553***           0.44              -0.672***          0.453                                   -0.158   -0.489***       0.452
                  CAD                 -0.708***           0.314              -0.622**          0.401                                   1.388*   -1.675***        0.46
                  CHF                 -0.468***           0.118             -0.404***          0.478                                   -0.223   -0.376***       0.501
                  EUR                 -0.766***           0.429             -0.733***          0.517                                    0.411   -1.074***       0.525
          3-year  GBP                 -0.738***           0.191             -0.618***          0.217                                   -0.167   -0.501***       0.215
         horizon
         forecast
                  JPY                   -0.15***          0.032             -0.946***           0.49                                   -0.144   -0.943***       0.522
          (h=36)  NOK                 -0.704***           0.202             -0.652***          0.328                                  1.597**   -1.764***       0.423
                  NZD                 -0.656***           0.549             -0.712***           0.57                                    0.312   -1.041***        0.57
                  SEK                 -0.267***           0.04              -0.764***          0.417                                    0.462   -1.047***       0.492
                  SA                  -0.809***           0.319             -0.689***          0.475                                    0.240   -0.836***       0.479
                  Panel               -0.497***           0.23              -0.657***          0.419                                   -0.043   -0.626***        0.42
                  AUD                 -0.886***           0.765             -1.030***          0.727                                   -1.123    0.287***       0.766
                  CAD                 -1.422***           0.662             -1.125***          0.732                                   1.351*   -2.124***       0.751
                  CHF                 -1.099***           0.318             -0.606***          0.710                                   -0.269   -0.550***       0.722
                  EUR                 -1.266***           0.654             -1.122***          0.776                                 1.658***   -2.438***       0.829
          5-year  GBP                 -1.364***           0.294             -1.250***          0.436                                    0.206     -1.383*       0.435
         horizon
         forecast
                  JPY                 -0.036***          -0.004             -1.283***          0.682                                   -0.158   -1.315***       0.703
          (h=60)  NOK                 -1.615***           0.471             -1.262***          0.600                                    1.117    -1.995**       0.621
                  NZD                 -0.913***           0.829             -0.964***          0.817                                 -0.817**   -0.102***       0.828
                  SEK                   -0.827**          0.140             -1.244***          0.689                                  0.750**   -1.596***       0.752
                  SA                  -1.616***           0.631             -1.111***          0.759                                    0.168   -1.209***       0.758
                  Panel               -0.849***           0.383             -1.030***          0.661                                   -0.056   -0.991***       0.661
Notes: * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01 for one-sided test based on Phillips Perron test statistics compared with Dickey Fuller distribution without drift (population value of  = 0). Significance inference
for  is based on Phillips Perron test statistics and compare to the Dickey Fuller distribution. Significance inference for  is based on Phillips Perron test statistics and compared to the Dickey Fuller
distribution in the univariate regression (column 3-4). Significance inference for  is based on usual t statistics in the bivariate regression (column 5-7).




                                                                                                                                                                                                       39
Table 8: 5-year rolling window out-of-sample using simple average of exchange rate, comparing predictive accuracy of models
between:
i)     +
         -         =  + -61,-1
                         
                                and + -  =    + -61,-1
                                                 
                                                          (Univariate  vs univariate  ) (Diebold Mariano West test)
ii)    +
         -         =                
                      + -61,-1  + -61,-1  and +  -  =     +   -61,-1
                                                               
                                                                      (Bivariate v.s. univariate  ) (Clark West test)
iii)   + -         =                
                      + -61,-1  + -61,-1  and +  -  =          
                                                          + -61,-1  (Bivariate v.s. univariate  ) (Clark West test)
iv)    +
         -         =     
                      + -61,-1  and + -  = 0 (Univariate  v.s. random walk model (r.w.) (Clark West test)
v)     +
         -         =  + -61,-1
                         
                                and + -  = 0 (Univariate  v.s. random walk model (r.w.)) (Clark West test)
                                                                 Univariate  vs              Bivariate v.s.            Bivariate v.s.            Univariate                Univariate 
                           Independent variables                  univariate                 univariate                univariate                  v.s. r.w.                 v.s. r.w.
                                                                        (i)                       (ii)                      (iii)                    (iv)                       (v)
                           US Treasury premium                         0.88                     1.72**                      0.22                    -0.91                     -0.63
                           MAR global factor                           0.34                      0.23                       0.27                    -0.88                     -0.72
                           GZ spread                                   0.47                      -0.28                      0.18                    -0.98                      0.51
                           Log SP500                                   0.22                      -0.22                      1.06                    -0.98                      1.02
            1-month        Log VIX                                     0.22                      0.03                      -0.59                    -0.98                      0.16
            horizon        US Term spread (5y-FF)                      0.38                      0.80                      -0.17                    -0.98                     -1.61
            forecast       US Term spread (10y-2y)                    -0.03                      0.52                       0.15                    -0.98                     -1.12
             (h=1)         TED                                         0.56                      -0.15                     -0.39                    -0.98                     -0.58
                           Intermediary leverage                       0.43                      -0.15                     -0.28                    -0.86                      0.10
                           Interm. weighted return                    -0.04                      0.41                      -0.13                    -0.86                     -0.03
                           Log Repo                                    0.84                      0.24                      -0.33                    -0.69                      0.12
                           Log Commercial Paper                        0.56                      -0.23                      0.11                    -0.81                      0.90
                           US Treasury premium                         0.30                      1.62*                     1.47*                   1.83**                    1.90**
                           MAR global factor                           0.28                      1.54*                     1.63*                   1.85**                    1.76**
                           GZ spread                                   0.86                      1.64*                      1.13                   1.85**                     1.52*
                           Log SP500                                   0.27                      1.15                       1.16                   1.85**                    3.60***
              1-year       Log VIX                                     0.71                     1.86**                      1.43                   1.85**                      1.25
             horizon       US Term spread (5y-FF)                      1.09                     2.24**                    1.82**                   1.85**                      0.91
             forecast      US Term spread (10y-2y)                     1.20                     2.06**                    2.01**                   1.85**                      0.08
              (h=12)       TED                                         0.74                     1.74**                   2.53***                   1.85**                    2.02**
                           Intermediary leverage                       0.89                     2.15**                     1.62*                   1.83**                    1.80**
                           Interm. weighted return                     0.86                     1.93**                     -2.05                   1.83**                      1.14
                           Log Repo                                    0.64                     2.24**                    1.97**                   1.84**                    2.20**
                           Log Commercial Paper                        0.44                     2.32**                     1.54*                   1.88**                    2.61***
Notes: * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01 for two-sided test for column (1) and one-sided test for the rest. In column (1), a positive value indicates the mean square error of univariate  is smaller than that
of  .Newey-West standard errors with h-1 lags are applied. Log SP500, Log Repo and Log Commercial Paper are log linearly detrended. Regressions with  matches the sample period of each global
variable. MAR global factor is Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2020) global factor. GZ spread is U.S. corporate bond credit spread taken from Gilchrist and Zakrajsek (20 12). Intermediary leverage ratio
and Intermediary weighted return are taken from He et al. (2017). TED is the 3-month Treasury Eurodollar spread.  reported here is the simple average exchange rate. Log SP500, Log Repo and Log
Commercial Paper are linearly detrended.

                                                                                                                                                                                                        40
Table 8 (continued): 5-year rolling window out-of-sample using simple average of exchange rate, comparing predictive accuracy of
models between:
i)     +
         -         =  + -61,-1
                         
                                and + -  =    + -61,-1
                                                 
                                                          (Univariate  vs univariate  ) (Diebold Mariano West test)
ii)    +
         -         =                
                      + -61,-1  + -61,-1  and +  -  =     +   -61,-1
                                                               
                                                                      (Bivariate v.s. univariate  ) (Clark West test)
iii)   + -         =                
                      + -61,-1  + -61,-1  and +  -  =          
                                                          + -61,-1  (Bivariate v.s. univariate  ) (Clark West test)
iv)    +
         -         =     
                      + -61,-1  and + -  = 0 (Univariate  v.s. random walk model (r.w.) (Clark West test)
v)     +
         -         =  + -61,-1
                         
                                and + -  = 0 (Univariate  v.s. random walk model (r.w.)) (Clark West test)
                                                                 Univariate  vs             Bivariate v.s.             Bivariate v.s.            Univariate                Univariate 
                           Independent variables                  univariate                univariate                 univariate                  v.s. r.w.                 v.s. r.w.
                                                                       (i)                       (ii)                       (iii)                    (iv)                       (v)
                           US Treasury premium                       2.38**                   2.49***                       0.10                   3.46***                   3.61***
                           MAR global factor                          0.86                     1.77**                       0.56                   3.44***                   2.92***
                           GZ spread                                  0.76                     2.11**                      1.63*                   3.44***                   3.41***
                           Log SP500                                  1.54                    2.55***                       0.75                   3.44***                   5.55***
              3-year       Log VIX                                    0.63                    2.92***                     1.98**                   3.44***                   2.82***
             horizon       US Term spread (5y-FF)                   3.02***                   3.99***                     2.15**                   3.44***                   4.20***
             forecast      US Term spread (10y-2y)                  3.38***                   4.28***                       0.79                   3.44***                   3.45***
              (h=36)       TED                                      4.72***                   4.07***                       1.46                   3.44***                   3.17***
                           Intermediary leverage                     2.21**                   6.02***                       1.10                   3.64***                   3.03***
                           Interm. weighted return                  3.51***                   5.54***                      1.51*                   3.64***                   3.13***
                           Log Repo                                 3.78***                   5.30***                      1.39*                   3.68***                   3.11***
                           Log Commercial Paper                     4.21***                   4.52***                       0.78                   3.32***                   2.88***
                           US Treasury premium                      3.65***                   3.99***                      -0.02                   2.96***                   3.61***
                           MAR global factor                        3.11***                   2.82***                       1.55                   2.96***                   1.78**
                           GZ spread                                2.65***                   3.15***                       0.95                   2.96***                   2.01**
                           Log SP500                                2.63***                   4.27***                      -1.78                   2.96***                   3.67***
              5-year       Log VIX                                  2.80***                   3.41***                       0.73                   2.96***                   1.90**
             horizon       US Term spread (5y-FF)                   4.10***                   5.27***                     2.30**                   2.96***                   3.53***
             forecast      US Term spread (10y-2y)                  3.65***                   4.13***                      1.46*                   2.96***                   3.84***
              (h=60)       TED                                      3.59***                   4.47***                    2.82***                   2.96***                   2.97***
                           Intermediary leverage                    4.07***                   5.31***                    2.80***                   2.96***                   2.91***
                           Interm. weighted return                  3.57***                   4.99***                      -1.44                   2.96***                   2.91***
                           Log Repo                                 3.52***                   5.94***                     1.91**                   3.11***                   3.46***
                           Log Commercial Paper                     3.39***                   3.93***                    2.57***                   3.30***                   2.71***
Notes: * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01 for two-sided test for column (1) and one-sided test for the rest. In column (1), a positive value indicates the mean square error of univariate  is smaller than that
of  .Newey-West standard errors with h-1 lags are applied. Log SP500, Log Repo and Log Commercial Paper are log linearly detrended. Regressions with  matches the sample period of each global
variable. MAR global factor is Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2020) global factor. GZ spread is U.S. corporate bond credit spread taken from Gilchrist a nd Zakrajsek (2012). Intermediary leverage ratio
and Intermediary weighted return are taken from He et al. (2017). TED is the 3-month Treasury Eurodollar spread.  reported here is the simple average exchange rate. Log SP500, Log Repo and Log
Commercial Paper are linearly detrended.

                                                                                                                                                                                                        41
Table 9
Summary of individual country 5-year rolling window out-of-sample prediction error, comparing predictive accuracy between:
i)     +
         -         =  + -61,-1
                         
                                and + -  =    + -61,-1
                                                 
                                                          (Univariate  vs univariate  ) (Diebold Mariano West test)
ii)    +
         -         =                
                      + -61,-1  + -61,-1  and +  -  =     +   -61,-1
                                                               
                                                                      (Bivariate v.s. univariate  ) (Clark West test)
iii)   + -         =                
                      + -61,-1  + -61,-1  and +  -  =          
                                                          + -61,-1  (Bivariate v.s. univariate  ) (Clark West test)
iv)    +
         -         =     
                      + -61,-1  and + -  = 0 (Univariate  v.s. random walk model (r.w.) (Clark West test)
v)     +
         -         =  + -61,-1
                         
                                and + -  = 0 (Univariate  v.s. random walk model (r.w.)) (Clark West test)
                                                               Univariate  vs             Bivariate v.s.           Bivariate v.s.           Univariate                Univariate 
                          Independent variables                 univariate                univariate               univariate                 v.s. r.w.                 v.s. r.w.
                                                                     (i)                      (ii)                     (iii)                    (iv)                       (v)
                          US Treasury premium                         0                         1                        1                        0                         0
                          MAR global factor                           0                         1                        0                        0                         0
                          GZ spread                                   0                         0                        0                        0                         0
                          Log SP500                                   0                         0                        1                        0                         1
            1-month       Log VIX                                     0                         0                        1                        0                         0
            horizon       US Term spread (5y-FF)                      0                         0                        0                        0                         0
            forecast      US Term spread (10y-2y)                     0                         3                        0                        0                         0
             (h=1)        TED                                         0                         1                        0                        0                         0
                          Intermediary leverage                       0                         0                        0                        0                         0
                          Interm. weighted return                     0                         0                        0                        0                         0
                          Log Repo                                    0                         2                        0                        0                         0
                          Log Commercial Paper                        0                         0                        0                        0                         0
                          US Treasury premium                         0                         8                        5                        8                         4
                          MAR global factor                           0                         7                        5                        8                         4
                          GZ spread                                   0                         6                        1                        7                         4
                          Log SP500                                   0                         7                        3                        8                         6
             1-year       Log VIX                                     0                         8                        2                        8                         3
            horizon       US Term spread (5y-FF)                      0                         9                        4                        8                         2
            forecast      US Term spread (10y-2y)                     1                         8                        3                        8                         0
             (h=12)       TED                                         0                         6                        7                        8                         4
                          Intermediary leverage                       0                         9                        3                        8                         4
                          Interm. weighted return                     0                         9                        0                        8                         0
                          Log Repo                                    1                         9                        5                        8                         6
                          Log Commercial Paper                        0                         9                        4                        7                         6
Notes: Nine sample countries in total. We count the coefficient that is below 5% significance level. Significance are based on Newey West standard errors with h-1 lags. Regressions with  matches the
sample period of each global variable. Regressions with  matches the sample period of each global variable. MAR global factor is Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2020) global factor. GZ spread is U.S.
corporate bond credit spread taken from Gilc hrist and Zakrajsek (2012). Intermediary leverage ratio and Intermediary weighted return are taken from He et al. (2017). TED is the 3-month Treasury
Eurodollar spread. Log SP500, Log Repo and Log Commercial Paper are linearly detrended.



                                                                                                                                                                                                  42
Table 9 (continued)
Summary of individual country 5-year rolling window out-of-sample prediction error, comparing predictive accuracy between:
i)     +
         -         =  + -61,-1
                         
                                and + -  =    + -61,-1
                                                 
                                                          (Univariate  vs univariate  ) (Diebold Mariano West test)
ii)    +
         -         =                
                      + -61,-1  + -61,-1  and +  -  =     +   -61,-1
                                                               
                                                                      (Bivariate v.s. univariate  ) (Clark West test)
iii)   + -         =                
                      + -61,-1  + -61,-1  and +  -  =          
                                                          + -61,-1  (Bivariate v.s. univariate  ) (Clark West test)
iv)    +
         -         =     
                      + -61,-1  and + -  = 0 (Univariate  v.s. random walk model (r.w.) (Clark West test)
v)     +
         -         =  + -61,-1
                         
                                and + -  = 0 (Univariate  v.s. random walk model (r.w.)) (Clark West test)
                                                               Univariate  vs             Bivariate v.s.           Bivariate v.s.           Univariate                Univariate 
                          Independent variables                 univariate                univariate               univariate                 v.s. r.w.                 v.s. r.w.
                                                                     (i)                      (ii)                     (iii)                    (iv)                       (v)
                          US Treasury premium                         3                         9                        2                        9                         7
                          MAR global factor                           1                         6                        1                        9                         6
                          GZ spread                                   2                         9                        3                        8                         8
                          Log SP500                                   2                         9                        3                        9                         6
             3-year       Log VIX                                     0                         9                        7                        9                         8
            horizon       US Term spread (5y-FF)                      3                         9                        6                        9                         8
            forecast      US Term spread (10y-2y)                     4                         9                        5                        9                         8
             (h=36)       TED                                         4                         9                        2                        9                         7
                          Intermediary leverage                       3                         9                        4                        9                         8
                          Interm. weighted return                     5                         9                        1                        9                         6
                          Log Repo                                    7                         9                        2                        9                         5
                          Log Commercial Paper                        5                         9                        3                        9                         5
                          US Treasury premium                         3                         9                        6                        9                         8
                          MAR global factor                           7                         8                        3                        9                         6
                          GZ spread                                   8                         9                        6                        9                         7
                          Log SP500                                   4                         9                        5                        9                         8
             5-year       Log VIX                                     6                         9                        4                        9                         7
            horizon       US Term spread (5y-FF)                      5                         9                        6                        9                         9
            forecast      US Term spread (10y-2y)                     4                         9                        4                        9                         8
             (h=60)       TED                                         6                         9                        7                        9                         8
                          Intermediary leverage                       6                         9                        7                        9                         7
                          Interm. weighted return                     7                         9                        0                        9                         7
                          Log Repo                                    7                         9                        3                        9                         9
                          Log Commercial Paper                        7                         8                        2                        9                         8
Notes: Nine sample countries in total. We count the coefficient that is below 5% significance level. Significance are based on Newey West standard errors with h-1 lags. Regressions with  matches the
sample period of each global variable. Regressions with  matches the sample period of each global variable. MAR global factor is Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2020) global factor. GZ spread is U.S.
corporate bond credit spread taken from Gilchrist and Zakrajsek (2012). Intermediary leverage ratio and Interm ediary weighted return are taken from He et al. (2017). TED is the 3-month Treasury
Eurodollar spread. Log SP500, Log Repo and Log Commercial Paper are linearly detrended.



                                                                                                                                                                                                  43
Table 10
5 year rolling window out of sample prediction error:
st + h - st =  +  t -61,t -1qt vs random walk model ( st + h - st = 0 )
          Clark West Statistics              1-month horizon                  1-year horizon                  3-year horizon                  5-year horizon
                                              forecast (h=1)                  forecast (h=12)                 forecast (h=36)                 forecast (h=60)
          Currency                                  (1)                              (2)                             (3)                             (4)
          AUD                                     -2.400                           1.099                         3.122***                        3.822***
          CAD                                      0.291                         2.644***                        4.373***                        3.986***
          CHF                                      0.475                         2.366***                         1.839**                         2.015**
          EUR                                     -0.421                         3.026***                        3.378***                        7.672***
          GBP                                     -1.135                         3.381***                         1.859**                        4.453***
          JPY                                     -0.997                           0.935                          1.636*                         3.230***
          NOK                                     -1.252                         2.529***                        2.455***                        2.474***
          NZD                                     -1.307                          1.432*                          2.270**                        3.832***
          SEK                                     -0.774                         2.406***                        2.907***                        3.072***
          SA                                      -1.386                          2.008**                        6.003***                        5.265***
          Panel                                   -0.712                          2.150**                        4.823***                       10.702***
Notes: SA is the regression with simple average of all nine currencies. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01 for one-sided test. Panel regressions include country fixed effect. Newey-
West standard errors and Driscoll Kraay (1998) standard errors (for panel regression) with h-1 lags in parentheses.




                                                                                                                                                                             44
Table 11
5-year rolling window out of sample prediction error using simple real exchange rate, comparing models between:
                         
                        -61,-1                      -61,-1
                                                    
i)     + -  =      +            and +  -  =    +            (Univariate  vs univariate  ) (Diebold Mariano West test)
                         
                        -61,-1  +  -61,-1  and +
                                                                
                                                               -61,-1
ii)    + -  =      +                                 -  =   +            (Bivariate v.s. univariate  ) (Clark West test)
                         
                        -61,-1  +  -61,-1  and +
                                                               -61,-1  (Bivariate v.s. univariate  ) (Clark West test)
                                                                
iii)   + -  =      +                                 -  =   + 
iv)    + -  =      +    -61,  and +
                         
                                     -  = 0 (Univariate  v.s. random walk model (r.w.) (Clark West test)
                         
v)     +
         -  =      + -61,  and +     -  = 0 (Univariate  v.s. random walk model (r.w.)) (Clark West test)
         Test statistics                        (i)              (ii)            (iii)                (iv)               (v)
                                          Univariate  vs   Bivariate v.s.   Bivariate v.s.      Univariate        Univariate 
                       Currency            univariate      univariate        univariate             v.s. r.w.         v.s. r.w.
                       AUD                    0.858           2.026**          1.888**               -1.067            -2.400
                       CAD                    -0.707           -0.977           -1.336               -0.127            0.291
                       CHF                    -0.113         2.388***          1.932**               -0.024            0.475
                       EUR                    1.112            1.099            0.275                0.043             -0.421
         1-month
                       GBP                    0.098            1.579*           0.845                -1.501            -1.135
          horizon
                       JPY                    1.020            0.853            0.532                -0.903            -0.997
          forecast
                       NOK                    -0.225           -0.854           -0.914               -1.360            -1.252
            (h=1)
                       NZD                    1.205            1.395*           0.761                -0.438            -1.307
                       SEK                    0.105            1.894*          1.822**               -0.679            -0.774
                       SA                     0.311            1.255            0.517                -0.975            -1.386
                       Panel                  0.891          3.371***         2.528***               -0.493            -0.712
                       AUD                    0.652           2.083**         2.287***              1.292*             1.099
                       CAD                    -0.674           1.381*           1.520*             2.896***          2.644***
                       CHF                    0.204          2.530***         3.301***             2.813***          2.366***
                       EUR                    0.055            1.615*          1.671**             3.988***          3.026***
           1-year
                       GBP                    0.281            1.355*           0.107              2.275**           3.381***
          horizon
                       JPY                    0.559          2.338***         2.345***             1.839**             0.935
          forecast
                       NOK                    -0.300         2.606***          1.887**             2.495***          2.529***
           (h=12)
                       NZD                    1.630          2.331***          2.045**             1.693**            1.432*
                       SEK                    0.307           2.025**          1.900**             2.102**           2.406***
                       SA                     -0.088          2.243**          1.783**             1.848**           2.008**
                       Panel                  1.348           2.906***         2.244**             2.001**           2.150**
Notes: * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01 for two-sided test for the first column and one-sided test for the rest. Newey-West standard errors with h-1 lags are applied. In column (1), a
positive value indicates the mean square error of univariate  is smaller than that of  . Panel regressions include country fixed effect. Newey-West standard errors and Driscoll
Kraay (1998) standard errors (for panel regression) with h-1 lags in parentheses.


                                                                                                                                                                                 45
Table 11 (continued)
5-year rolling window out of sample prediction error using simple real exchange rate, comparing models between:
                         
                       -61,-1                       -61,-1
                                                    
i)     + -  =     +             and +  -  =    +            (Univariate  vs univariate  ) (Diebold Mariano West test)
                         
                       -61,-1  +   -61,-1  and +
                                                                
                                                               -61,-1
ii)    + -  =     +                                  -  =   +            (Bivariate v.s. univariate  ) (Clark West test)
                         
                       -61,-1  +   -61,-1  and +
                                                               -61,-1  (Bivariate v.s. univariate  ) (Clark West test)
                                                                
iii)   + -  =     +                                  -  =   + 
iv)    + -  =     +    -61,  and +
                         
                                     -  = 0 (Univariate  v.s. random walk model (r.w.) (Clark West test)
                         
v)     +
         -  =     + -61,  and +      -  = 0 (Univariate  v.s. random walk model (r.w.)) (Clark West test)
         Test statistics                        (i)              (ii)            (iii)                (iv)               (v)
                                          Univariate  vs   Bivariate v.s.   Bivariate v.s.      Univariate        Univariate 
                      Currency             univariate      univariate        univariate             v.s. r.w.         v.s. r.w.
                      AUD                     -1.378           1.483*         2.863***             2.927***          3.122***
                      CAD                     1.079           1.675**          1.674**             3.861***          4.373***
                      CHF                     1.085            1.630*         2.981***             2.257**           1.839**
                      EUR                     1.676*         2.437***           1.230              3.833***          3.378***
          3-year
                      GBP                     0.746           2.169**         3.314***             2.192**           1.859**
         horizon
                      JPY                     0.378            1.597*         2.705***             2.355***           1.636*
         forecast
                      NOK                   2.761***          2.320**           1.535*             2.769***          2.455***
          (h=36)
                      NZD                     1.301           1.771**           1.499*             2.289**           2.270**
                      SEK                    2.045**          2.160**          1.993**             2.311**           2.907***
                      SA                     2.058**          2.265**          1.908**             3.444***          6.003***
                      Panel                   1.365           2.091**         2.476***             4.300***          4.823***
                      AUD                     -2.470           -0.571          1.805**             4.476***          3.822***
                      CAD                     1.043            0.343            -2.634             3.066***          3.986***
                      CHF                     0.936           1.676**           1.552*             2.756***          2.015**
                      EUR                   3.505***         3.004***          2.216**             7.981***          7.672***
          5-year
                      GBP                     0.335           1.665**           1.554*             4.101***          4.453***
         horizon
                      JPY                     1.056           2.199**           1.450*             3.918***          3.230***
         forecast
                      NOK                     -0.255          1.697**           1.383*             2.087**           2.474***
          (h=60)
                      NZD                     -0.907           1.263            1.065              3.830***          3.832***
                      SEK                    2.095**         3.401***          2.238**             1.988**           3.072***
                      SA                      0.523            0.952            0.879              2.957***          5.265***
                      Panel                  2.026**         3.292***          1.714**             5.018***         10.702***
Notes: * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01 for two-sided test for the first column and one-sided test for the rest. Newey-West standard errors with h-1 lags are applied. In column (1), a
positive value indicates the mean square error of univariate  is smaller than that of  . Panel regressions include country fixed effect. Newey-West standard errors and Driscoll
Kraay (1998) standard errors (for panel regression) with h-1 lags in parentheses.


                                                                                                                                                                                 46
Table 12
Summary of rolling window R2 of out-of-sample forecasting (5-year rolling window): st + h - st =  + t -61,t -1 X t + et + h
                                                                          min      25%tile      50%tile      75%tile      90%tile      95%tile       99%tile      max
                                     Independent variables                (1)        (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)           (7)         (8)
                                      (simple average)                   -0.02      0.00         0.02         0.03         0.09         0.13          0.20        0.20
                                     US treasury premium                 -0.02      -0.01        0.00         0.04         0.07         0.08          0.17        0.18
                                     MAR global factor                   -0.02      -0.01        0.02         0.05         0.07         0.08          0.11        0.12
                                     GZ spread                           -0.02      -0.01        -0.01        0.00         0.03         0.06          0.15        0.17
                                     Log SP500                           -0.02      0.00         0.04         0.08         0.10         0.13          0.22        0.24
                                     Log VIX                             -0.02      -0.02        -0.01        0.01         0.05         0.06          0.09        0.11
           1-month horizon
                                     US Term spread (5y-FF)              -0.02      -0.01        0.00         0.03         0.08         0.09          0.12        0.15
            forecast (h=1)
                                     US Term spread (10y-2y)             -0.02      -0.02        -0.01        0.02         0.07         0.09          0.12        0.13
                                     TED                                 -0.02      -0.02        0.01         0.03         0.04         0.06          0.07        0.08
                                     Intermediary leverage               -0.02      -0.02        -0.01        0.02         0.06         0.08          0.10        0.11
                                     Interm. weighted return             -0.02      -0.01        -0.01        0.03         0.07         0.09          0.14        0.14
                                     Log Repo                            -0.02      0.00         0.02         0.05         0.14         0.16          0.18        0.18
                                     Log Commercial Paper                -0.02      -0.02        -0.01        0.02         0.06         0.07          0.09        0.11
                                      (simple average)                   -0.02      0.17         0.50         0.57         0.64         0.70          0.82        0.83
                                     US treasury premium                 -0.02      0.11         0.19         0.26         0.42         0.60          0.61        0.62
                                     MAR global factor                   0.00       0.14         0.30         0.47         0.53         0.59          0.65        0.65
                                     GZ spread                           -0.02      0.06         0.12         0.36         0.44         0.48          0.53        0.53
                                     Log SP500                           -0.02      0.07         0.18         0.34         0.47         0.55          0.65        0.66
                                     Log VIX                             -0.02      -0.01        0.13         0.27         0.39         0.40          0.43        0.44
            1-year horizon
                                     US Term spread (5y-FF)              -0.02      0.01         0.09         0.18         0.35         0.40          0.45        0.46
            forecast (h=12)
                                     US Term spread (10y-2y)             -0.02      0.01         0.07         0.26         0.44         0.65          0.72        0.73
                                     TED                                 -0.02      0.01         0.11         0.31         0.37         0.68          0.72        0.72
                                     Intermediary leverage               -0.02      0.00         0.04         0.13         0.37         0.48          0.57        0.58
                                     Interm. weighted return             -0.02      -0.02        -0.01        -0.01        0.01         0.06          0.11        0.13
                                     Log Repo                            -0.02      0.00         0.04         0.23         0.31         0.33          0.35        0.36
                                     Log Commercial Paper                -0.02      0.02         0.08         0.25         0.35         0.38          0.42        0.42
Notes: Adjusted R2 are reported. Log SP500, Log Repo and Log Commercial Paper are log linearly detrended. MAR global factor is Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2020) global
factor. GZ spread is U.S. corporate bond credit spread taken from Gilchrist and Zakrajsek (2012). Intermediary leverage ratio and Intermediary weighted return are taken from He
et al. (2017). TED is the 3-month Treasury Eurodollar spread.  reported here is the simple average exchange rate. Log SP500, Log Repo and Log Commercial Paper are linearly
detrended.




                                                                                                                                                                              47
Table 12 (continued)
Summary of rolling window R2 of out-of-sample forecasting (5-year rolling window): st + h - st =  + t -61,t -1 X t + et + h
                                                                          min      25%tile      50%tile      75%tile      90%tile      95%tile       99%tile      max
                                     Independent variables                (1)        (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)           (7)         (8)
                                      (simple average)                   0.06       0.20         0.54         0.68         0.75         0.80          0.91        0.91
                                     US treasury premium                 -0.02      0.03         0.12         0.34         0.42         0.46          0.49        0.50
                                     MAR global factor                   -0.02      0.12         0.30         0.40         0.56         0.59          0.63        0.64
                                     GZ spread                           -0.02      0.09         0.32         0.46         0.53         0.59          0.60        0.61
                                     Log SP500                           -0.02      0.00         0.04         0.41         0.61         0.72          0.79        0.79
                                     Log VIX                             -0.02      0.05         0.23         0.34         0.47         0.55          0.59        0.60
            3-year horizon
                                     US Term spread (5y-FF)              -0.02      0.09         0.21         0.28         0.50         0.54          0.58        0.59
            forecast (h=36)
                                     US Term spread (10y-2y)             -0.02      0.02         0.11         0.21         0.30         0.40          0.41        0.41
                                     TED                                 -0.02      0.01         0.07         0.17         0.21         0.22          0.25        0.25
                                     Intermediary leverage               -0.02      0.02         0.09         0.16         0.26         0.33          0.42        0.42
                                     Interm. weighted return             -0.02      0.00         0.01         0.02         0.06         0.09          0.13        0.17
                                     Log Repo                            -0.02      -0.01        0.03         0.10         0.23         0.30          0.45        0.45
                                     Log Commercial Paper                -0.02      0.00         0.02         0.06         0.20         0.37          0.56        0.56
                                      (simple average)                   0.24       0.56         0.63         0.71         0.75         0.83          0.86        0.87
                                     UST premium                         -0.02      0.00         0.07         0.23         0.50         0.57          0.60        0.61
                                     MAR global factor                   -0.02      0.01         0.17         0.40         0.57         0.60          0.73        0.74
                                     GZ spread                           -0.02      0.02         0.45         0.60         0.71         0.74          0.75        0.75
                                     Log SP500                           -0.02      0.00         0.08         0.22         0.53         0.64          0.66        0.66
                                     Log VIX                             -0.02      0.03         0.13         0.27         0.35         0.48          0.54        0.57
            5-year horizon
                                     Term spread (5y-FF)                 -0.02      -0.01        0.03         0.16         0.20         0.23          0.28        0.30
            forecast (h=60)
                                     Term spread (10y-2y)                -0.02      0.00         0.02         0.19         0.40         0.41          0.44        0.50
                                     TED                                 -0.02      0.00         0.03         0.18         0.38         0.40          0.43        0.43
                                     Intermediary leverage               -0.02      0.00         0.04         0.11         0.20         0.29          0.30        0.31
                                     Interm. weighted return             -0.02      -0.01        -0.01        -0.01        0.03         0.06          0.13        0.15
                                     Log Repo                            -0.02      -0.01        0.00         0.03         0.11         0.14          0.15        0.16
                                     Log Commercial Paper                -0.02      0.02         0.04         0.08         0.34         0.40          0.42        0.42
Notes: Adjusted R2 are reported. Log SP500, Log Repo and Log Commercial Paper are log linearly detrended. MAR global factor is Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2020) global
factor. GZ spread is U.S. corporate bond credit spread taken from Gilchrist and Zakrajsek (2012). Intermediary leverage ratio and Intermediary weighted return are taken from He
et al. (2017). TED is the 3-month Treasury Eurodollar spread.  reported here is the simple average exchange rate. Log SP500, Log Repo and Log Commercial Paper are linearly
detrended.




                                                                                                                                                                              48
Table 13
Summary of rolling window R2 of out-of-sample forecasting (5-year rolling window): st + h - st =  + t -61,t -1qt + et + h
                                              min       25%tile        50%tile 75%tile 90%tile                     95%tile       99%tile            max
                          Currency            (1)         (2)            (3)        (4)        (5)                   (6)           (7)              (8)
                                                                         1-month horizon forecast
                          AUD                -0.02        -0.01         0.00       0.03       0.07                   0.09           0.17            0.20
                          CAD                -0.02        -0.01         0.02       0.04       0.07                   0.12           0.20            0.23
                          CHF                -0.02         0.00         0.02       0.04       0.06                   0.07           0.09            0.09
                          EUR                -0.02        -0.01         0.02       0.06       0.10                   0.13           0.17            0.18
                          GBP                -0.02        -0.01         0.00       0.03       0.07                   0.09           0.14            0.15
                          JPY                -0.02        -0.01         0.01       0.06       0.08                   0.10           0.16            0.17
                          NOK                -0.02        -0.01         0.02       0.04       0.11                   0.14           0.18            0.20
                          NZD                -0.02         0.00         0.02       0.04       0.08                   0.10           0.17            0.22
                          SEK                -0.02        -0.01         0.01       0.04       0.07                   0.08           0.13            0.19
                          SA                 -0.02        -0.01         0.01       0.03       0.07                   0.10           0.16            0.17
                          Panel              -0.02         0.00         0.01       0.02       0.05                   0.06           0.10            0.10
                                                                          1-year horizon forecast
                          AUD                -0.02        0.14          0.34       0.51       0.58                   0.65           0.73            0.73
                          CAD                -0.02        0.04          0.36       0.52       0.62                   0.66           0.83            0.83
                          CHF                 0.00        0.15          0.35       0.44       0.54                   0.64           0.72            0.72
                          EUR                 0.00        0.19          0.52       0.65       0.70                   0.71           0.84            0.85
                          GBP                -0.02        0.18          0.26       0.47       0.57                   0.64           0.81            0.82
                          JPY                -0.02        0.08          0.25       0.54       0.68                   0.71           0.75            0.75
                          NOK                -0.02        0.09          0.45       0.61       0.74                   0.77           0.79            0.79
                          NZD                -0.02        0.22          0.39       0.57       0.65                   0.70           0.75            0.76
                          SEK                -0.02        0.10          0.47       0.62       0.67                   0.73           0.75            0.75
                          SA                 -0.02        0.10          0.44       0.56       0.67                   0.73           0.75            0.76
                          Panel               0.04        0.15          0.36       0.42       0.52                   0.56           0.64            0.64
Notes: SA is the regression with simple average of all nine currencies. Adjusted R2 are reported. Panel regressions include country fixed effect.




                                                                                                                                                           49
Table 13 (continued)
Summary of rolling window R2 of out-of-sample forecasting (5-year rolling window): st + h - st =  + t -61,t -1qt + et + h
                                              min       25%tile        50%tile 75%tile 90%tile                     95%tile       99%tile            max
                          Currency            (1)         (2)            (3)        (4)        (5)                   (6)           (7)              (8)
                                                                          3-year horizon forecast
                          AUD                -0.02        0.20          0.51       0.76       0.85                   0.87           0.87            0.87
                          CAD                -0.02        0.14          0.53       0.60       0.83                   0.89           0.93            0.93
                          CHF                -0.02        0.12          0.33       0.58       0.85                   0.89           0.90            0.90
                          EUR                -0.02        0.17          0.46       0.63       0.74                   0.81           0.89            0.89
                          GBP                 0.01        0.24          0.49       0.71       0.84                   0.86           0.87            0.88
                          JPY                -0.01        0.25          0.55       0.82       0.91                   0.95           0.97            0.97
                          NOK                -0.02        0.09          0.24       0.56       0.70                   0.79           0.94            0.95
                          NZD                 0.03        0.28          0.54       0.71       0.76                   0.83           0.88            0.88
                          SEK                -0.02        0.06          0.30       0.63       0.77                   0.79           0.82            0.82
                          SA                 -0.02        0.11          0.43       0.71       0.77                   0.82           0.89            0.89
                          Panel               0.23        0.40          0.53       0.63       0.71                   0.74           0.82            0.82
                                                                          5-year horizon forecast
                          AUD                 0.06        0.48          0.62       0.89       0.92                   0.94           0.95            0.95
                          CAD                 0.25        0.46          0.54       0.66       0.74                   0.83           0.87            0.87
                          CHF                 0.11        0.53          0.61       0.68       0.74                   0.83           0.87            0.88
                          EUR                 0.05        0.22          0.58       0.68       0.73                   0.74           0.77            0.81
                          GBP                 0.46        0.64          0.71       0.82       0.90                   0.90           0.91            0.91
                          JPY                 0.21        0.36          0.58       0.76       0.86                   0.89           0.92            0.93
                          NOK                 0.07        0.34          0.47       0.53       0.60                   0.62           0.65            0.66
                          NZD                 0.04        0.64          0.76       0.86       0.89                   0.90           0.90            0.90
                          SEK                 0.03        0.31          0.54       0.64       0.72                   0.80           0.83            0.83
                          SA                  0.30        0.61          0.67       0.71       0.74                   0.78           0.82            0.82
                          Panel               0.60        0.66          0.68       0.71       0.75                   0.76           0.77            0.78
Notes: SA is the regression with simple average of all nine currencies. Adjusted R2 are reported. Panel regressions include country fixed effect.




                                                                                                                                                           50
Table 14
Regression statistics of in sample forecasting using simulated data: st + h - st =  +  st + et +h
                                       Beta                                  t-stat                                                Adjusted R2
                          Actual       MC           BS       Actual           MC          BS                                Actual    MC         BS
                            data     p-value     p-value       data        p-value    p-value                                data   p-value    p-value
         Currency            (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)           (5)         (6)                                 (7)      (8)       (9)
                                                      1-month horizon forecast (h=1)
         AUD               -0.016      0.52        0.52       -1.41          0.57        0.58                                0.004           0.57           0.57
         CAD               -0.017      0.50        0.50       -1.69          0.44        0.44                                0.006           0.50           0.51
         CHF               -0.011      0.67        0.69       -1.19          0.66        0.68                                0.002           0.65           0.67
         EUR               -0.019      0.45        0.45       -1.41          0.57        0.57                                0.005           0.52           0.52
         GBP               -0.013      0.63        0.62       -1.11          0.71        0.71                                0.000           0.74           0.73
         JPY               -0.023      0.35        0.36       -1.73          0.42        0.42                                0.008           0.41           0.41
         NOK               -0.008      0.78        0.77       -0.66          0.86        0.84                               -0.002           0.86           0.85
         NZD               -0.020      0.43        0.44       -1.64          0.46        0.47                                0.007           0.45           0.46
         SEK               -0.018      0.48        0.49       -1.48          0.54        0.56                                0.003           0.62           0.63
         SA                -0.014      0.60        0.80       -1.28          0.64        0.63                                0.003           0.64           0.74
         Panel             -0.015      0.47        0.48       -1.91          0.65        0.64                                0.003           0.84           0.84
                                                      1-year horizon forecast (h=12)
         AUD               -0.224      0.45        0.44       -2.03          0.57        0.56                                0.113           0.49           0.49
         CAD               -0.191      0.53        0.52       -2.11          0.54        0.53                                0.111           0.50           0.50
         CHF               -0.123      0.70        0.71       -1.66          0.67        0.68                                0.084           0.60           0.60
         EUR               -0.257      0.37        0.36       -2.18          0.50        0.51                                0.131           0.42           0.41
         GBP               -0.216      0.46        0.46       -1.40          0.74        0.75                                0.075           0.64           0.64
         JPY               -0.283      0.31        0.32       -2.02          0.57        0.57                                0.143           0.38           0.37
         NOK               -0.193      0.52        0.52       -1.73          0.66        0.66                                0.073           0.65           0.65
         NZD               -0.252      0.39        0.40       -1.95          0.60        0.60                                0.139           0.40           0.41
         SEK               -0.301      0.29        0.29       -2.14          0.53        0.54                                0.127           0.44           0.45
         SA                -0.219      0.45        0.46       -1.92          0.60        0.63                                0.111           0.49           0.46
         Panel             -0.217      0.30        0.30       -2.39          0.70        0.69                                0.110           0.37           0.37
Notes: SA is the regression with simple average of all nine currencies. MC and BS stand for Monte Carlo and Bootstrap (with replacement) respectively. Each exercise simulates the
data 5000 times. Inference are based on Newey-West standard errors and Driscoll Kraay (1998) standard errors (for panel regression) with h-1 lags. The simulated panel data are
simulated with empirical variance-covariance matrix. The panel regressions are with country fixed effects. p-values of one-sided test are reported.



                                                                                                                                                                              51
Table 14 (continued)
Regression statistics of in sample forecasting using simulated data: st + h - st =  +  st + et +h
                                       Beta                                  t-stat                                                Adjusted R2
                          Actual       MC           BS       Actual           MC          BS                                Actual    MC         BS
                             data    p-value     p-value       data        p-value    p-value                                data   p-value    p-value
         Currency             (1)       (2)         (3)         (4)           (5)         (6)                                 (7)      (8)       (9)
                                                      3-year horizon forecast (h=36)
         AUD               -0.672      0.39        0.39       -4.75          0.26        0.26                                0.45            0.29           0.28
         CAD               -0.622      0.45        0.44       -3.06          0.52        0.50                                0.40            0.37           0.37
         CHF               -0.404      0.66        0.67       -5.09          0.21        0.22                                0.48            0.24           0.24
         EUR               -0.733      0.33        0.34       -5.13          0.22        0.21                                0.52            0.19           0.18
         GBP               -0.618      0.45        0.46       -2.08          0.70        0.71                                0.22            0.66           0.66
         JPY               -0.946      0.16        0.15       -4.78          0.25        0.24                                0.49            0.22           0.22
         NOK               -0.652      0.42        0.42       -2.72          0.58        0.58                                0.33            0.49           0.49
         NZD               -0.712      0.35        0.37       -5.90          0.15        0.16                                0.57            0.12           0.13
         SEK               -0.764      0.32        0.31       -3.71          0.41        0.40                                0.42            0.35           0.35
         SA                -0.689      0.37        0.37       -4.07          0.34        0.34                                0.48            0.25           0.21
         Panel             -0.657      0.20        0.21       -5.26          0.31        0.31                                0.42            0.11           0.11
                                                      5-year horizon forecast (h=60)
         AUD               -1.030      0.35        0.36       -7.48          0.20        0.19                                0.73            0.12           0.12
         CAD               -1.125      0.28        0.26       -6.31          0.28        0.27                                0.73            0.12           0.11
         CHF               -0.606      0.66        0.67       -6.10          0.28        0.29                                0.71            0.14           0.15
         EUR               -1.122      0.27        0.28      -10.72          0.08        0.08                                0.78            0.07           0.07
         GBP                -1.25      0.17        0.17       -3.65          0.58        0.58                                0.44            0.56           0.55
         JPY               -1.283      0.15        0.14       -4.89          0.43        0.42                                0.68            0.19           0.19
         NOK               -1.262      0.16        0.16       -5.81          0.31        0.31                                0.60            0.31           0.32
         NZD               -0.964      0.40        0.41      -13.13          0.04        0.05                                0.82            0.04           0.04
         SEK               -1.244      0.18        0.18       -7.16          0.22        0.22                                0.69            0.17           0.18
         SA                -1.111      0.29        0.28       -7.33          0.20        0.20                                0.76            0.09           0.06
         Panel             -1.030      0.14        0.14      -10.67          0.11        0.11                                0.66            0.05           0.05
Notes: SA is the regression with simple average of all nine currencies. MC and BS stand for Monte Carlo and Bootstrap (with replacement) respectively. Each exercise simulates the
data 5000 times. Inference are based on Newey-West standard errors and Driscoll Kraay (1998) standard errors (for panel regression) with h-1 lags. The simulated panel data are
simulated with empirical variance-covariance matrix. The panel regressions are with country fixed effects. p-values of one-sided test are reported.


                                                                                                                                                                              52
Table 15
5-year rolling window out-of-sample prediction error with simulated data:
+    -  =      +  -61,-1
                   
                           and +     -  = 0 (Univariate  v.s. random walk model)
                                                      CW statistics                                                                    CW statistics
                                                          MC                      BS                                                       MC                       BS
                                Actual data             p-value                 p-value                          Actual data             p-value                  p-value
Currency                            (1)                   (2)                     (3)                                (4)                   (5)                      (6)
AUD                                  -1.07                  0.84                   0.83                               2.93                    0.55                  0.54
CAD                                  -0.13                  0.50                   0.50                               3.86                    0.24                  0.24
CHF                                  -0.02                  0.46                   0.47                               2.26                    0.82                  0.82
EUR              1-month             0.04                   0.43                   0.43            3-year             3.83                    0.23                  0.25
GBP              horizon             -1.50                  0.92                   0.91           horizon             2.19                    0.85                  0.85
JPY              forecast            -0.90                  0.78                   0.79           forecast            2.36                    0.79                  0.79
NOK               (h=1)              -1.36                  0.90                   0.90            (h=36)             2.77                    0.62                  0.61
NZD                                  -0.44                  0.64                   0.63                               2.29                    0.82                  0.80
SEK                                  -0.68                  0.72                   0.72                               2.31                    0.80                  0.81
SA                                   -0.98                  0.81                   0.80                               3.44                    0.36                  0.36
Panel                                -0.49                  0.66                   0.66                               4.30                    0.57                  0.55
AUD                                  1.29                   0.94                   0.93                               4.48                    0.20                  0.21
CAD                                  2.90                   0.30                   0.29                               3.07                    0.48                  0.47
CHF                                  2.81                   0.33                   0.33                               2.76                    0.59                  0.58
EUR               1-year             3.98                   0.05                   0.05            5-year             7.98                    0.03                  0.03
GBP              horizon             2.28                   0.60                   0.59           horizon             4.10                    0.25                  0.26
JPY              forecast            1.84                   0.80                   0.80           forecast            3.92                    0.29                  0.28
NOK               (h=12)             2.50                   0.48                   0.47            (h=60)             2.09                    0.84                  0.84
NZD                                  1.69                   0.85                   0.84                               3.83                    0.30                  0.30
SEK                                  2.10                   0.68                   0.67                               1.99                    0.87                  0.87
SA                                   1.85                   0.79                   0.79                               2.96                    0.51                  0.51
Panel                                2.00                   0.93                   0.92                               5.02                    0.44                  0.44
Notes: SA is the regression with simple average of all nine currencies. MC and BS stand for Monte Carlo and Bootstrap (with replacement) respectively. Each exercise simulates the
data 5000 times. Inference are based on Newey-West standard errors and Driscoll Kraay (1998) standard errors (for panel regression) with h-1 lags. The simulated panel data are
simulated with empirical variance-covariance matrix. The panel regressions are with country fixed effects. p-values of one-sided test are reported.




                                                                                                                                                                              53
Table 16
5-year rolling window R2 of out of sample forecasting with simulated data from the regression: + -  =  + -61,-1  + +
                                                                            90%tile of rolling R2                     95%tile of rolling R2
                                                                         Actual     MC          BS                 Actual     MC          BS
                                                                          data    p-value p-value                   data    p-value p-value
                        Currency                                          (1)       (2)         (3)                 (4)       (5)         (6)
                        AUD                                               0.08          0.51          0.50          0.10          0.50          0.48
                        CAD                                               0.07          0.69          0.68          0.15          0.92          0.91
                        CHF                                               0.13          0.07          0.07          0.21          0.99          0.99
                        EUR                                               0.10          0.25          0.24          0.13          0.82          0.81
                                                1-month horizon
                        GBP                                               0.10          0.25          0.24          0.14          0.87          0.87
                                                   forecast
                        JPY                                               0.06          0.82          0.84          0.08          0.21          0.20
                                                    (h=1)
                        NOK                                               0.13          0.06          0.07          0.15          0.92          0.91
                        NZD                                               0.10          0.24          0.23          0.12          0.74          0.73
                        SEK                                               0.08          0.51          0.51          0.09          0.35          0.35
                        SA                                                0.09          0.37          0.37          0.13          0.80          0.80
                        Panel                                             0.06          0.12          0.13          0.09          0.01          0.01
                        AUD                                               0.64          0.41          0.42          0.70          0.39          0.41
                        CAD                                               0.66          0.31          0.32          0.72          0.31          0.34
                        CHF                                               0.70          0.14          0.15          0.78          0.08          0.09
                        EUR                                               0.71          0.11          0.11          0.74          0.21          0.21
                                                 1-year horizon
                        GBP                                               0.76          0.02          0.03          0.79          0.06          0.07
                                                    forecast
                        JPY                                               0.68          0.21          0.22          0.72          0.30          0.30
                                                     (h=12)
                        NOK                                               0.75          0.03          0.04          0.79          0.05          0.07
                        NZD                                               0.71          0.10          0.11          0.72          0.29          0.31
                        SEK                                               0.64          0.40          0.41          0.66          0.60          0.60
                        SA                                                0.64          0.41          0.42          0.70          0.40          0.41
                        Panel                                             0.57          0.09          0.10          0.62          0.09          0.12
Notes: SA is the regression with simple average of all nine currencies. MC and BS stand for Monte Carlo and Bootstrap (with replacement) respectively. Each exercise simulates the
data 5000 times. Inference are based on Newey-West standard errors and Driscoll Kraay (1998) standard errors (for panel regression) with h-1 lags. The simulated panel data are
simulated with empirical variance-covariance matrix. The panel regressions are with country fixed effects. p-values of one-sided test are reported.




                                                                                                                                                                              54
Table 16 (continued)
5-year rolling window R2 of out of sample forecasting with simulated data from the regression: + -  =  + -61,-1  + +
                                                                            90%tile of rolling R2                     95%tile of rolling R2
                                                                         Actual     MC          BS                 Actual     MC          BS
                                                                          data    p-value p-value                   data    p-value p-value
                        Currency                                          (1)       (2)         (3)                 (4)       (5)         (6)
                        AUD                                               0.83          0.65          0.68          0.85          0.69          0.72
                        CAD                                               0.77          0.84          0.84          0.83          0.78          0.78
                        CHF                                               0.83          0.66          0.66          0.85          0.70          0.71
                        EUR                                               0.71          0.93          0.94          0.81          0.84          0.84
                                                 3-year horizon
                        GBP                                               0.91          0.21          0.23          0.93          0.22          0.23
                                                    forecast
                        JPY                                               0.91          0.21          0.22          0.95          0.09          0.10
                                                     (h=36)
                        NOK                                               0.71          0.93          0.93          0.81          0.83          0.83
                        NZD                                               0.81          0.72          0.74          0.84          0.74          0.75
                        SEK                                               0.71          0.93          0.93          0.73          0.95          0.95
                        SA                                                0.75          0.88          0.88          0.80          0.86          0.86
                        Panel                                             0.78          0.67          0.68          0.81          0.59          0.61
                        AUD                                               0.83          0.63          0.66          0.91          0.37          0.41
                        CAD                                               0.75          0.82          0.84          0.82          0.75          0.77
                        CHF                                               0.95          0.09          0.09          0.95          0.13          0.14
                        EUR                                               0.80          0.73          0.74          0.81          0.79          0.80
                                                 5-year horizon
                        GBP                                               0.93          0.19          0.19          0.94          0.20          0.20
                                                    forecast
                        JPY                                               0.96          0.05          0.05          0.96          0.08          0.08
                                                     (h=60)
                        NOK                                               0.67          0.93          0.93          0.73          0.92          0.92
                        NZD                                               0.85          0.57          0.57          0.89          0.50          0.49
                        SEK                                               0.76          0.81          0.82          0.78          0.85          0.85
                        SA                                                0.75          0.84          0.84          0.83          0.74          0.75
                        Panel                                             0.82          0.82          0.82          0.84          0.78          0.78
Notes: SA is the regression with simple average of all nine currencies. MC and BS stand for Monte Carlo and Bootstrap (with replacement) respectively. Each exercise simulates the
data 5000 times. Inference are based on Newey-West standard errors and Driscoll Kraay (1998) standard errors (for panel regression) with h-1 lags. The simulated panel data are
simulated with empirical variance-covariance matrix. The panel regressions are with country fixed effects. p-values of one-sided test are reported.




                                                                                                                                                                              55
Table 17. Forecasts using GZ
Data generating process of the simulation (under the null hypothesis): st - st -1 = u1,t and GZ t = 1st -1 + 1GZ t -1 +  2 st - 2 +  2GZ t - 2 + u2,t
Regression statistics of in sample forecasting using simulated data: st + h - st =  +  GZt + et + h
                                                      Beta                                           t-stat                                  Adjusted 2
                                                              MC 2-sided                                      MC 2-sided                              MC 1-sided
        Simple average                Actual data              p-value                Actual data              p-value              Actual data        p-value
        exchange rate                     (1)                    (2)                      (3)                    (4)                    (5)              (6)
        h=1                            0.0003                   0.76                     0.40                   0.96                  -0.003            0.63
        h=12                            0.011                   0.12                     2.54                   0.16                   0.086            0.14
        h=36                            0.027                   0.10                     2.59                   0.30                   0.194            0.13
        h=60                            0.022                   0.44                     1.49                   0.84                   0.071            0.46

5-year rolling window out-of-sample prediction error with simulated data:
+    -  =      +  -61,-1
                   
                           and +       -  = 0 ( v.s. random walk model)
                                                                          CW Statistics
                    Simple average                    Actual Data                  MC 1-sided p-value
                    exchange rate                          (1)                            (2)
                    h=1                                   0.51                           0.26
                    h=12                                  1.52                           0.55
                    h=36                                  3.41                           0.07
                    h=60                                  2.01                           0.56

5-year rolling window R2 of out of sample forecasting with simulated data from the regression: + -  =  + -61,-1  + +
                                        90%tile of rolling 2                                       95%tile of rolling 2
       Simple
       average                 Actual data              MC 1-sided p-value                Actual data              MC 1-sided p-value
       exchange rate                (1)                         (2)                           (3)                         (4)
       h=1                         0.03                        0.41                          0.06                        0.29
       h=12                        0.44                        0.21                          0.48                        0.27
       h=36                        0.53                        0.36                          0.59                        0.38
       h=60                        0.71                        0.10                          0.74                        0.12
Notes: Each exercise simulates the data 5000 times using Monte Carlo. Newey-West standard errors with h-1 lags are used. p-values of two-sided test are reported for beta and t-
statistics. p-values of one-sided test are reported for 2 and CW statistics. The simulated data are simulated with empirically estimated coefficient and variance-covariance matrix.
Kilian (1998) method is applied for correcting small sample bias. Number of lags (2) under the null hypothesis is chosen by AIC.


                                                                                                                                                                                 56
                    Figure 1
U.S. Dollar Exchange Rates 1999M1-2020M3
(log of U.S. dollar per unit of foreign currency)




                                                    57
Appendix 1: Data Appendix

Appendix Table 1: Data source

  Variable                         Data source                                        Sample period
  Exchange rates                   FRED                                               1999M1-2020M3
                                                                                      (end of month)
  US treasury premium     Engel and Wu (2020)                                         1999M1-2018M1
                          https://www.ssc.wisc.edu/~cengel/Data
                          /LiquidityYield/
  MAR global factor       Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2020)                            1999M1-2019M4
                          (http://www.helenerey.eu/RP.aspx?pid
                          =Published-Papers_en-
                          GB&aid=291587444_67186463733)
  GZ spread               Gilchrist and Zakrajsek (2012)                              1999M1-2020M3
                          https://www.federalreserve.gov/econre
                          sdata/notes/feds-notes/2016/updating-
                          the-recession-risk-and-the-excess-
                          bond-premium-20161006.html
  Log SP500*              FRED                                                        1999M1-2020M3
  Log VIX                 FRED                                                        1999M1-2020M3
  US Term spread (5y-FF) FRED                                                         1999M1-2020M3
  US Term spread (10y-2y) FRED                                                        1999M1-2020M3
  TED                     FRED                                                        1999M1-2020M3
  Intermediary leverage   He, Kelly, Manela (2017)                                    1999M1-2018M11
                          http://apps.olin.wustl.edu/faculty/manel
                          a/data.html
  Intermediary weighted   He, Kelly, Manela (2017)                                    1999M1-2018M11
  return                  http://apps.olin.wustl.edu/faculty/manel
                          a/data.html
  Log Repo*               Board of Governors of the Federal                           1999M8-2020M3
                          Reserve System
  Log Commercial Paper* Board of Governors of the Federal                             2001M1-2020M3
                          Reserve System
  CPI Index               IMF IFS                                                     1999M1-2020M3

Notes: * We linearly detrended the data. For in sample forecasting, we detrended the variable using the whole
sample. For out-of-sample forecasting, we detrended the variable using the 60 observations within the window.




                                                        58
Appendix Table 2: Persistence of global risk variables
AR(1) coefficient from the regression X t =  +  X t -1 + et
                                                       AR(1)
                   Variable                                         Standard errors*      Obs #
                                                     coefficient
               MAR global factor                        0.97             (0.02)            243
                   GZ spread                            0.96             (0.05)            254
                  Log SP500                             0.98             (0.02)            254
                   Log VIX                              0.85             (0.03)            254
           US Term spread (5y-FF)                       0.90             (0.03)            254
           US Term spread (10y-2y)                      0.98             (0.01)            254
                     TED                                0.84             (0.04)            254
             Intermediary leverage                      0.98             (0.01)            238
         Intermediary weighted return                   0.17             (0.10)            238
                   Log Repo                             0.98             (0.01)            247
            Log Commercial Paper                        0.93             (0.03)            230
Notes: *Newey West standard errors with 5 lags are reported

AR(1) coefficient from the regression X t =  +  X t -1 + et by currency

                                Real exchange rate                         US Treasury premium
                       AR(1)        Standard                         AR(1)       standard
    Currency                                       Obs #                                     Obs #
                     coefficient      errors*                      coefficient    errors*
     AUD                0.99           (0.01)       254               0.78         (0.05)      228
     CAD                0.98           (0.01)       254               0.90         (0.05)      228
     CHF                0.97           (0.01)       254               0.82         (0.05)      228
     EUR                0.98           (0.01)       254               0.82         (0.04)      228
     GBP                0.97           (0.01)       254               0.72         (0.09)      228
     JPY                0.99           (0.01)       254               0.81         (0.07)      228
     NOK                0.98           (0.02)       254               0.84         (0.04)      228
     NZD                0.98           (0.01)       254               0.78         (0.05)      228
     SEK                0.99           (0.01)       254               0.85         (0.03)      228
 Simple average         0.99           (0.01)       254               0.84         (0.04)      228
Notes: *Newey West standard errors with 5 lags are reported




                                                       59
Appendix 2: Simulation Methods


First we describe the simulation methods for the in-sample forecasts (Table 14), then for the out-
of-sample exercises in Tables 15 and 16.


Data
           For any given currency, we have data running from January 1999 to March 2020, for 255
data points. Let January 1999 be date t = 1 . T=255.
In-sample
           For h=1,12,36,60, we estimate
(7)         st + h - st = a + b st + ut + h

                                 ^ and the t-statistics of b
           We then calculate the b                         ^ using Newey-West standard error of h - 1
lags.
For the panel specification, we estimate
si ,t + h - si ,t = ai + bsi ,t + ui ,t + h

                                                           ^ using Driscoll-Kraay standard error of
                                 ^ and the t-statistics of b
           We then calculate the bi                         i


h - 1 lags.
           Also, we record the adjusted R2 for h = 1,12,36,60 .
Out-of-sample
           For h=1,12,36,60, we use 60 data points to estimate
(8)         st + h - st = ah ,t + bh ,t st + ut + h

for t = 1,       , T - h . That is, we run rolling regressions with 60 observations each.
           We forecast h periods ahead using the formula
            st +1+ h - st +1 = a        ^ s +u
                               ^ h ,t + b          ^t + h
                                         h ,t t +1


for t = 1,          , T - h , where the ^ over variables refers to the estimated values, and st +1+i is the
forecasted value. That is, for h = 1,12,36,60 , we make h-period ahead forecasts.

           We then calculate the T - 60 - h forecast errors, st +1+ h - st +1+ h , and calculate their mean-

squared error. We use the Clark-West statistic to compare that m.s.e. to the m.s.e. of the forecast


                                                            60
of no change in the exchange rate, for which the forecast error is st +1+ h - st +1 . We use Newey-West

standard error of h - 1 lags to correct for the Clark-West statistics.
           For the panel specification, we forecast h periods ahead using the following formula and
apply the same procedure above
si ,t +1+h - si ,t +1 = a         ^ s +u
                        ^i ,h,t + b             ^i ,t +h
                                   h ,t i ,t +1


We use Driscoll-Kraay standard error of h - 1 lags to correct for the panel Clark-West statistics.
           Also, we record the T - 60 - h values of adjusted R2 and record the min, max, 50th, 90th,
95th, and 99th percentile of those T - 60 - h regressions for h = 1,12,36,60 .


Monte Carlo
           We perform K = 5000 iterations of the following procedure:
           In iteration k, k = 1,              , K , we create an artificial time series that has 2000 + T elements as
follows:
           Under the null of a zero-drift random walk, we calculate the variance of st +1 - st for the

sample of T -1 observations of st +1 - st . We then construct an artificial time series of 2000 + T -1

random variables drawing from a normal distribution with mean zero and variance equal to the
sample variance of st +1 - st . Call each of these  j , j = 1,                  ,2000 + T -1 . Then we construct a

series of length 2000 + T with the following properties: The first element, call it x1 is equal to

zero. Then for j = 1,                ,2000 + T -1 , we have x j +1 = x j +  j . Now take the last T values of x j .

Call these st for t = 1,                , T , which is the simulated exchange rate series for iteration k.
           For the panel specification, under the null of a zero-drift random walk, we calculate the
variance covariance matrix of si ,t +1 - si ,t for the sample of T -1 observations of si ,t +1 - si ,t where i

is the index of a currency (i={1,2...I}). We then construct an artificial time series of
(2000 + T -1)  I random variables drawing from a multivariate normal distribution with mean
zero and variance and covariance equal to the sample variance covariance of si ,t +1 - si ,t . Call each

of these  i , j , j = 1,             ,2000 + T -1 . Then we construct a series of length 2000 + T with the

following properties: The first element, call it xi ,1 is equal to zero. Then for j = 1,                ,2000 + T -1


                                                                 61
, we have xi , j +1 = xi , j +  i , j . Now take the last T values of xi , j . Call these si ,t for t = 1,   , T , which
is the simulated panel exchange rate series for iteration k.


         Next proceed exactly as in the Data section, but use st as the "data" rather than st .
                                                                                 ^ , t-statistic of b
         So in each iteration k, for in-sample, we record a coefficient estimate b                  ^
and adjusted R2 . For out-of-sample, we record a Clark-West statistic and adjusted R2 for the min,
max, 50th, 90th, 95th, and 99th percentile of those T - 60 - h rolling regressions.
         Repeat this K times so we have the Monte Carlo distribution of these statistics.


Boostrap (with replacement)
         We essentially follow the same steps as above for the Monte Carlo, but the creation of the
artificial data is different.
         We perform K = 5000 iterations of the following procedure:
         In iteration k, k = 1,      , K , we create an artificial time series that has 2000 + T elements as
follows:
         Under the null of a zero-drift random walk, we collect the T -1 observations of st +1 - st .

We then use a random number generator that chooses a value from 1 to T -1 with equal
probability. We construct an artificial time series of 2000 + T -1 random variables, calling each
element of this series  j , j = 1,         ,2000 + T -1 .  j is created as follows: For each j, we use the

random number generator to choose a numeral n with equal probability, and then we set  j to be

the nth element of st +1 - st Then we construct a series of length 2000 + T with the following

properties: The first element, call it x1 is equal to zero. Then for j = 1,                 ,2000 + T -1 , we have
x j +1 = x j +  j . Now take the last T values of x j . Call these st for t = 1,         , T , which is the simulated
exchange rate series for iteration k.
         For the panel specification, under the null of a zero-drift random walk, we collect T -1
observations of si ,t +1 - si ,t , where i is the index of a currency (i={1,2...I}) and for each t there are

I-tuple of exchange rates. We use a random number generator that chooses an I-tuple from 1 to
T -1 with equal probability. We construct an artificial time series of (2000 + T -1)  I random


                                                           62
variables, calling each element of this series  i , j , j = 1,     ,2000 + T -1 .  i , j is created as follows:
For each j, we use the random number generator to choose a numeral n with equal probability, and
then we set each element in  j to be the nth tuple of si ,t +1 - si ,t . Then we construct a series of length

2000 + T with the following properties: The first I-tuple, call it xi ,1 is equal to zero. Then for

j = 1, ,2000 + T -1 , we have xi , j +1 = xi , j +  i , j . Now take the last T values of xi , j . Call these si ,t
for t = 1,   , T , which is the simulated panel exchange rate series for iteration k.
        Next proceed exactly as in the Data section, but use st as the "data" rather than st .
                                                                                ^ , t-statistic of b
        So in each iteration k, for in-sample, we record a coefficient estimate b                  ^
and adjusted R2 . For out-of-sample, we record a Clark-West statistic and adjusted R2 for the min,
max, 50th, 90th, 95th, and 99th percentile of those T - 60 - h rolling regressions.
        Repeat this K times so we have the bootstrap distribution of these statistics.




                                                       63
Appendix 3: Additional notes to the tables
Table 1:
The regression is in sample: st + h - st =  +  st + et

Single country
Parameters estimated by OLS, Newey-West standard errors of h-1 lags in parentheses.
Significance inference is based on Phillips Perron test statistics and compared to the Dickey Fuller
distribution.
Panel
The panel allows for country fixed effect.
Parameter are estimated by OLS, the standard errors are Driscoll Kraay (1998) standard errors
with h-1 lags in parentheses.
Significance inference is based on Choi (2001), which is a panel version of Phillips Perron test
statistics and compared to inverse chi square distribution.


Table 2:
The regression is out of sample rolling regression, rolling window is 5 year:
st + h - st =  + t -61,t -1st + et vs a random walk model

The Clark West statistics is calculated as follows:
A positive statistic indicates the larger model is the better one in the Clark West sense.
The squared regression error is obtained for each prediction,
f1,t = ( yt - y                        ^2,t )2 and adj = ( y
              ^1,t )2 , f 2,t = ( yt - y                   ^1,t - y
                                                                  ^2,t )2

                             ^ = f - ( f - adj )
For each period, we compute: f t  1,t   2,t


           ^ on a constant and test if the constant is significantly bigger than zero (one-sided
We regress f t

test). (Clark West 2007) The inference is based on usual t-statistics of the constant term. We use
Newey West standard errors for accounting serial correlation in the Clark West test.


Panel
The panel allows for country fixed effect.
We use Driscoll Kraay (1998) for accounting serial correlation in the Clark West test.



                                                             64
For the Clark West statistics, we still regress on one single constant, (i.e. no country specific
constant) Significance is based on one-sided test.


Table 3:
Table 3 uses the regressions of table 2, but reports the adjusted R 2 of the regressions.


Table 4:
Table 4 does three in-sample regressions:
st + h - st =  +  X X t + et , st + h - st =  +  s st + et and st + h - st =  +  XX X t +  ss st + et
Parameters estimated by OLS with Newey-West standard errors of h-1 lags.
Inference of significance for  is based on Phillips Perron test statistics and compare to the Dickey
Fuller distribution
Significance inference for macro variable is based on usual t statistics.
Table 4 reports only regression with simple average of exchange rates.


Table 5:
Table 5 does the same regressions as Table 4, but summarizes the count of all 9 countries at 5%
significance level.
Inference of significance for  is based on Phillips Perron test statistics and compare to the Dickey
Fuller distribution
Significance inference for macro variable is based on usual t statistics.


Table 6
The same inference as Table 1, but replacing the RHS variable with qt .

The regression is in-sample: st + h - st =  +  qt + et + h


Table 7
Table 7 does the same inference as in Table 4, and treats qt as a "macro variable"
Table 7 does three in-sample regressions:
st + h - st =  +  X X t + et , st + h - st =  +  s st + et and st + h - st =  +  XX X t +  ss st + et
Parameters estimated by OLS with Newey-West standard errors of h-1 lags.


                                                        65
Significance inference for  is based on Phillips Perron test statistics and compare to the Dickey
Fuller distribution.
Significance inference for qt is based on usual t statistics in the bivariate regression (column 5-7).

Significance inference for qt is based on Phillips Perron test statistics and compared to the Dickey

Fuller distribution in the univariate regression (column 3-4).


Table 8:
The regression is out-of-sample rolling regression, rolling window is 5 year, compared across 5
models. The first comparison involves two non-nested model, for which we compare MSPE of:
model1 based on X t minus model 2 based on st . Therefore, a positive statistic means the MSPE

is larger for X t than st . We use the Diebold Mariano statistics. The significance stars are based

on a two-sided test.
i)   +    -  =   +   -61,-1
                      
                               and +
                                     -  =  + -61,-1
                                              
                                                     (Univariate  vs univariate  )
     (Diebold Mariano West test)

The rest of the tests involve nested model comparisons, we applied the Clark West statistics. The
significance stars are based on one-sided tests. A positive statistic indicates the larger model is
better in Clark West sense.
ii) +    -  =    +    -61,-1
                       
                              +  -61,-1
                                  
                                         and +  -  =     + -61,-1
                                                            
                                                                    (Bivariate v.s. univariate
      ) (Clark West test)
iii) +   -  =    +    -61,-1
                       
                              +  -61,-1
                                  
                                         and +  -  =     + -61,-1
                                                             
                                                                    (Bivariate v.s. univariate
      ) (Clark West test)
iv) +    -  =    +    -61,-1
                       
                              and +  -  = 0 (Univariate  v.s. random walk model (r.w.) (Clark
     West test)
v) +     -  =    +    -61,-1
                       
                              and +  -  = 0 (Univariate  v.s. random walk model (r.w.)) (Clark
     West test)


The Clark West statistics is computed based on the procedure described in Table 2:


Table 9:
Table 9 does the same regression as Table 8, but summarizes the count of all 9 countries.
We count the countries below 5% significant level. The inference is based on usual t-statistics of
the constant term. We use Newey West for accounting for serial correlation in the Clark West test.



                                                 66
Table 10
The same inference as Table 2, but replacing the RHS variable with qt .

Table 11
Table 11 uses the same inference as in Table 8, but treats qt as a new "macro variable"


Table 12:
The regression is out of sample rolling regression, rolling window is 5 year,
st + h - st =  + t -61,t -1 X t + et

We reported the adjusted R 2 of the simple average exchange rate case.
Table 13
The same inference as Table 12, but replacing the RHS variable with qt .


Tables 14-16 are simulated data regressions
The simulation procedures are described in Appendix 2: Simulation Methods.


Table 14
The regression is in sample: st + h - st =  +  st + et

We report the beta, t statistics and adjusted R2.
Single country
The data are simulated with no drift
Parameters are estimated by OLS, the standard errors and t statistics are based on Newey-West
standard errors with h-1 lags in parentheses.
Restricted Panel
The panel are simulated with no drift, but simulated with cross country covariance matrix
We regress restricting the slope coefficients to be the same. Parameters are estimated by OLS,
the standard errors are Driscoll Kraay (1998) standard errors with h-1 lags in parentheses.


Table 15
The regression is out of sample: st + h - st =  + t -61,t -1st + et vs random walk

Single country



                                                    67
Parameters are estimated by OLS, the standard errors are Newey West standard errors with h-1
lags in parentheses.
Restricted Panel
We regress restricting the beta coefficient to be the same. Parameters are estimated by OLS, the
standard errors are Driscoll Kraay (1998) standard errors with h-1 lags in parentheses.
Then we calculate the Clark West statistics based on the prediction of this regression.


The test statistics are calculated as in Table 2.


Table 16
Table 16 has the same regression as table 15. We report the adjusted R 2 from the data (Actual
data column) and compare with the simulation.


Table 17
We first estimate two equations from the actual data:
st - st -1 = u1,t

GZ t =  + 1GZ t -1 +  2GZ t - 2 + 1st -1 +  2 st - 2 + u2,t

We correct for the bias using Kilian (1998) method. We compute the empirically estimated
coefficients ( ^, ^ ,^ and ^ ) and variance covariance matrix of the error terms. We use these
                1  2  1     2


parameter estimates to simulate the series st and GZ t with empirical sample size (T) 5000 times

using a Monte Carlo method. Within each simulation k, we re-estimate 1 ,  2 , 1 and  2 . Call it

1,k ,  2,k , 1,k and  2,k . We then take average of these estimates across simulation, i.e.
       5000

               1, k
1 =    k =1
                      . Our empirical estimates of the bias are 1 - ^ , -^ , -^ , -^ . Finally, the
                                                                     1 2  2 1  1 2  2
        5000
bias          adjusted      estimates    are      1  ^ - [ - ^ ],   ^ - [ - ^ ] ,  =  - [ - ^ ],
                                                      1   1   1   2  2   2   2    1  1   1   1


 2 =  2 - [ 2 - ^ ].
                 2


We use st - st -1 = e1,t and GZt =  + 1GZt -1 + 2GZt -2 + 1st -1 +  2 st -2 + e2,t to generate the

artificial data for the regression of interest: st + h - st =  + 1GZt + et

                                                         68
