                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  ADDRESSING PARTIAL IDENTIFICATION IN CLIMATE MODELING AND POLICY
                              ANALYSIS

                                      Charles F. Manski
                                       Alan H. Sanstad
                                      Stephen J. DeCanio

                                      Working Paper 28449
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28449


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   February 2021




Dr. Sanstad's work was partially supported by the National Science Foundation through the
Center for Robust Decision-Making on Climate and Energy Policy at the University of Chicago.
We would like to thank the research team of Professor Elizabeth Moyer, Department of
Geosciences, University of Chicago, for providing CMIP5 model output, and Valentyn Litvin,
Department of Economics, Northwestern University, for his technical review. We have benefitted
greatly from the comments of Robert Pindyck and Robert Rosner. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Charles F. Manski, Alan H. Sanstad, and Stephen J. DeCanio. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Addressing Partial Identification in Climate Modeling and Policy Analysis
Charles F. Manski, Alan H. Sanstad, and Stephen J. DeCanio
NBER Working Paper No. 28449
February 2021
JEL No. D81,Q54,Q58

                                         ABSTRACT

Numerical simulations of the global climate system provide inputs to integrated assessment
modeling for estimating the impacts of greenhouse gas mitigation and other policies to address
global climate change. While essential tools for this purpose, computational climate models are
subject to considerable uncertainty, including inter-model "structural" uncertainty. Structural
uncertainty analysis has emphasized simple or weighted averaging of the outputs of multi-model
ensembles, sometimes with subjective Bayesian assignment of probabilities across models.
However, choosing appropriate weights is problematic. To use climate simulations in integrated
assessment, we propose instead framing climate model uncertainty as a problem of partial
identification, or "deep" uncertainty. This terminology refers to situations in which the
underlying mechanisms, dynamics, or laws governing a system are not completely known and
cannot be credibly modeled definitively even in the absence of data limitations in a statistical
sense. We propose the min-max regret (MMR) decision criterion to account for deep climate
uncertainty in integrated assessment without weighting climate model forecasts. We develop a
theoretical framework for cost-benefit analysis of climate policy based on MMR, and apply it
computationally with a simple integrated assessment model. We suggest avenues for further
research.

Charles F. Manski                              Stephen J. DeCanio
Department of Economics                        Department of Economics (emeritus)
Northwestern University                        University of California at Santa Barbara
2211 Campus Drive                              stephen.decanio@gmail.com
Evanston, IL 60208-2600
and NBER
cfmanski@northwestern.edu

Alan H. Sanstad
1849 Shattuck Avenue Apt.
407
Berkeley, CA 94709
USA
alansanstad@gmail.com
1. Introduction



     Computational modeling of the global climate system provides a foundation for estimating the

effects of greenhouse gas (GHG) mitigation and other policies on global climate change. Climate models

project the future path of the climate as a function of trajectories of anthropogenic GHG emissions and

other inputs. *They are used to predict the climatic and other impacts of altering emission trajectories by

means of various GHG reduction policies, which in turn supports analysis of how to address the climate

change problem.

     Climate models aim to represent the immensely complicated climate system in a tractable manner.

Scientific understanding of the climate, as developed over decades of research by many scholars around

the world, is at this point remarkable in its scope and depth. It remains, however, incomplete, and

continues to evolve. Hence, the construction and use of climate models entail choices by modelers

regarding model elements that are not fully specified by physical theory or exactly determined by

empirical evidence. Over time, different sets of choices have yielded different climate models

     Researchers have sought to understand and quantify the uncertainties in climate models and the

predictions that they yield. One primary approach is multi-model ensemble (MME) analysis of inter-

model structural choices (1). This paper offers a perspective on the uncertainties MME analysis seeks to

address, from the vantage point of econometrics, decision theory, and energy policy analysis. We frame

climate model uncertainty as a problem of partial identification, or "deep uncertainty." This terminology

refers to situations in which the underlying mechanisms governing a system are not completely known

and cannot be credibly modeled definitively even in the absence of data limitations in a statistical sense.



*
  This paper focuses on coupled atmospheric, ocean, and land-surface models; we follow the custom of using the
term "climate model" to refer to these coupled systems.


                                                        1
     The predictions yielded by a partially identified model of a system are set-valued rather than exact or

probabilistic. Thus, partial identification generates what is referred to in various disciplines as

"ambiguity," "model uncertainty," "deep uncertainty," or "epistemic uncertainty." Study of partial

identification has origins mainly in econometrics, which applies statistical methods to study economic

phenomena. In this field, partial identification refers to circumstances in which the probability distribution

governing a stochastic system is not completely known theoretically and its unknown aspects cannot be

fully learned empirically even in the absence of data limitations in the sense of statistical imprecision. In

the limit case where these unknown aspects can be fully learned empirically given sufficient data, the

probability distribution is said to be point identified or simply identified.

     The fundamental mathematical and physical theory underlying computational climate modeling is

not based on probability distributions, but rather comprises a set of deterministic nonlinear partial

differential equations describing large-scale atmospheric dynamics. However, due to incomplete

knowledge of other physical processes and differences in ways to represent them numerically, multiple

climate models have been developed around the world and are currently in use, each reflecting different

but credible choices in model design and implementation. Existing models yield different projections of

the global climate even with broadly-harmonized input assumptions. Put differently, neither a

"consensus" climate model nor quantitative climate projections can be definitively specified with current

knowledge. These inter-model differences are referred to as reflecting "structural" uncertainty. We show

how this can be framed in terms of partial identification or deep uncertainty.

     This paper applies partial-identification thinking to climate modeling in two ways. First, we argue on

decision-theoretic grounds against the prevalent practice in climate modeling of computing simple or

weighted averages of predictions across models considered in MME analysis. Computation of simple

averages of predictions assumes that equal weight should be given to each model, an assumption lacking

a compelling foundation (2). But determining appropriate weights is challenging, for reasons including

the weak link between metrics of model validity and predictive skill (1). Some researchers have attempted

to motivate computation of weighted averages as an exercise in Bayesian judgment, the weights

                                                       2
expressing subjective probabilities that particular models represent truth (3). However, it may be difficult

to judge the credibility of the subjective probability distribution used. Rather than compute averages of, or

assigning probability distributions to, predictions across models, partial identification analysis would

present the set of predictions yielded by model ensembles as the starting point for decision-making,

foregoing an attempt to reduce the set to a point through averaging.

     Second, we use classical ideas in decision theory to show how these ensemble outputs can be applied

directly in policy applications of climate modeling, specifically the min-max (4) and min-max regret (5)

decision rules. In decision problems in general, min-max reflects the principle of preparing for the worst

case. In the climate context, it would entail making policy decisions, such as carbon abatement levels,

using the most "pessimistic" climate model in an ensemble ­ the one projecting the highest temperature

changes. Min-max regret (MMR) uses multi-model information in a more nuanced way. If a climate

policy maker selects one model from an ensemble and chooses, say, an emissions abatement path that is

optimal for that model according to some economic metric, the economic penalty, or regret, is the excess

cost of that abatement path if a different model is actually the correct one. That is, regret measures the

potential sub-optimality of policies relative to climate models. The MMR rule is to choose a policy that

minimizes the maximum regret, or largest degree of sub-optimality, across the climate model ensemble. 

        MMR has been applied in several policy areas, including criminal justice (6) and public health

(7). It has been used in computational modeling of energy and climate policy in a number of studies (8-

12). (Cai (13) reviews this research). The present paper complements this previous work in several ways.

The paper is aimed in part at climate modelers and other researchers who are non-specialists in economics

but interested in the policy applications of climate modeling. Our approach is primarily conceptual rather

than computational. We emphasize the partial identification paradigm and its suitability for framing

structural uncertainty in climate models. We provide a theoretical discussion of MMR for climate policy,

to highlight the basic idea in non-computational form. We then present a deliberately simple numerical


 The other primary approach to studying climate model uncertainty is Perturbed Physics Ensemble (PPE) analysis
of parametric uncertainty. Mutatis mutandis, the concepts and methods discussed in this paper can also be applied to
understanding PPEs from a decision perspective.

                                                         3
integrated assessment example of MMR applied to carbon abatement policy, in order to illustrate the

method in a transparent way.

     In what follows, Section 2 discusses the theory of partial identification as developed in econometrics

and describes how climate model uncertainties can be framed in this way. Section 3 discusses technical

aspects of structural uncertainties in climate modeling as a partial identification problem. Section 4 turns

to decision-making under partial identification, providing background and discussing the min-max and

min-max regret decision rules. Section 5 develops a numerical example illustrating their application to the

problem of choosing dynamic carbon abatement policies that optimally balance abatement costs and

climate economic damages. The paper ends with a summary and concluding remarks.



2. Partial Identification in Econometrics and Climate Modeling

     Econometrics is the term used by economists to describe study of the logic of empirical inference.

Whatever the field of science may be, the logic of empirical inference is summarized by the relationship:

assumptions + data  conclusions. Data alone do not suffice to draw useful conclusions. Inference

requires assumptions that relate the data to a question of interest. Holding fixed the available data, a

fundamental difficulty of empirical research is deciding what assumptions to maintain.



2.1. Identification and Statistical Inference

        Economists and many other researchers use sample data to learn about theoretically unknown

aspects of the mechanisms that govern stochastic systems. Empirical research confronts problems of

statistical imprecision and identification problems. Statistical theory characterizes the inferences that can

be drawn by observing a finite sample of outcomes generated by a system. Identification analysis studies

inferential difficulties that persist even when sample size grows without bound. The distinction between

identification and statistical inference, first formalized by Koopmans (14), has long been central to the

field of econometrics.



                                                     4
        A simple example of statistical imprecision occurs when one observes a random sample of

outcomes generated by a stationary system and uses this sample average to estimate the mean outcome

that the system produces. Statisticians typically measure imprecision of the estimate by its variance,

which decreases to zero as sample size increases. The famous "Laws of Large Numbers" imply that

imprecision vanishes as sample size increases to infinity.

        Identification problems encompass the spectrum of issues that are sometimes called non-sampling

errors or data-quality problems. These issues cannot be resolved by amassing so-called "big data." They

may be mitigated by collecting better data, but not by merely collecting more data.

        A simple example of an identification problem is generated by measurement errors. Suppose that

a stationary system generates a random sample of outcomes, but one observes these outcomes with error.

Increasing sample size adds new observations, but it also yields further measurement errors. If one has

incomplete knowledge of the process creating measurement errors and cannot collect better data that are

error-free, one cannot precisely learn the system mean outcome as sample size increases to infinity.



2.2. Point and Partial Identification

     For most of the twentieth century, econometricians studying inference commonly thought of

identification as a binary event ­ a parameter of a model is either point-identified or it is not. Empirical

researchers combined available data with assumptions that yield point identification and they reported

point estimates of model parameters. Economists recognized that point identification often requires strong

assumptions that are difficult to motivate, but they saw no other way to perform inference.

     Yet there is enormous scope for fruitful inference using weaker and more credible assumptions that

partially identify objects of interest. A parameter in a probabilistic model is partially identified if the

sampling process and maintained assumptions reveal that the object lies in a set, called the identification

region or identified set, that is smaller than the logical range of possibilities but larger than a single point.

Sample estimates of partially identified objects generically are set-valued.



                                                       5
    To illustrate, suppose economic theory posits that there are positive parameters a, b, and c such that

Y = ( a  c )  X + b +  . Given a random sample of observations of pairs ( X , Y ) , the product d= a  c

can be estimated by the method of least squares if it is known that  has mean zero conditional on X.

Statistical imprecision regarding d vanishes as sample size increases. However, absent additional

assumptions, all that can be inferred empirically about a and c is that they lie in the set of all pairs of

positive real numbers such that a  c =d . That is, these parameters are partially identified, with the

identification region defined by this identity.

     Part of the modern literature on partial identification in econometrics focuses on the identification

problems generated by imperfect data quality, including measurement error and missing data. Part focuses

on identification of structural econometric models used to describe human behavior and interactions.

Manski (15, 16), Tamer (17), and Molinari (18) provide in-depth reviews of the literature at different

technical levels and with different emphases. Section 1 in the Supporting Information (SI) provides a brief

history and some key references.

     Whatever the specific subject under study, a common theme runs through the literature. One first

asks what available data combined with relatively weak and highly credible assumptions reveal about the

population of interest. One then studies the identifying power of stronger assumptions that still aim to

retain acceptable credibility, keeping in mind a principle called (ref. 15, p. 1):



     The Law of Decreasing Credibility: The credibility of inference decreases with the strength of
     the assumptions maintained.



This principle implies that researchers face a dilemma as they decide what assumptions to maintain:

Stronger assumptions yield inferences that may be more powerful but less credible.

     This approach to inference makes clear the conclusions one can draw in empirical research without

imposing untenable assumptions. It establishes a domain of consensus among researchers who may hold

disparate beliefs about what assumptions are appropriate. Partial identification analysis also makes plain

                                                       6
the limits to credible inference. When identification regions turn out to be large, researchers should face

up to the fact that the available data and acceptable assumptions do not support inferences as tight as they

might like to achieve.



2.3. Partial Identification of Climate Models

     One might think that econometrics and climate modeling are so different that econometric

methodology would have little if any application to climate modeling. In this sub-section we explain why

the ideas of partial identification do, in fact, apply to climate models and can serve to frame and interpret

their uncertainties.

     First, research in both domains faces broadly similar identification problems due to data

imperfections. Climate data that might have been available in principle may have measurement errors or

be missing in practice, especially data documenting climate dynamics prior to the existence of modern

instrumentation. Moreover, climate data in counterfactual settings is unavailable in principle. We cannot

observe what climate change would have occurred over the past century if the trajectory of anthropogenic

GHG emissions had differed from its actual path.

     Second, research in both domains faces the problem of modeling a complex system. The climate

system comprises many different physical processes and mechanisms occurring at a range of spatial and

temporal scales. Designing and implementing a climate model requires many choices regarding the

underlying architecture, the methods of numerical approximation, solution technique, which physical

processes to include as model components, and how to represent these processes (19). Climate model

structural uncertainty arises from incomplete scientific understanding of physical phenomena, limitations

of quality and quantity of empirical data available to fit models, and the need to make approximations for

computational tractability.

     With respect to underlying scientific principles, all general circulation models of the climate are

based on a set of five deterministic equations governing atmospheric variables including temperature,

pressure, humidity, and wind flow (20). These so-called "primitive equations" instantiate first-principle

                                                     7
laws of physics; they include partial differential equations describing a form of the classical conservation

laws of momentum, mass, and energy.

     However, the highly complex and nonlinear nature of the climate system makes it inevitable that the

computational models used to represent it are subject to a degree of irreducible imprecision (21).

Although the basic set of primitive equations is common across models in a theoretical sense, the exact

way in which the equations are rendered in a particular model is subject to numerous practical choices of

implementation, including choice of coordinate system, discretization approach, and numerical solutions.

In addition, climate models differ in the details of which physical processes are selected for inclusion ­

i.e., the overall strategy used to simplify the climate into a tractable form for modeling ­ and how they are

represented. The multiplicity of models and inter-model variations of the quantitative outputs they

generate are generally referred to as reflecting "structural" uncertainty (22, 23, 24, 25).

     It is important to note that this is not an exhaustive description of uncertainty in climate modeling,

nor would it be if parametric uncertainty were also taken into account. The factors just discussed are

"known unknowns" ­ they have been explicitly determined to be sources of uncertainty. By contrast,

"unknown unknowns" are also presumptively present ­ it cannot be assumed that the models encompass

all physical processes affecting the climate to an extent that is policy relevant.

     To summarize, the present state of science, modeling methods, and empirical knowledge are not such

that the climate system can be uniquely represented in mathematical or computational form. Nor can

climate dynamics be predicted deterministically or stochastically ­ one can only predict a range of

possible trajectories (26). Thus, we see an underlying correspondence between econometric and climate

models with respect to structural uncertainty, making the concept of partial identification applicable to

climate modeling.

     In the following sections we elaborate on this perspective and show how it can be applied to climate

change-related policy decision-making.




                                                       8
3. Partial identification and multi-model ensemble analysis

     At the beginning of the paper we introduced the terminology of climate model "ensembles." It is

difficult to vary a given model's components such as sub-grid process representations (much less

numerical integration schemes) to assess the effects of variations in structural components on the model's

performance. Thus, to quantify and analyze structural uncertainty, sets of models are run to study how the

different structural choices across models affect the outputs across the set. This is "multi-model ensemble

(MME)" analysis, which we discuss next.



     3.1. MMEs background

     MMEs are based on model intercomparison projects in which the characteristics and performance of

individual and multiple models are analyzed. First conducted in the 1980s (27), such projects have since

proliferated and greatly increased in scope and detail. Most MME analyses have been generated in the

Coupled Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP), which began in the 1990s and has thus far completed

five studies (28, 29). These studies examine the individual and collective ability of models to simulate the

current and historical climate, analyze the factors driving model behavior and inter-model differences,

and provide a means of assessing changes in model performance over time (30).

     The performance of climate models in simulating present and past climate has been gauged by

various metrics based on the mean squared error of differences between model outputs, or "fields," and

their observed counterparts, such as global mean temperature and precipitation (31). Comparison of

model performance based on such metrics has been conducted using CMIP MMEs of historical

simulations (32).

     The CMIP and other intercomparison projects have been part of a substantial international research

effort to develop and improve the models. Advances in computational hardware and software have also

been critical. The models have been refined and improved in a number of ways, including the ability to

simulate key aspects of the historical climate.



                                                     9
     Nevertheless, there continue to be shortcomings in the models' accuracy and precision (1). There are

non-trivial biases and uncertainties in particular fields across models that have persisted through

development cycles (33, 34, 35). As noted previously, structural uncertainty arises from the fact that

theory and evidence do not completely constrain design and implementation choices such as which sub-

grid processes to include, at what levels of detail. When assessing model performance in historical

simulations, there are multiple model fields for which performance metrics can be defined and quantified,

and modelers have not been able to develop a single metric that effectively captures all the dimensions of

interest (24). Because the relative accuracies of different models can depend on which field is measured,

it has not proven possible to unambiguously rank models with respect to performance or to identify a

"best" model using historical climate information (31). The extent of structural uncertainty can be gauged

by the fact that there are currently several dozen different modeling groups around the world, each

running one or more versions of its own model (36).

     Abramowitz et al. (37) take the view that different models can be thought of as representing different

"working hypotheses" about how to best represent the details of the structure and dynamics of the

climate. Parker (26) characterizes the climate modeling community's acceptance of multiple, co-existing

models as "model pluralism," with different models seen as complementary. In the language of the

present paper, the climate models are only partially identified.



3.2. MME projections of future climate

     Model pluralism has generally been maintained in MME studies of the future climate, in that the sets

of models used in specific studies have usually been determined simply by which modeling teams choose

to participate, a procedure Knutti (2) describes as "model democracy." That available models are not

assessed or screened for inclusion essentially reflects the unavailability of reliable, agreed-upon criteria

for doing so: If ab initio structural uncertainty (partial identification) cannot be resolved through standard

evaluation and performance intercomparison, there are no obvious grounds to omit particular models from

climate projection studies. Nevertheless, some modelers and climate scientists believe that there are

                                                     10
important shortcomings in model democracy for projective MME analysis (2). Developing better

approaches has been the focus of considerable research on narrowing model selection criteria and/or

finding ways of assessing candidate models according to some informational criterion.

     Most of this work is closely tied to, or part of, a broader long-term effort to address uncertainty in

MMEs of future climate. A number of methods have been developed and applied to MME uncertainty

quantification and analysis, virtually all of which involve combining MME outputs into single projected

climate trajectories. There appear to be two primary reasons that this form of model combination

predominates: Simple averaging across models can improve accuracy relative to individual models in

historical simulations (38), and modelers perceive policy-makers as requiring single projections (as

functions of individual GHG emissions scenarios) for use in decision-making (26).

     Simple averaging reflects model democracy. Weighted averaging is sometimes performed when it is

felt that models can be ranked with respect to relative accuracy in specific fields in historical simulations

(even if not overall) (39). Thus, models may be weighted along particular dimensions of policy interest,

and the results then averaged.

     Expanding on this approach, numerous studies have quantified MME uncertainty and combined

model projections by creating multi-model probability distributions across predictions of key variables

such as global temperature, and by using them to compute mean trajectories. Bayesian techniques are one

approach to doing this ­ e.g., Smith et al. (3) and Sexton et al. (40) ­ building in particular on the work of

Tebaldi et al. (41, 42).

     As this type of work has proceeded, climate modelers and scientists and others have recognized

some persistent methodological problems in combining model projections (43, 1). Regarding the finding

that model averages can improve upon the predictions of individual models, Manski (44, 45) has shown

that this may be the consequence of a mathematical relationship rather than an empirical result. Also,




 Specifically, Jensen's Inequality implies that when mean square error or another convex loss function is used to
measure predictive accuracy, the accuracy of a simple or weighted mean prediction is algebraically better than the
corresponding average accuracy of individual model predictions.

                                                         11
model performance with respect to specific fields in historical data has not been demonstrated to imply

skill in predicting climate (46), weakening the case for this approach to weighting projections.

     Other issues have to do with how relationships among the models, and the selection of model

ensemble subsets from the entire set of extant models, affect the informational content and quality of the

ensemble results. These topics have been framed in terms of the degrees or levels of model

"independence" in ensembles, although the formal meaning of "independence" has not been clear. In

particular, one should be wary of conceptualizing independence in statistical terms, in the absence of a

probabilistic theory of model development. As noted above, ensembles are typically assembled by

convenience, in the sense that they are determined by the availability and interests of modelers. Thus, one

cannot reasonably assert that any given ensemble is a random sample drawn from a population of

potential models. Nor can one reasonably assert that any given ensemble adequately expresses the full

range of structural uncertainty in model projections (24). Indeed, it is not known how well the world's

complete set of existing climate models expresses the full range of uncertainty.

     While it is inappropriate to conceptualize model independence in statistical terms, there may be good

reason to think non-statistically about dependence across models. Modeling teams communicate with one

another and they may, hence, influence the modeling choices that they collectively make. In fact, some

models share parts of their codes (47).

     As discussed by Sanderson (1), researchers are actively working on ways to address these problems.

However, combining climate model ensemble outputs into single projected trajectories of the future

global climate remains a challenging and unresolved problem. In the following sections we discuss how

viewing model structural uncertainty in terms of partial identification facilitates an alternative approach to

using MME information in climate policy and decision-making.




                                                     12
4. Climate policy under partial identification: Cost-benefit analysis with the min-max and
    min-max regret decision rules

     The issues with standard approaches to defining and quantifying uncertainties in climate modeling

that we have reviewed do not obviate the fact modeling is essential for developing policies to address the

risks of global climate change. What is clearly the case, however, is that addressing uncertainties remains

an open, and challenging, problem. Parker (48) observed that a primary rationale for using weighting or

probability analysis to combine climate model outputs into single time paths of important variables

appears to be modelers' perception that policy makers require uncertainty to be represented in this form to

make decisions. In this section we show that, in fact, this is not the case, and that a partial identification

framing of climate modeling opens the way to alternative methods for dealing with uncertainties in

decision-making. We might say that these methods allow for single decisions to be made without needing

single inputs from the models.

     Our departure point is climate model ensemble analysis, so the models discussed in the following

sections express partial identification in terms of a discrete set of climate models. As noted earlier, our

analysis does not encompass the full uncertainty inherent in numerical climate simulation. By its very

nature decision analysis must explicitly specify possible "states of nature," which list only known

unknowns. Our goal is to advance understanding within that paradigm.



4.1. Economic uncertainty in integrated assessment modeling

     Although not our focus in this paper, for the sake of context we begin with a brief discussion of

uncertainty in the economic elements of quantitative climate policy analysis, which as a rule uses

computational energy-economic or integrated assessment (IA) models. (This subject is discussed by

Sanstad in (49)). These are, characteristically, long-run (century-scale or more) models of the global

economy including the energy system and its role in economic production, and are applied to estimating

the costs of policy-induced GHG emissions reductions. IA models incorporate reduced-form

representations of the climate (or more generally, the carbon cycle) and its links to the economy,


                                                     13
particularly the climatic effects of anthropogenic GHG emissions and in turn their effects on the

economy.

        The development of integrated assessment models has enabled economic analysis of how the global

climate and social systems interact with one another, which has played a critical role in the development

of policies to reduce GHG emissions (50). IA models are subject to uncertainty not just in their

representation of the climate but also in their economic assumptions (50). Examples arise in highly-

aggregated IA models in which the direct economic costs of climate change and those of GHC abatement

are both represented explicitly, so that trade-offs between emissions reduction and reduced climate

change-induced economic losses can be assessed. The paradigmatic example is Nordhaus's DICE

(Dynamic Integrated Climate Economy) model, the most influential IA model of the last several decades

(51).

        In DICE and models based on it, the economic losses from climate change are represented in terms

of "damage functions" that give the decreases in world-wide output resulting from increases in mean

global temperature, as a proportional reduction or in dollar terms. It is recognized that these functions

have uncertain theoretical and empirical grounding (52). §

        Another feature of these models is dynamic optimization by a representative decision maker, which

entails discounting to quantify the present value of future economic costs and benefits. The appropriate

definition and magnitude of the discount rate is a long-standing issue in climate change economics and

integrated assessment modeling (56 - 58). Controversy persists in part due to the fact that this is not only

an empirical question but also a matter of theory and of ethics in regard to intergenerational equity (59).

        In addition to these issues, integrated assessment model estimates of the long-run costs of large-

scale GHG emissions abatement vary considerably, by some measures up to an order of magnitude (60).



§
  Some of this work has focused on improving aggregate damage functions with respect to both aggregate-level
evidence and functional forms (53). Moreover, it is also the case that aggregation per se is a major source of this
type of uncertainty, and increasing attention is being paid to empirical, statistical estimation of spatially and
sectorally disaggregated climate damages (54, 55).


                                                        14
As evidenced by comparing these more recent estimates with examples from the 1990s (61), this

uncertainty has persisted over several decades of model development

      While improving estimates of the economic impacts of climate change is an active area of research,

uncertainty persists. Damage functions in aggregate models continue to be debated, and model-based

abatement cost estimates continue to proliferate but are not converging. Because our focus is partial

identification of climate models and its implications for decision-making, this paper limits formal analysis

of economic uncertainties to sensitivity analysis with respect to the exogenous economic parameters

governing abatement and damage costs. However, our decision framework can be readily applied to

economic uncertainty.



4.2. A simple theoretical framework

    In what follows, we consider climate policy from a cost-benefit perspective in the context of partial

identification of climate models, in which emissions abatement policy is based on comparing the costs of

reducing GHG emissions with the resulting benefit in terms of avoided climate change damages. The key

consideration is that the decision-maker's knowledge of these benefits is subject to uncertainty arising

from the partial identification. We first develop an abstract theoretical framework and then, in the

following section, implement it quantitatively using a simple integrated assessment model.
                                                                                                    
    Let  represent the state at time      t   of a baseline energy-economic scenario, and let   be the

corresponding baseline GHG emissions. Let  be GHG abatement actions at time            t   under some climate

                                                                                    
policy, measured in the same units as emissions, let  ( ) be their cost, and   be the resulting net

                                                                                                 
emissions. In what follows, we will slightly abuse terminology by also referring to  and   as "paths"

or "trajectories." We assume that abatement paths are chosen from some space of feasible paths.

    Emissions paths are used as inputs to a climate model M. We focus on the global mean temperatures

                                                          (       )
projected by M as a function of these paths. Thus, let T EtAt , M be the global mean temperature at time




                                                     15
                                         
t   determined by the GHG trajectory   when it is simulated in the climate model M. Then a damage

                                                       (
function ­ as discussed above ­ can be written as D T ( EtAt , M ) .  )

4.2.1. Cost-benefit analysis

4.2.1.1. The min-max decision rule

      For an abatement path  and climate model M, denote the associated total (abatement plus

                                                             
damages) cost at time t as ( , )   ( ) + (  , ). A policy-maker seeks to minimize the

present value of the cumulative cost over a planning horizon which, as is customary in the climate

economics literature, we assume to be infinite. The cost-benefit climate policy problem given a particular

climate model M is

                                                 
                                          min  C ( At , M ) e - t dt ,                                 (1)
                                            At   0


where  is a discount rate. In this approach, the optimal  is chosen with commitment at time zero ­

that is, it is not updated over time as new climate or cost information is obtained. As stated, (1) is a

deterministic optimization problem that, under certain technical assumptions regarding the feasible

abatement path space and the cost and damage functions, has a unique solution. We will assume that such

conditions hold for the series of problems we describe.

      Reflecting the discussion in Section 3, let M = {1 , ... ,  } be a model ensemble. We amend the

                                                                              
damage and cost function notations to ( ,  )   ( ) + (  ,  ,  = 1, ... , . The

hypothetical policy-maker now faces the problem of minimizing total cost while taking account of the

model uncertainty. One way of approaching this problem is to assign a probability distribution or some

other weighting scheme to M and minimize the expected cost. However, this strategy is unsatisfactory if

one lacks a credible basis for assigning a distribution or weights.

      Under a partial identification perspective, one alternative way to proceed is to apply the min-max

decision rule, which can be characterized colloquially as "preparing for the worst." Here, the "worst" is


                                                      16
the model  that results in the highest total abatement plus damage costs. Given an abatement path 

                                    
and associated emissions path   the most costly outcome will correspond to the model that solves the

problem

                                                           
                                             max  C ( At , M i ) e - t dt.                                              (2)
                                                  i        0


This maximum cost will vary across possible abatement paths, and the min-max decision is to select the

path that solves

                                                               
                                            min max  C ( At , M i ) e - t dt.                                           (3)
                                             At        i       0


That is, the decision rule chooses the abatement policy that minimizes the total cost of abatement and

damages under the most pessimistic assumption regarding the climate model.



4.2.1.2. The min-max regret decision rule

     Policies chosen using the min-max criterion are conservative by design. An alternative decision rule

that is applicable under conditions of partial identification but is less conservative is called min-max

regret, which Manski and Tetenov (62) characterizes as seeking uniformly near-optimal solutions to

decision    problems.     For        each         model                          in   the   ensemble    = {1 , ... ,  } let

                                
( ,  )   ( ) + (  ,  ) be the associated time t cost with abatement and emissions paths 

                            
and   respectively. Let At ; M i be the abatement path that solves the problem

                                                           
                                             min  C ( At , M i ) e - t dt ,                                             (4)
                                                  At       0




and  ; ,   be the resulting minimum cost:



                                       (                   )
                                                                             
                                   C  At;M i , M i  min  C ( At , M i ) e - t dt.                                       (5)
                                                                   At        0




                                                                        17
(Note the change in notation: Previously, C ( At , M i ) was total cost at time t; now, C
                                                                                                        
                                                                                                           (A  
                                                                                                               t ;M i       )
                                                                                                                        , M i is

total discounted cost, i.e., an integral.) Now consider any other feasible trajectory  and its cost ­ not

                                                                              
                                                                              C ( A , M ) e dt.
                                                                                                  - t
necessarily optimal ­ over the entire time horizon with  ,                           t        i                The regret
                                                                             0


R ( At , M i ) associated with  when climate model  is used in determining damages is the difference

between its cost and the cost of the optimal policy associated with  :




                                                                         (           )
                                             
                            R ( At , M i )   C ( At , M i ) e- t dt - C  At;M i , M i .                                      (6)
                                            0



The regret is non-negative because C  ( At; M i , M i ) is the minimum cost with  . Regret measures the

sub-optimality of  when temperature is determined by  . That is, it is the excess cost resulting from

this abatement path relative to the minimal cost associated with this model.

    To apply the min-max regret rule, a decision-maker first considers each feasible abatement path 

and finds the model version that maximizes regret as defined in Equation (6), solving the problem


                                                                                 (            )
                                                       
             max R ( At , M i ) max  C ( At , M i ) e - t dt - C  At;M i , M i .
             =                                                                                                               (7)
                       Mi                    Mi    0




The min-max regret solution is then to find  to solve the problem


                                                                                          (                )
                                                                
            min max R ( At , M i ) min max  C ( At , M i ) e - t dt - C  At;M i , M i .
            =                                                                                                                (8)
                      At    Mi                    At      Mi    0


      This discussion highlights the fact that, in any application, MMR requires an explicit criterion to

measure the differences in social welfare between optimal and sub-optimal outcomes. For example,

applying the technique to analyze policies that entail exogenously-set "caps" on GHG emissions would

necessitate measurement of the social cost of exceeding those caps.


5. A numerical example



                                                           18
        In this section we describe a computational implementation of the min-max regret (MMR)

framework described above. We present a simple integrated assessment model defining an optimal

control problem that formalizes the dynamic economic trade-off between emissions abatement and

reduced damages from emissions-caused temperature increases. We also contrast the results of applying

the MMR criterion with those obtained with the min-max decision rule. **

5.1. A simple integrated assessment model

5.1.1. Emissions and temperature

        In the previous section we represented the link between carbon emissions, in the form of a trajectory
     
  , and projected global mean temperature  , as a functional relationship based on a climate model M:

          (       )    
Tt  T EtAt , M , where   are net emissions at time t when baseline emissions  are reduced by

abatement  , and are used to project temperature using M. For quantitative analysis, we now simplify

this representation by adapting the approach of Matthews et al. (64) to summarize the long-term

relationship between aggregate carbon emissions and global mean temperature. Using a combination of

modeling and observational data analysis, these researchers showed that the ratio of temperature increase

to cumulative emissions, the "carbon-climate response (CCR)," is roughly constant over decades up to

several centuries. We use the CCR to capture the influence of emissions on temperature. (This approach is

further discussed in NAS (65) and Cline (66).
                                                                                                              
        Let   be cumulative emissions between an initial time 0 and time t given a net emissions path  

                                                        t
                                                 EtAt =  EsAs ds.                                             (9)
                                                        0




**
  Our model is similar to that of Goulder and Mathai (63), which was adapted to min-max regret analysis of carbon
abatement policy by Cai and Sanstad (11). Rezai and van der Ploeg (12) developed a more complex integrated
assessment model and applied it to max-min and min-max regret analysis of climate analysis under uncertainty,
using temperature projections from several different IA models.

                                                       19
Let m(M) be the CCR associated with a climate model M. Then the Matthews et al. approximation of
                                                                     
global mean temperature projected by M when it is driven by   is


                                           (
                                    Tt = T EtAt , M    )
                                                   t
                                                                                                       (10)
                         = m
                           = ( M )  EsAs ds m ( M ) EtAt .
                                                   0



    Slightly amending our notation from the previous section, we will use the parameter m to

characterize the models being compared. Different models might in principle have the same m, but this is

not the case for the six we examine here. Thus, we can write the model-projected temperature as

       (       )
Tt = T EtAt , m .



5.1.2. Costs and damages

    We assume that the functions for abatement cost and climate damage at time t are quadratic:

                                     1
                           C ( At ) =  At 2
                                     2
                                                                                                       (11)
                           D (Tt ) =
                                     1
                                               (1
                                                           )
                                              2
                           =            mEtAt      m 2 (EtAt ) 2 .
                                     2          2

The quadratic is a convenient and tractable functional form; in the present case, it enables us to solve our

optimization model in closed form (see below). The shape of the damage function has been controversial

in climate economics. Nordhaus and Moffat (53) conducted a comprehensive survey of empirical damage

estimates in the literature and conducted their own estimations; their preferred specification was

quadratic.

      =
      With Tt T=     (       )
               EtAt , m mEtAt , the total cost at time t is



                                                               ( (
                                  C ( At , m )  C ( At ) + D T EtAt , m   ))
                                         1      1                                                      (12)
                                       =  At 2 +  m 2 (EtAt ) 2 .
                                         2      2

                                                       20
5.1.3. Optimization

     In the abstract framework of Section 4.2, any constraints that might be imposed on the optimizations

were implicit. In optimal control problems, the key type of constraint specifies the dynamic relationship
                                                                           
between the decision variable and the "state" variable ­ here    as an ordinary differential equation.

We write the cost-minimization problem for a given climate model as

                                              
                                       min 
                                        At
                                                   1
                                                   2
                                                     (  At 2 +  Tt 2 ) e - t dt
                                               0

                                             subject to
                                        d At
                                          Et= EtA =
                                                  t
                                                    Bt - At                                             (13)
                                       dt
                                       Tt = mEtAt
                                        At
                                       E0  = E0 ,


where the last expression defines an initial condition for cumulative emissions. Solving (13) yields the

                   
abatement path At , m that minimizes the present (discounted) values of abatement costs plus climate

damages subject to the relationships among emissions, temperature, and damages. Conceptually, this path

makes the optimal trade-off over time between abatement and damages.



5.2. Calibration

5.2.1. Baseline emissions projection

     We created our baseline emissions path using the "Representative Concentration Pathway (RCP)

8.5" of carbon and other emissions and atmospheric concentrations created by integrated assessment

modelers circa 2010 (67). It is one of four such scenarios, each corresponding to a different level of global

average watts per meter squared in 2100 that was projected in one or more IAMs (68, 69). The 8.5

watts/meter-squared pathway is the highest-warming of the RCPs, reflecting a pessimistic scenario




                                                           21
regarding the increase in global emissions over the 21st century; it has been used as a baseline in

numerous studies.

     We used the RCP 8.5 projection of annual carbon emissions (fossil and land use sources) from 2000

to 2500 in gigatons of carbon (GtC), obtained from the RCP repository at the Potsdam Institute for

Climate Impact Research.  For a baseline emissions path approximating the projection, we fitted the

following functional form to these data:

                                                   B0   
                                   Bt =   t +            exp ( - ( t -  ) ) ,                         (14)
                                                exp ( ) 


where 0 is 8 GtC, the RCP 8.5 emissions in 2000. The fitted parameter values are  = 0.0123125 and

 = 339.565. Further details are provided in SI Section 2.



5.2.2. Temperature projections under structural uncertainty

     To calibrate temperature as a function of cumulative emissions for structural uncertainty analysis, we

used outputs of six earth system models (ESMs) from CMIP5 that each projected the effects of RCP 8.5.

We first computed decadal averages of the CMIP5-reported monthly surface air temperature projections

from these models under RCP 8.5 for the period 1900-1909 to 2090-2099. Following Matthews et al. (64)

as described above, we then calculated decade-by-decade temperature increases over this period relative

to 1900-1909 as projected by each ESM, along with the corresponding decade-by-decade increases in

cumulative carbon emissions in RCP 8.5. Extending the notation introduced above, denote the latter

             Bt
quantity as ECum .

     For each ESM, indexed by i = 1,...,6, we represented the relationship between temperature and

cumulative net emissions as





   http://www.pik-potsdam.de/~mmalte/rcps/.


                                                        22
                                                 Ti = mi ECum
                                                          Bt
                                                              .                                      (15)




To estimate the  's we fitted (15) to the decadal average time series for each model. See SI Section 2

for details.

      The six models and fitted values of  are shown in Table 1. The range among these estimates is a

simple gauge of structural uncertainty.


                                                TABLE 1 HERE

5.2.3. Economic parameters

     We derived low, median, and high estimates of the abatement cost parameter  from Dietz and

Venmans (70), who summarized global marginal abatement costs as a percent of global economic output

as documented in the IPCC Fifth Assessment Report. Because these costs were derived from energy-

economic and integrated assessment model analyses that assumed a 5% discount rate, we used this value

exclusively. For the central value of the damage cost parameter  we used Nordhaus's and Moffat's (53)

central estimate from their preferred (quadratic) specification and estimation of the climate damage

function. We also specified low and high values for sensitivity analysis. The values for these parameters

are presented in Table 2.

                                                TABLE 2 HERE


5.3 Analytical and numerical solutions

     Using standard methods, the model is solved in closed form analytically and the numerical solution

is computed using the Mathematica (71) software; details are presented in SI Section 3. The results are

                            
optimal abatement paths At ;mi and minimum costs


                                  (         )
                                                       
                               C  At;mi , mi = min  C ( At , mi ) e - t dt
                                                  At   0
                                                                                                     (16)
                                                                (  At 2 +  Tt 2 ) e - t dt ,
                                                              1
                               = min 
                                                 At    0      2

                                                       23
subject to the constraints in (13).  Details are presented in SI Section 3.



5.4. Min-Max Regret under structural uncertainty

     We begin with an example of how regrets are calculated, in the case that FIO is the correct model

and with the median and central values of  and , respectively. Our analysis assumes that the state space

of possible real worlds includes only those represented by the six models. That is, it excludes the

possibility that all six models are wrong. In principle, the calculations could be done with a larger state

space that has more distinct models. However, we reiterate the point made earlier: No finite ensemble can

enable analysis of the "unknown unknowns" of climate modeling.

     The first row of Table 3 shows C  ( At;mi , mi ) , i = 1,K , 6, the minimum total discounted abatement

                                                                                      
costs plus climate damages, associated with the optimal trajectory At ;mi for each model for the median 

and central  parameter case. We assign the indices i in the order in which the models are listed in Table

1; that is according to ascending values of the CCR parameter.

     To explain the second row, we recall the idea of a sub-optimal trajectory from Section 4.3, here

assuming for the sake of discussion that FIO (i = 3) is the correct model. For legibility, we again amend

                                
our previous notation: Let At ,i  3 be the optimal trajectory for one of the models other than FIO and


E ( At,i 3 ) be the net emissions at time t when this trajectory is used to reduce emissions from the baseline

 , i.e., E ( At,i 3=
                   ) Bt - At,i3. We write the resulting cumulative emissions path as
                                                      t
                                       Et ( At,i 3 ) =  E ( As,i 3 ) ds
                                                      0
                                                      t
                                                                                                          (17)

                                                      (B                      ) ds.
                                                                    
                                              =                s   -A
                                                                    s ,i  3
                                                      0





  Under our assumptions, the necessary conditions are also sufficient, and the model will have unique solutions
with the parameters we use.


                                                          24
Now consider using this emissions path to project temperature with the FIO CCR, 3 :

                                                             (
                                                    Tt = T E ( At,i 3 )     )
                                                                 t
                                                      = m3  E ( As,i 3 ) ds                                (18)
                                                                 0

                                                      = m3Et ( At,i 3 ) .

                  (       )
That is, Tt = m3Et At,i 3 is the temperature path when the optimal trajectory for a different model is used

                                                                                                        
with the FIO CCR. In turn, we calculate the time t abatement costs associated with At ,i  3 and climate


                                   (
damages associated with m3Et At,i 3 :       )
                              C ( At=
                                    ,i  3 , m3 )
                                    
                                                                          ( (
                                                 C ( At,i 3 ) + D T E ( At,i 3 )          ))
                                                                                                           (19)
                                                     1
                                                                                (
                                                        ( At,i 3 ) +  m32 Et ( At,i 3 ) .
                                                                    1
                                                                                                 )
                                                                  2                    2
                                =
                                                     2              2

The present value of these costs is then


                                                 ( C ( A ) + D (T ( E ( A ) ) ) ) e
                                                

                           ( At,i3 , m3 )
                      C PV =                             
                                                         s ,i  3
                                                                                
                                                                                s ,i  3
                                                                                               - s

                                                0
                                                
                                                                                                           (20)
                          1
                                                                                (                   )
                                                            2
                       =    ( As,i 3 ) +  m32 E s ( As,i 3 )  e - s .
                                      2 1
                         0                                   
                           2            2

Equation (20) displays the sub-optimality we have referred to: It is a cost, but not the optimal cost, using

the FIO model to project temperature. These sub-optimal costs for the models i = 1, 2, 4, 5, 6 comprise

the second row of Table 3.



                                                      TABLE 3 HERE



The last row of the Table presents the associated regrets, the differences between the sub-optimal costs

and the optimal (minimum) cost with the FIO model:

                                                                                    (
                              R ( At,i 3 , m3 ) C PV ( At,i 3 , m3 ) - C  At, m3 , m3 ,
                              =                                                                 )          (21)


                                                                     25
for i = 1,2,4,5,6. As discussed in Section 4.3, these are the post hoc losses when a decision-maker

implements the optimal abatement policy assuming that one of the models other than FIO is correct, but

FIO is in fact the correct model.

     The full set of regrets across the six models for the median  and central  case is shown in Table 4:

                                                                           (           )
                           R ( At,i  j , m j ) C PV ( At,i  j , m j ) - C  At, m j , m j ,
                           =

i, j = 1, , 6. The rows are regrets with respect to the models listed at the left, with the FIO row values

equal to those in the last line of Table 3. For example, the number in the second row, fourth column

(0.01266) is the regret from using the Hadley model to perform the optimization when the correct model

is the BCC. The min-max regret (MMR) solution across entire the table is in shown bold italics, and

occurs when FIO is the correct model and MIROC used instead for the optimization.


                                                TABLE 4 HERE


     Note that the values in each row form a "U" shape with respect to the zero value for the correct

model for the row. In the rows with the three lowest CCRs ­ GFDL, BCC, and FIO ­ the maximum

regret occurs with the MIROC model, while for the rows with the three highest CCRs ­ Had, IPSL, and

MIROC ­ it occurs with the GFDL. This is intuitive given the relative magnitudes of the various CCRs.

     This calculation of the MMR solution assumes that the action space (that is, the set of feasible

abatement paths) includes only the six abatement paths that are optimal under one of the models. Thus, it

takes the action space to be the set of "best response" paths. More generally, society could consider

abatement paths that are not optimal under any of the six models. Even if the state space comprises only

the six models, it is possible that the MMR path will be one that is not optimal in any state. Thus, Table 4

gives a constrained MMR solution. Finding the unconstrained MMR abatement path would be a much

more complex computational problem.

     To explore the sensitivity of the MMR to the economic parameters, we calculated nine tables for the

nine ,  pairs. Table 5 summarizes the results, showing the MMR for each combination of  and . For


                                                         26
all these parameter pairs the MMR occurs with FIO as the model selected for optimization and MIROC as

the incorrect model.

                                            TABLE 5 HERE

It is interesting to see that the MMR is increasing in  for each value of , that is, the greater the

sensitivity of climate damages to cumulative carbon, the greater the regret for using an incorrect ESM.

The MMR is also increasing in  for the central and high values of , but not for the low value.

    A sensitivity analysis of the model with respect to the economic parameters is presented in SI

Section 3; its results and the data in Table 4 allow us to compare the MMR and min-max decision rule

outcomes. The sensitivity analysis shows that the MIROC model yields the highest cost optimal solution

for all ,  pairs ­ that is, if MIROC correctly embodies the CCR, the outcome is the worst using our

optimization model. It is natural to ask, what will the cost turn out to be if MIROC is correct, but another

model is chosen? The answer is of course the set of regrets associated with MIROC. Comparing the

MIROC and FIO rows in Table 4, we see that the MIROC regrets are in some cases higher and in some

cases lower than those for FIO. But its maximum regret (0.06558, when GFDL is chosen but MIROC is

correct) is greater than FIO's maximum regret (0.01749). The difference between the two can be

interpreted as the potential cost of using the min-max rather than the MMR decision rule with this

optimization model.



6. Conclusion



    Computational climate modeling is a challenging endeavor. Over decades, the efforts of many

modelers around the world have yielded steady progress in model development. The models enable

policy-makers to analyze the long-range consequences of societal decisions about energy production and

use. However, the complexities of the climate system and computational difficulties generate structural




                                                    27
uncertainty. A consequence is that a number of distinct models have been developed over time and are

currently in use,

     Taking account of this uncertainty in integrated assessment modeling and other policy applications

has with few exceptions relied on climate model weighting of one kind or another, including Bayesian

probabilistic analysis. The shortcomings of these weighting schemes are known and well-documented in

the technical literature. As an alternative, we have proposed a partial identification framing and cost-

benefit analysis of climate policy using the min-max regret criterion. We have provided a theoretical

treatment of min-max regret decision-making under structural uncertainty, and a simple numerical

integrated assessment example. The min-max regret criterion offers a rationally grounded way to deal

with structural uncertainty, and our results establish that the partial identification approach is a promising

avenue for further development of computational modeling for climate policy.

     There are several ways this work could be extended. MMR analysis of joint parametric and structural

climate model uncertainty could be conducted by explicitly distinguishing the two in the link between

cumulative emissions and temperature. Of particular interest is MMR analysis of the types of economic

uncertainties we discussed, both in their own right and jointly with climate model uncertainty. Such

research could greatly enhance the capacity of decision-makers to address this most challenging of

environmental problems.




                                                     28
References

1. B. M. Sanderson, Uncertainty Quantification in Multi-Model Ensembles. Oxford Research
Encyclopedia of Climate Science, Online, October (2018).

2. R. Knutti, The end of model democracy? Climatic Change 102, 395-404 (2010).

3. R. L. Smith, C. Tebaldi, D. Nychka, L. O. Mearns, Bayesian Modeling of Uncertainty in Ensembles of
Climate Models. J. Am. Stat. Assoc 104, 485, 97-116 (2009).

4. A. Wald, Statistical Decision Functions (New York: Wiley, 1950).

5. L. J. Savage, The Theory of Statistical Decision. J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 46, 55-67 (1951).

6. Manski, C., "Search Profiling with Partial Knowledge of Deterrence," The Economic
Journal, 116, F385-F401 (2006).

7. Manski, C., "Vaccination with Partial Knowledge of External Effectiveness," Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 107, 3953-3960 (2010).

8. R. Loulou, A. Kanudia, Minimax regret strategies for greenhouse gas abatement: methodology and
application. Oper. Res. Lett. 25, 5, 219-230 (1999).

9. T. Iverson, Communicating Trade-offs amid Controversial Science: Decision Support for Climate
Policy. Ecol. Econ. 77, 74-90 (2012).

10. D. Anthoff, R. Tol, Climate policy under fat-tailed risk: an application of FUND. Ann. Oper. Res.,
Springer, 220, 1, 223-237, September (2014).

11. Y. Cai, A. H. Sanstad, Model uncertainty and energy technology policy: The example of induced
technical change. Comput. Oper. Res. 66, 362-373 (2016).

12. A. Rezai, F. v. d. Ploeg, Climate policies under climate model uncertainty: Max-min and min-max
regret. Energ. Econ. 68, 4-16 (2017).

13. Y. Cai, Computational Methods in Environmental and Resource Economics. Ann. Rev. Resour. Econ.
11, 59-82 (2019).

14. T. Koopmans, Identification Problems in Economic Model Construction. Econometrica 17, 125-144
(1949).

15. C. Manski, Partial Identification of Probability Distributions (New York: Springer-Verlag, 2003).

16. C. Manski, Identification for Prediction and Decision (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2007a).

17. E. Tamer, Partial Identification in Econometrics. Annu. Rev. Econ. 2, 167-195 (2010).

18. F. Molinari, Microeconomics with partial identification. Handbook of Econometrics (Elsevier, 2020).



                                                    29
19. K. McGuffie, A. Henderson-Sellers, A Climate Modelling Primer ­ Third Edition. (Chichester,
England: John Wiley & Sons, 2005).

20. CCSP, Climate Models: An Assessment of Strengths and Limitations. A Report by the U. S. Climate
Change Science Program and the Subcommittee on Global Change Research [Bader D. C., C. Covey, W.
J. Gutowski Jr., I. M. Held, K. E. Kunkel, R. L. Miller, R. T. Tokmakian and M. H. Zhang (Authors),
Department of Energy, Office of Biological and Environmental Research, Washington, D. C., USA, 124
pp. (2008).

21. J. C. McWilliams, Irreducible imprecision in atmospheric and oceanic simulations. P. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 104, 21, 8709-8713 (2007).

22. T. N. Palmer, G. J. Shutts, R. Hagedorn, F. J. Doblas-Reyes, T. Jung, M. Leutbecher, Representing
Model Uncertainty in Weather and Climate Prediction. Annu. Rev. Earth Pl. Sc. 33, 163-193 (2005).

23. D. A. Stainforth, M. R. Allen, E. R. Tredger, L. A. Smith, Confidence, uncertainty and decision-
support in climate predictions. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A 365, 2145-2161 (2007).

24. R. Knutti, R. Furrer, C. Tebaldi, J. Cermak, G. A. Meehl, Challenges in Combining Projections from
Multiple Climate Models. J. Climate 23, 15 May, 2739-2758 (2010).

25. W. S. Parker, Ensemble modeling, uncertainty and robust predictions. WIRES Clim. Change 4, 213-
223 (2013).

26. W. S. Parker, Understanding Pluralism in Climate Modeling. Found. Sci. 11, 349-368 (2006).

27. S. J. Lambert, G. J. Boer, Atmosphere-ocean heat fluxes and stresses in general circulation models.
Atmos. Ocean 27:4, 692-715 (1989).

28. G. A. Meehl, G. J. Boer, C. Covey, M. Latif, R. J. Stouffer, The Coupled Model Intercomparison
Project. B. Am. Meteorol. Soc. (BAMS) 81, 2, 313-318 (2000).

29. G. A. Meehl, C. Covey, B. McAvaney, M. Latif, R. J. Stouffer, Overview of the Coupled Model
Intercomparison Project. B. Am. Meteorol. Soc. (BAMS), January, 89-93 (2005).

30. K. E. Taylor, R. J. Stouffer, G. A. Meehl, An Overview of CMIP5 and the Experimental Design. B.
Am. Meteorol. Soc. (BAMS), April, 485-498 (2012).

31. P. J. Gleckler, K. E. Taylor, C. Doutriaux, Performance metrics for climate models. J. Geophys. Res.
113, D06104 (2008).

32. M. Collins, B. B. B. Booth, B. Bhaskaran, G. R. Harris, J. M. Murphy, D. M. H. Sexton, M. J. Webb,
Climate model errors, feedbacks, and forcings: a comparison of perturbed physics and multi-model
ensembles. Clim. Dynam. 36, 1737-1766 (2011).

33. C. Wang, L. Zhang, S-K. Lee, L. Wu, C. R. Mechoso, A global perspective on CMIP5 climate model
biases. Nat. Clim. Change 4, March, 201-205 (2014).

34. A. Gainusa-Bogdan, F. Hourdin, A. K. Traore, P. Braconnot, Omens of coupled model biases in the
CMIP5 AMIP simulations. Clim. Dynam. 51, 2927-2941 (2018).


                                                   30
35. B. J. Soden, W. D. Collins, D. R. Feldman, Reducing uncertainties in climate models. Science 361,
6400, 27 July, 326-327 (2018).

36. World Climate Research Programme (WCRP), Overview [of] CMIP6 Experimental Design and
Organization. https://www.wcrp-climate.org/wgcm-cmip/wgcm-cmip6 (2016).

37. G. Abramowitz, N. Herger, E. Gutmann, D. Hammerling, R. Knutti, M. Leduc, R. Lorenz, R. Pincus,
G.A. Schmidt, Model dependence in multi-model climate ensembles: weighting, sub-selection and out-of-
sample testing. Earth Syst. Dynam. Discussions (2018). Available at https://doi.org/10.5194/esd-2018-51.

38. T. Reichler, J. Kim, How Well Do Coupled Models Simulate Today's Climate? B. Am. Meteorol. Soc.
(BAMS), March, 303-311 (2008).

39. F. Giorgi, L. O. Mearns, Probability of regional climate change based on the Reliability Ensemble
Averaging (REA) method. Geophys. Res. Lett. 30, 12, 1629 (2003).

40. D. M. H. Sexton, J. M. Murphy, M. Collins, M. J. Webb, Multivariate probabilistic projections using
imperfect climate models part I: outline of methodology. Clim. Dynam. 38, 2513-2542 (2012).

41. C. Tebaldi, L. Mearns, D. Nychka, R. Smith, Regional probabilities of precipitation change: a
Bayesian analysis of multimodel simulations. Geophys. Res. Lett. 31, L24, 213 (2004).

42. C. Tebaldi, R. L. Smith, D. Nychka, L. O. Mearns, Quantifying uncertainty in projections of regional
climate change: A Bayesian approach to the analysis of multimodel ensembles. J. Climate 18, 10, 1524-
1540 (2005).

43. C. Tebaldi, R. Knutti, The use of the multi-model ensemble in probabilistic climate projections. Phil.
Trans. R. Soc. A, 365, 2053-2075 (2007).

44. C. Manski, Interpreting and combining heterogeneous survey forecasts. In M. Clements and D.
Hendry, Eds., Oxford Handbook on Economic Forecasting, 457-472 (2011).

45. C. Manski, Interpreting Point Predictions: Some Logical Issues. Found. Trends Accounting 10, 2-4,
238-261 (2016).

46. G. Flato, J. Marotzke (Coordinating Lead Authors), "Evaluation of Climate Models," in Stocker, T.
F., et al, Eds., Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the
Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Cambridge University Press
(2013).

47. R. Knutti, D. Masson, A. Gettelman, Climate model genealogy: Generation CMIP5 and how we got
there. Geophys. Res. Lett. 40, 1194-1199 (2013).

48. W. S. Parker, Whose Probabilities? Predicting Climate Change with Ensembles of Models. Philos.
Sci. 77, 5, 985-997 (2010).

49. A. H. Sanstad, Energy-economic policy modeling. AIP Conference Proceedings 1924, 020011 (2018);
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5020291

50. J. Weyant, Some Contributions of Integrated Assessment Models of Global Climate Change. Rev.
Env. Econ. Policy 11, 1, Winter, 115-137 (2017).

                                                    31
51. W. D. Nordhaus, Climate Change: The Ultimate Challenge for Economics. Am. Econ. Rev. 109 (6),
1991-2014 (2019).

52. R. Pindyck, Climate Change Policy: What Do the Models Tell Us? J. Econ. Lit. 51, 3, September,
860-872 (2013).

53. W. D. Nordhaus, A. Moffat, A Survey of Global Impacts of Climate Change: Replication, Survey
Methods, and a Statistical Analysis. NBER Working Paper No. 23646 (2017).

54. S. Hsiang et al., Estimating economic damage from climate change in the United States. Science 356,
1362-1369, 30 June 2017.

55. M. Auffhammer, Quantifying Economic Damages from Climate Change. J. Econ. Perspect. 32, 4,
Fall, 33-52 (2018).

56. F. Ackerman, S. J. DeCanio, R. B. Howarth, K. Sheeran, Limitations of integrated assessment models
of climate change. Climatic Change 95, 297-315 (2009).

57. D. A. Weisbach, C. R. Sunstein, Climate Change and Discounting the Future: A Guide for the
Perplexed. 27 Yale L. & Pol'y Rev. 433 (2009).

58. R. Pindyck, The Use and Misuse of Models for Climate Policy. Rev. Env. Econ. Policy 11, 100-114
(2017).

59. P. Dasgupta, Discounting climate change. J. Risk Uncertainty 37, 2/3, Special Issue on Discounting
Dilemmas (December), 141-169 (2008).

60. L. Clarke, L., K. Jiang, Assessing Transformation Pathways. In O. Edenhofer et al., eds., Climate
Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change. Contribution of Working Group III to the Fifth Assessment
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA (2014).

61. C. Fischer, R. D. Morgenstern, Carbon Abatement Costs: Why the Wide Ranges of Estimates? Energ.
J. 27, 2, 73-86 (2006).

62. C. Manski, A. Tetenov, Sufficient Trial Size to Inform Clinical Practice. P. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 113,
10518-10523 (2016).

63. L. H. Goulder, K. Mathai, Optimal CO2 Abatement in the Presence of Induced Technical Change. J.
Environ. Econ. Manag. 39, 1-38 (2000).

64. H. D. Matthews, N. P. Gillett, P. A. Stott, K. Zickfeld, The proportionality of global warming to
cumulative carbon emissions. Nat. Lett. 459, 829-832 (2009).

65. National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (NAS), Assessment of Approaches to
Updating the Social Cost of Carbon: Phase 1 Report on a Near-Term Update. Committee on Assessing
Approaches to Updating the Social Cost of Carbon, Board on Environmental Change and Society.
Washington, DC: The National Academies Press, doi: 10.17226/21898 (2016).



                                                    32
66. W. R. Cline, Transient Climate Response to Cumulative Emissions (TCRE) As A Reduced-form
Climate Model. Economics International, Inc. (2020).

67. K. Riahi et al., RCP 8.5 ­ A scenario of comparatively high greenhouse gas emissions. Climatic
Change 109, 33-57 (2011).

68. R. H. Moss et al., The next generation of scenarios for climate change research and assessment.
Nature 463, 747-756, doi: 10.1038/nature08823 (11 February 2010).

69. M. Meinshausen et al., The RCP greenhouse gas concentrations and their extensions from 1765 to
2300. Climatic Change 109, 213-241, DOI 10.1007/s10584-011-0156-z (2011).

70. S. Dietz, F. Venmans, Cumulative carbon emissions and economic policy: In search of general
principles. J. Environ. Econ. Manag. 96, 108-129 (2019).

71. Wolfram Research, Inc., Mathematica 12. Champaign, IL (2020).




                                                33
             Table 1. Carbon-climate response estimates ­ six earth system models,
                        CMIP5 temperature projections under RCP 8.5


                                                Fitted  under RCP 8.5 (degrees Celsius per
            Earth system model
                                                           teraton carbon)

GFDL-ESM-2G - Geophysical Fluid Dynamics
                                                                    1.573
   Laboratory Earth System Model version 2G

BCC-CSM-1 - Beijing Climate Center Climate
                                                                    1.864
   System Model version 1.1

FIO-ESM - FIO-ESM - First Institute of
                                                                    1.937
    Oceanography Earth System Model

Had-GEM2-ES - Hadley Global Environmental
                                                                    2.286
    Model 2 - Earth System

IPSL-CM5A-MR - Institut Pierre Simon Laplace
                                                                    2.361
    Coupled Model 5A - Medium Resolution

MIROC-ESM - Model for Interdisciplinary
                                                                    2.438
   Research on Climate - Earth System Model




                                               34
             Table 2. Values of economic parameters used for calibration


   Abatement cost parameter                      Climate damage cost parameter 
  (Fractional GDP lost per GtC               (Fractional GDP loss per degrees Celsius
         abated)                                         increase)

Low                0.000078                    Low                     0.014

                                          Central (Nordhaus
Median             0.000125                                            0.018
                                          & Moffat 2017)

High                 0.0002                    High                    0.022




                                     35
                  Table 3. Example of regrets calculation ­ with FIO the correct model,
                                    median  and central 

                                                                          Model

               Calculations                    GFDL     BCC       FIO      Had    IPSL    MIROC

      Optimal values for each model
                                                0.293   0.381    0.4029   0.509   0.531   0.554
         (assuming it is correct)

Sub-optimal values (if other models' optimal
                                                0.413   0.4033     -      0.412   0.416   0.420
paths are used but FIO is the correct model)

        Regrets: Sub-optimal values
                                               0.01059 0.0004      0      0.0088 0.01274 0.01749
           minus FIO optimum




                                                36
          Table 4. Values of regret across six ESMs, median  and central ,
                 including Min-Max Regret solution (in bold italics)

                            INCORRECT MODEL (COLUMN)

CORRECT
                                                                                  Row
 MODEL    GFDL       BCC          FIO         Had        IPSL       MIROC
                                                                                 maxima
 (ROW)

 GFDL            0   0.00608     0.00939     0.03436     0.04137     0.04914     0.04914

 BCC      0.00669          0     0.00039     0.01266     0.01726     0.02266     0.02266

  FIO     0.01059     0.0004            0     0.0088     0.01274     0.01749     0.01749

  Had     0.04357    0.01459      0.0099            0    0.00041     0.00166     0.04357

 IPSL     0.05379     0.0204      0.0147     0.00042            0    0.00043     0.05379

MIROC     0.06558    0.02748     0.02071     0.00175     0.00044             0   0.06558




                                        37
 Table 5. Values of Min-Max Regret among six climate models across
economic parameters (from the FIO/MIROC model pair in each case)

                                       Value of 

                          Low          Central      High

           Value of 

              Low       0.01300        0.01538     0.01719

             Median     0.01387        0.01749     0.02053

              High      0.01312        0.01763     0.02179




                                  38
Supporting Information

1. Research on Partial Identification

1.1. Partial Identification Due to Imperfect Data
      A large body of research on partial identification has studied the inferential problems created by
imperfect data, where imperfection can mean measurement error or missing data. Obtaining larger
samples does not resolve these inferential problems. Measurement error and missing data generate
identification problems, not merely statistical imprecision.
      Notable early studies of partial identification with measurement error include (1) and (2). They
derived sharp bounds on the slope parameter of a simple linear regressions with errors-in-variables; that
is, white-noise measurement error in the outcome and covariate. These early findings were later extended
to multiple linear regression by (3). More recent work on partial identification with measurement error
has studied nonparametric inference with contaminated and corrupted sampling (4) and misclassification
(5) rather than white-noise error.
      Another notable early subject of study was use of knowledge of the marginal distribution of each
element of a vector of random variables to partially identify the joint probability distribution of the vector
or conditional distributions (6). See (7) and (8) respectively for more recent contributions to these
subjects. In this body of work, the data imperfection is that one can observe each element of a vector in
isolation from one another, but one lacks data on the vector in totality.
      A prominent concern of econometricians has been partial identification with missing data. Early on,
(9) suggested conservative analysis of surveys with missing data due to nonresponse by sample members,
informally distinguishing between identification problems and those of statistical inference. Manski (10)
initiated formal analysis of partial identification with missing data, determining what can be concluded
about a population mean and distribution function if nothing is known about the missingness process.
Many subsequent contributions have studied partial identification of various population parameters given
alternative assumptions about the missingness process. Manski (11, 12) provides monograph and
textbook expositions of this body of work.
      Consideration of missing data problems has led to a large literature studying partial identification of
treatment response, beginning with (13). Again, (11, 12) give monograph and textbook expositions of the
ensuing literature. Analysis of treatment response poses a distinctive problem of missing outcome data.
Studies of treatment response aim to predict the outcomes that would occur if counterfactual treatment
rules were applied to a population. Treatments are mutually exclusive, so one cannot observe the
outcomes that a person would experience under all treatments. At most, one can observe the outcome that
a person experiences under the treatment he actually receives. The counterfactual outcomes that a person
would have experienced under other treatments are logically unobservable.

1.2 Partial Identification of Structural Econometric Models
      Structural econometric models place assumptions on the behavior of economic agents (consumers,
firms, or governments) and on the ways that they interact with one another. These assumptions are
combined with data on observed behavior and interactions to estimate model parameters. Estimated
models are used to predict the choices that agents would make and the interactions that would occur in
counterfactual settings. Particularly prominent are applications of the models to predict economic
outcomes under counterfactual public policies.
      A classic example is analysis of competitive markets. Economists assume that firm and consumer
behavior are expressed by supply and demand functions. They restrict the heterogeneity of behavior
across by markets through functional form assumptions (e.g., linear supply and demand) and
distributional assumptions (e.g., mean independence involving so-called instrumental variables). They
assume that observed transactions are market equilibria. Estimated models are used to predict the


                                                     39
transactions that would occur in counterfactual settings, such as under counterfactual tax and subsidy
policies.
      The traditional practice of applied econometrics has been to make assumptions that are strong
enough to yield point identification of structural models when the assumptions are combined with data on
the observable behavior of the relevant economic agents. However, the assumptions imposed are often
criticized for lacking credibility.
      Studies of partial identification of structural models investigate inference under weaker assumptions
that may be more credible. Given such assumptions, findings distinguish models that are consistent with
available data from those that are not. Thus, one narrows the scope of scientific inquiry to a set of feasible
models, but one does not claim to have found a unique best model. Having determined a set of feasible
models, one may use each model to predict economic outcomes in counterfactual settings. The result is a
set of predictions, one for each feasible model, rather than an exact prediction or a probability distribution
of predictions.
      Discussion of partial identification of structural econometric models occurred as early as the 1940s,
but formal analysis is more recent. Manski (13) studied partial identification of the market demand for a
good when data on transactions are combined with the weak and credible assumption that demand
decreases as price rises. Haile and Tamer (14) studied partial identification of the bidding rules used by
participants in auctions when data on observed bids are combined with weak and credible assumptions on
bidding behavior. Ciliberto and Tamer (15) studied partial identification of the rules that oligopolistic
airlines use to decide whether to initiate service between specific city pairs. Manski (16, 17) studied
partial identification of discrete choice models in generality and of labor supply models in particular.
Barseghyan, Molinari, and Teitelbaum (18) studied partial identification of the decision rules that
households use to make insurance purchases.
      Studies of partial identification of structural econometric models build on the literature on partial
identification due to imperfect data. In general, the data available for structural modeling suffers from
measurement error and missingness. A fundamental missing data problem is that one can only observe the
historical behavior of economic agents under the policies that existed at the time. The counterfactual
choices that agents would have made under other policies are logically unobservable. Thus, research on
structural models faces the same missing data problem that arises in analysis of treatment response.


2. Calibration

2.1. Fitting a Functional Form to RCP 8.5

     The exogenous baseline emissions projection Bt driving the results of the model is the Representative
Concentration Pathway (RCP) 8.5 (see main body of the text). The functional form fitted to this emissions
path is given by equation (14) in the text, reproduced here as equation SI.2.1:
                                B0    
                 Bt =   t +            exp ( - ( t -  ) )                                     (SI.2.1)
                            exp ( ) 
We used Mathematica's "NonlinearModelFit" procedure specifying the Levenberg-Marquardt method
(19, 20, 21). Both RCP 8.5 and the fitted version of (SI.2.1) are shown in Fig. S1.
     We make no claim about any statistical properties of this curve-fitting. Our objective was solely to
obtain a functional form that is analytically tractable and closely resembles the projected emissions
pathway. Equation (SI.2.1) with the fitted parameters shown in the main text accomplishes this; the
adjusted R2 measure of goodness of fit is 0.927 and the fitted function exhibits the same pattern of rising
and then falling gross emissions shown by RCP 8.5.




                                                     40
2.2. Temperature data

     To estimate the simple carbon-climate response model described in Section 5.2 of the main text, we
adapted the CMIP5 variable "tas" ­ near surface air temperature in Kelvin ("CMIP5 PCMDI
standard_output.pdf," p. 19, table "CMOR Table Amon: Monthly Mean Atmospheric Fields and some
Surface Fields," https://pcmdi.llnl.gov/mips/cmip5/docs/standard_output.pdf?id=54). The model output
was generously provided by the research group of Professor Elizabeth Moyer, Department of
Geosciences, University of Chicago. We used the projections of this variable generated by the CMIP5
earth systems models (ESMs) listed in Section 5.2. As noted there, these observations were averaged into
decades starting in 1900 and ending at 2100. Information on the models, including technical references,
can be found in (22).


2.3.    Comparisons of Actual and Fitted Values of Temperature, Equation (15) of Main Text, Six
        Models Separately (Fig. S2a-f) and Together (Fig. S3).

Actual and fitted values for each model were computed using EViews11 (23). Each series for
temperature and cumulative emissions had 19 observations (decadal averages), and the equation was
fitted by least squares with no constant and an AR(1) process specified for the disturbance term. Fitting
without specifying an autocorrelated error indicated a great deal of serial correlation of the residuals.
While these estimates of the mi were not too different from those we report, our judgment was that it was
best to fit equation (15) while removing most of the autocorrelation. We make no statistical claims, but
conventional measures were all indicative of a tight fit (R2 values greater than 0.99) and the inverted AR
roots were less than one.


3. Model Solutions

       The current-value Hamiltonian of the simple model in Section 5 is

                 1        1
                               (        )
                                            2
          H=        At 2 +  mEtAt               + t ( Bt - At ),                                 (SI.3.1)
                 2        2

where t is an adjoint or co-state variable (a counterpart to the Lagrange multiplier in static
optimization). The first-order necessary conditions are
             t =  At
           d t
             = t -  m 2 EtA         t

            dt
            E0At
                 = E0                                                                             (SI.3.2)
            lim e - t t EtAt = 0.
            t 



The first two equations in (SI.3.2) can be re-arranged to yield




                                                                   41
          dAt          m 2 At
           =  At -        Et
           dt            
                                                                                                    (SI.3.3)
         dEtAt
             = Bt - At .
          dt
This is a two-dimensional system of linear, first-order, constant-coefficient ordinary differential
equations, and can be solved in closed form with elementary methods: first a diagonalization procedure to
uncouple the two equations, and second the use of an integrating factor to solve the resulting system in
terms of exponential functions. Reversing the diagonalization and applying the initial and transversality
conditions (the third and fourth lines in (SI.3.2)) then yields closed-form solutions for the optimal
abatement path At;mi and cumulative carbon emissions Et t for most values of  ,  , and m.
                                                       A


     We obtained numerical values of  and  from Figure 3, p. 113, of (24) using the Web Plot Digitizer
software (https://automeris.io/WebPlotDigitizer/).
     We solved the system both by hand and using Mathematica's "DSolve" command. We also used
Mathematica to solve the optimal control problem: Mathematica's "Integrate" command calculated the
optimal values ­ minimum discounted abatement costs plus climate damages ­ as a function of the
optimal solution paths At and Et . We present these results in the next section for the values of
 ,  , and m presented in the main text.
     For both analytical and numerical solutions there is general and a special case defined by particular
combinations of parameters. Our parameter values reflect the general case, but the difference between the
two raises certain computational issues that we discuss in Section 3.3 below.

3.1. Numerical solutions
     Fig. S4 displays the optimal abatement paths over the 21st century for each of the six ESMs as
proxied by mi , i = 1, ,6, for the median value of  and the central value of . Fig. S5 shows the
corresponding optimal net emissions paths ( Et =       Bt - At for each model) as well as the fitted baseline
                                                 A  t


RCP 8.5 emissions path from equation (14) of the main text. The figures show that the optimal control
model with our calibration finds fairly aggressive abatement to be optimal across the ESMs. They also
show an inverse correspondence, as it were, between the geometry of these paths and the values of the
CCRs: the higher the CCR, the greater is optimal abatement and the lower is optimal net emissions, with
the spacing of the paths reflecting the relative differences among the numerical values of mi.
     Table S1 shows sensitivity of optimal (minimum) costs with respect to the low, middle, and high
values of both  and , for each value of mi . The results are as would be expected: For each mi , the
optimal cost is increasing in both  and , conversely, for each ,  pair, it is increasing in mi . These
results allow us to compare climate uncertainty and economic sensitivity in the calibrated simple model.
In each row (corresponding to a value of mi ), the lowest optimal cost is in the low  , low  case, and
the highest cost is in the high  , high  case. The largest row range (highest value minus lowest value) is
0.341, with the MIROC ESM. Conversely, in each column (representing an  ,  pair), the lowest cost is
the in first row ­ the GFDL model ­ and the highest in the last row ­ the MIROC model. The largest
column range is 0.362, again with MIROC. That is, the magnitudes of climate uncertainty and economic
sensitivity are roughly equivalent. This finding highlights the importance of taking account of both
climate-model and economic uncertainty in quantitative studies of optimal carbon policy.




                                                     42
3.2. Closed form analytical solutions

3.2.1. General case:  + 1  0
     Diagonalization of the system involves determining eigenvalues of the fundamental matrix
                    m2 
                 -
          M =       .
                                                                                                         (SI.3.5)
              -1
                   0   

There are two, 1 and 2 , which are negative and positive, respectively. We recall that the baseline
                                                        - (t - )
                                                         B0
                                     Bt   t +
emissions trajectory in our model is =                 e         . The parameter condition for the general
                                                         e 
case arises in solving the diagonalized form of the equation for At :
                                   2           B0  - (t - )
         y1 ( t ) =1 y1 ( t ) -            t +    e         ,
                                ( 2 - 1 )  e 
or                                                                                                       (SI.3.6)
                                           2          B0  - (t - )
        y1 ( t ) - 1 y1 ( t ) =   -              t +    e          .
                                     ( 2 - 1 )  e 
Multiplying both sides by the integrating factor e - 1t yields
                                                 2           B0  - (t - ) - 1t
        e - 1t y1 ( t ) - e - 1t 1 y1 ( t ) =
                                            -            t +    e        e ,
                                              ( 2 - 1 )  e 
i.e.,
                                 2
             ( e y1 ( t ) ) =
          d - 1t
          dt
                            -
                              ( 2 - 1 )
                                        ( e  t + B0 ) e -( + 1 )t ,

         (SI.3.7)
and
                                 
                          - ( 2 -2 1 ) ( e  t + B0 ) e
         e - 1t y1 ( t ) =                               -( + 1 )t
                                                                     dt.

When  + 1  0 , the right-hand side of the last equation of (SI.3.7) is
         2            B0    - (t - ) - 1t       2              B0           -( + 1 )t
 - (    2 - 1 ) 
                  t + 
                     e     
                           e        e dt = -
                                             ( 2 - 1 )  e  t + 
                                                              e            
                                                                           e          dt
                                                                                                         (SI.3.8)
       2 e                              2 e                              2
                   e - ( + )t t +                    e - ( + )t +                  B0 e -( + )t + C1 ,
                                                                                           
=                            1                                        1                      1

  ( 2 - 1 )( + 1 )                ( 2 - 1 )( + 1 )
                                                   2
                                                                  ( 2 - 1 )( + 1 )
where C1 is a constant. Substituting back into Equation (SI.3.7) and multiplying both sides by e 1t yields
the solution:
                         2 e                          2          e             - t
 =y1 ( t )                           e - t t +                           + B   e + C1e t         1
                                                                                                         (SI.3.9)
                    ( 2 - 1 )( + 1 )           ( 2 - 1 )( + 1 )  ( + 1 )    0
                                                                              

The solution for y2 ( t ) is obtained analogously.


                                                             43
     In this general case, returning to the original coordinates and setting C1 using the initial condition
for Et , the solutions to (SI.3.3) are of the form
         At = A1e - t t + A 2 e - t + A 3e1 t
                                                                                                       (SI.3.10)
         Et = E1e - t t + E 2 e - t + E 3e1 t ,

where the A i ' s and Ei 's are algebraic expressions in the model parameters.
3.2.2 Special case:  + 1 =
                         0
     The growth rates of the terms with e - t and e 1t are -  and 1 , respectively, and the growth rate of
                             d              1
the terms with e - t t is       ln e - t t= -  , i.e., - asymptotically. Thus if  + 1 = 0, these growth rates
                             dt             t
coincide as t  . Given that the eigenvalues of the diagonalized system have opposite signs
( 1 < 0 and 2 > 0 ) , it is saddle-path stable, with the stable arm corresponding to 1. Thus, this special
case amounts to the asymptotic growth rates equaling that along the stable arm of the system (25).
     This affects the solutions in a particular way. Specifically, if  + 1 = 0, the diagonalized equation
for At is the same as for Equation (SI.3.6) above, but applying the integrating factor e - 1t yields
                                                  
         e - 1t y1 ( t ) - e - 1t 1 y1 ( t ) =
                                             -      2

                                               ( 2 - 1 )
                                                         ( e  t + B0 ) e - ( + 1 )t
                                                                                                       (SI.3.11)
                                                  2
                                        =
                                        -
                                          ( 2 - 1 )
                                                    ( e  t + B0 ) .
                                                            




Note that there is no exponential term with time as an argument in the last expression. Therefore
                 2                         2 e  1 2 2 e 
         -   ( 2 - 1 )
                       ( e
                            t + B0) dt -
                                       =            t -       B t +C
                                         ( 2 - 1 ) 2 ( 2 - 1 ) 0 2
                                                                                                       (SI.3.12)


and the solution to the differential equation is
                    e  1 2 1t 2 e 
         y1 (t ) =
                 - 2       t e -        B0te1t + C2 e1t
                  ( 2 1)
                     -   2       ( 2 1)
                                    - 
                                                                                                       (SI.3.13)
                    e  1 2 - t 2 e 
                =
                - 2          t e -           B0te - t + C2 e - t
                 ( 2 - 1 ) 2       ( 2 - 1 )
             0 in this case. The solution for y2 ( t ) is obtained in a similar manner.
because 1 +  =
     In this special case, the solutions to the system in the original coordinates are of the form
                   S - t 2  S - t    S - t
         AtSpec = A1 e t + A2 e t + A3 e
                                                                                                       (SI.3.14)
                   S - t 2  S - t    S - t
         EtSpec = E1 e t + E2 e t + E3 e ,

where A iS 's and E iS 's are again algebraic expressions in the model parameters. These coefficients are
different from those in the general case, and the primary structural difference is the presence of the
quadratic term.




                                                               44
3.3. Continuity of solutions in parameter space

     Given that the system parameters  ,  , and m can also vary, what we mean more precisely in the
preceding discussion is that the condition  + 1  0 does or does not hold given any particular
combination ( ,  , m ) . The coefficient expressions in the solutions for the general case (Equation
                                1
(SI.3.10)) contain the term           , which approaches infinity as  approaches -1 in parameter space.
                              ( + 1 )
The eigenvalues 1 and 2 are functions of the model parameters  ,  , m, and  , and it can be shown that
 + 1 = 0 is equivalent to
   m 2
     =  ( +  ) .                                                                               (SI.3.15)
     
The parameters , , and  are fixed for all versions of the model ( and  from the fitted exogenous
emissions path and  as the IPCC conventional value of 0.05). However, our model solutions were a
function of m corresponding to different climate models, and we conducted sensitivity analysis with
respect to  and  . The difference between the general and special case solutions therefore raises a
question of continuity as the parameters of the two solutions approach each other. Using Mathematica we
confirmed that the solutions at the parameter configuration (SI. 3.15) are limits of those at nearby points
as the parameters approach (SI.3.15), so there is no discontinuity. However, there are additional
considerations for numerical solutions, as we discuss next.


3.4. Numerical stability issues.

      None of the numerical values used in the cases reported in the text used parameter values that lie
exactly on the hypersurface in parameter space defined by (SI.3.15). However, this surface does divide
the region in parameter space in which these values lie, and there are numerical issues in the transition
between the two cases. Using the general solutions (SI.3.10) in calculations for parameter combinations
that are very close to, but not on, the special case gave rise to numerical instabilities because of cumulated
rounding errors and the intrinsic precision limits of machine computations. Therefore, it is important to
check whether any of the (, , m) parameter combinations used in the calculations reported in the text are
close enough to satisfying (SI.3.15) that the special case solution needs to be employed rather than the
general case in calculating the numerical results. In general, care needs to be taken in numerical
implementation of the model to make sure that the correct solutions of the system are the ones employed.
      An illustration of the potential problem that could arise from using the general solutions if the
parameters are too close to satisfying (SI.3.15) is shown in Fig. S6, a 2-D color plot of the optimal value
of the objective function (equation (16) in the text) as a function of  and m. The region with pixels of a
color different from the yellow-to-gray shade (which represents values of the objective function) shows
the region in which numerical instability is occurring. It can be seen that one of our parameter
combinations, m = 0.00286 (Hadley) and  = 0.018 (Nordhaus and Moffat), lies fairly close to the region
of numerical instability.
      To double-check that this parameter combination is far enough away from satisfying (SI.3.15) to be
numerically stable we proceeded as follows. First, we calculated the 18 values of  for which (SI.3.15) is
satisfied for the 18 combinations of  and m we used (three 's, six m's). These 's for each (, m) pair are
shown in Table S2. We inspected this table to see which values of  in the Table appeared to be close to
one of the  values used in our analysis. For example, the value 0.0183465 associated with the median 
and the Hadley m is fairly close to our central  of 0.018. Is it close enough that numerical instability
might be a problem affecting the MMR calculations?

                                                     45
     To answer this question, we narrowed down the range around the critical value 0.0183465 to see
how close one has to be to this value for numerical instability to appear. We then plotted At and Et for
the range 0  t  1000 over ever-narrowing intervals around this critical value. With increments of
1/10,000,000,000, the plots for At over the interval 0.01834649905    0.01834650395 are displayed in
Fig. S7. (There were 50 incremental steps in this interval given the specified width of each step; the plots
for Et are similar in appearance.)
     What is evident from this figure is that for the first 10 or so steps, the plots of At are smoothly well-
behaved. After that, the plots begin to get "fuzzy" as the  being used to calculate At gets closer to the
critical value. From around step 16 through step 35, the numerical instability is more pronounced;
beginning with step 22 the numerical calculation of At breaks down and even begins showing
(theoretically impossible) negative values.
      By around step 40, the At function becomes well-behaved again, indicating that the value of  is far
enough from the critical value that division by a number close enough to zero to cause numerical
instability is no longer an issue. Being very conservative, we can conclude that outside the interval,
0.01834649905    0.01834650395, the solutions to the model are well-behaved when the general form
of the solutions are used. The central value of  used in the calculations reported in the main body of the
paper is 0.018, safely outside this interval.
      We did a similar analysis for another candidate for instability,  = 0.0241934, associated with the
low  value of 0.000078 and the GFDL m of 0.001572749 and shown in Table S2. This was the critical
value closest to our high value of , which was 0.022. Again, the width of the interval of numerical
instability around the critical  value was narrow enough that 0.022 was safely outside of it. Other critical
values of  shown in Table S2 are farther away from the values we used than the critical value
0.01834649905 was. We conclude that numerical instability is not a problem for any of the calculations
reported in the main body of the paper which were based on the general solutions (SI.3.10).




                                                     46
                                                   RCP 8.5


                                                    Fitted SI.2.1




                                                Years after 2000



Fig. S1. RCP 8.5 and fitted equation (SI.2.1)




                     47
Temperature




                                                 Year


              Fig. S2a. GFDL Actual and Fitted




                         48
Temperature




                                                Year

              Fig. S2b. BCC Actual and Fitted




                        49
Temperature




                                                Year


              Fig. S2c. FIO Actual and Fitted




                        50
Temperature




                                                   Year


              Fig. S2d. Hadley Actual and Fitted




                          51
Temperature




                                                 Year


              Fig. S2e. IPSL Actual and Fitted




                         52
Temperature




                                                  Year

              Fig. S2f. MIROC Actual and Fitted




                         53
Temperature




                                                                      Year




    Fig. S3. Actual and Fitted Values from Equation (15), all six models




                                    54
                                                                  Year



Fig. S4. Optimal Abatement, six ESMs, 2010-2100,  = 0.000125,  = 0.018




                                 55
GtC




                                                                            Year

 Fig. S5. Baseline (uncontrolled) and net emissions, six ESMs, 2010-2100,
                               = 0.000125,  = 0.018




                                   56
          0.002275




           0.00228

     m-axis
  (decreasing )




Hadley m = 0.002286




           0.00229                                                          
                               0.0175        0.0180         0.0185

                          Fig. S6.: 2-D Color Plot of Objective Function,
                       = 0.000125; 0.017    0.019; 0.002275  m  0.002290




                                        57
            Fig. S7. Numerical instability test on At,
0.01834649905    0.01834650395, steps of width 1/10,000,000,000




                              58
        Table S1. Optimal (minimum) costs across values of economic parameters:
        Present values of abatement costs plus climate damages in optimal solutions.

                                                   Value

                          Low                     Central                     High

                         Value                     Value                     Value

   Model         Low    Median     High    Low    Median     High    Low    Median     High

GFDL-ESM-2G     0.217    0.262    0.301 0.239      0.293    0.343 0.256      0.318     0.377

 BCC-CSM1-1     0.279    0.331    0.378 0.315      0.381    0.441 0.343      0.423     0.496

  FIO-ESM       0.294    0.348    0.396 0.334      0.403    0.465 0.366      0.450     0.526

Had GEM2-ES     0.367    0.429    0.482 0.427      0.509    0.581 0.479      0.582     0.675

IPSL-CM5A-MR 0.382       0.445    0.500 0.447      0.531    0.605 0.504      0.610     0.706

 MIROC-ESM      0.398    0.462    0.518 0.468      0.554    0.630 0.530      0.640     0.739




                                            59
                        Table S2.  values for which (SI.3.15) is satisfied,
                           m and  values used for calculations in text

                                 Model and associated m (columns)

             GFDL         BCC             FIO           Hadley           IPSL       MIROC
 (rows)
           0.001572749 0.00186463 0.001936724 0.002286328 0.00236084              0.002437833

0.000078    0.241934   0.0172119      0.0159544        0.114482        0.010737    0.0100695

0.000125   0.0387714   0.0275832      0.0254579       0.0183465       0.0172067    0.0161370

0.00020    0.0620342   0.0441332      0.0409086       0.0293544       0.0275307    0.0258192




                                            60
SI References

1. R. Frisch, Statistical Confluence Analysis by Means of Complete Regression Systems. Oslo, Norway:
University Institute for Economics (1934).

2. O. Reiersol, Confluence Analysis by Means of Lag Moments and Other Methods of Confluence
Analysis. Econometrica 9, 1­24 (1941).

3. S. Klepper, E. Leamer, Consistent Sets of Estimates for Regressions with Errors in All Variables.
Econometrica 52, 163­183 (1984).

4. J. Horowitz, C. Manski, Identification and Robustness with Contaminated and Corrupted Data.
Econometrica 63, 281-302 (1995).

5. F. Molinari, Partial Identification of Probability Distributions with Misclassified Data. J. Econometrics
144, 81-117 (2008).

6. Duncan, O. and B. Davis, An Alternative to Ecological Correlation. Am. Sociol. Rev. 18, 665­666
(1953).

7. L. Rüschendorf, Sharpness of Frechet-Bounds. Z. Wahrscheinlichkeit. 57, 293­302 (1981).

8. P. Cross, C. Manski, Regressions, Short and Long. Econometrica 70, 357-368 (2002).

9. W. Cochran, F. Mosteller, and J. Tukey, Statistical Problems of the Kinsey Report on Sexual Behavior
in the Human Male (Washington, DC: American Statistical Association, 1954).

10. C. Manski, Anatomy of the Selection Problem. J. Human Resour. 24, 343­360 (1989).

11. C. Manski, Partial Identification of Probability Distributions (New York: Springer-Verlag, 2003).

12. C. Manski, Identification for Prediction and Decision (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2007a).

13. C. Manski, Monotone Treatment Response. Econometrica 65, 1311­1334 (1997).

14. P. Haile, E. Tamer, Inference with an Incomplete Model of English Auctions. J. Polit. Econ. 111, 1-
51 (2003).

15. F. Ciliberto, E. Tamer, Market Structure and Multiple Equilibria in Airline Markets. Econometrica 77,
1791-1828 (2004).

16. C. Manski, Partial Identification of Counterfactual Choice Probabilities. Int. Econ. Rev. 48, 1393-
1410 (2007b).

17. C. Manski, Identification of Income-Leisure Preferences and Evaluation of Income Tax Policy.
Quant. Econ. 5, 145-174 (2014).

18. L. Barseghyan, F. Molinari, J. Teitelbaum, Inference under Stability of Risk Preferences. Quant.
Econ. 7, 367-409 (2016).


                                                    61
19. Wolfram Research, Inc., Wolfram Mathematica 12.1. Champaign, IL (2020).

20. E. Weisstein, Levenberg-Marquardt Method. From MathWorld--
A Wolfram Web Resource. https://mathworld.wolfram.com/Levenberg-MarquardtMethod.html.

21. M. I. A. Lourakis, A Brief Description of the Levenberg-Marquardt Algorithm Implemened{sic] by
levmar (2005).
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/239328019_A_Brief_Description_of_the_Levenberg-
Marquardt_Algorithm_Implemened by levmar.

22. M. Collins, M. et al., Long-term Climate Change: Projections, Commitments and Irreversibility. In
Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contributions of Working Group I to the Fifth
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Stocker, T. F. et al. (eds.)].
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA (2013).

23. IHS Global, EViews11. Irvine, CA (2020).

24. S. Dietz, F. Venmans, Cumulative carbon emissions and economic policy: In search of general
principles. J. Environ. Econ. Manag. 96, 108-129 (2019).

25. R. J. Barro, X. Sala-i-Martin, Economic Growth (New York: McGraw Hill, 1995).




                                                 62
