                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     UNCOVERING THE HIDDEN EFFORT PROBLEM

                                      Azi Ben-Rephael
                                       Bruce I. Carlin
                                           Zhi Da
                                      Ryan D. Israelsen

                                     Working Paper 28441
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28441


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   February 2021




We are grateful for feedback from Tom Bates, Alex Butler, Alan Crane, Jeff Coles, David De
Angelis, Gene Fama, Simon Gervais, Jessica Jeffers, Steve Kaplan, Mike Lemmon, William
Mann, Kevin Murphy, Stefan Nagel, Lubos Pastor, David Robinson, James Weston, David
Yermack, and Luigi Zingales. Also, we acknowledge helpful feedback from seminar participants
at the University of Chicago, Washington University in St. Louis, University of Texas, Notre
Dame, Drexel University, and Rice University, and conference attendees at the ASU Sonoran
Winter Finance Conference the 2020 Northern Finance Meetings, and the 2021 American
Finance Meetings. We also appreciate the advice and counsel from Richard Zansitis (Vice
President and General Counsel for Rice University). This study was approved by the IRB at Rice
University and by Bloomberg Finance L.P. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Azi Ben-Rephael, Bruce I. Carlin, Zhi Da, and Ryan D. Israelsen. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Uncovering the Hidden Effort Problem
Azi Ben-Rephael, Bruce I. Carlin, Zhi Da, and Ryan D. Israelsen
NBER Working Paper No. 28441
February 2021
JEL No. D22,D82,G32,M52

                                          ABSTRACT

We use machine learning to analyze minute-by-minute Bloomberg online status data and study
how the effort provision of top executives in public corporations affects firm value. While
executives likely spend most of their time doing other activities, Bloomberg usage data allows us
to characterize their work habits. We document a positive effect of effort on unexpected earnings,
cumulative abnormal returns following firm earnings announcements, and credit default swap
spreads. We form long-short, calendar-time, effort portfolios and show that they earn significant
average daily returns. Finally, we revisit several agency issues that have received attention in the
prior academic literature on executive compensation.


Azi Ben-Rephael                                  Zhi Da
Rutgers Business School                          University of Notre Dame
1 Washington Park                                239 Mendoza College of Business
Newark, NJ 07102                                 Notre Dame, Indiana 46556-5646
abenrephael@business.rutgers.edu                 zda@nd.edu

Bruce I. Carlin                                  Ryan D. Israelsen
Jones School of Business                         Michigan State University
Rice University                                  Broad College of Business
1900 Rice Boulevard                              667 N Shaw Ln Rm 307
Houston, TX 77005                                East Lansing, MI 48824
and NBER                                         USA
carlin@rice.edu                                  israels4@msu.edu
1. Introduction
        The moral hazard problem due to hidden effort is ubiquitous in economics and two
fundamental ideas are generally accepted. First, principals are tasked with an inference problem
regarding their agent's effort provision. Second, they can (or should) try to ameliorate the conflict
with compensation contracts or ownership grants (Holmstrom and Milgrom, 1987).
        But studying whether this actually works in Corporate America or if high effort provision
is indeed valuable is nearly impossible. If the principal in any organization cannot observe the
effort provision made by their managers, it is unlikely that outsiders like an economic empiricist
or a market investor would have better information. Both can perform statistical inference, much
like the principal, based on compensation contracts and firm outcomes (e.g., stock prices or
earnings). But these calculations are limited because they face the hidden action problem too.
        How could one calibrate a manager's work activities without inducing an observer effect
(i.e., changing executive behavior) or covertly spying on them? 1 A good prospect would be to find
something that is highly correlated with the time they spend working, like the amount of time their
office lights are on (at home or work), their computer is active, or their office phone (cell phone)
is in use. Certainly, none of these is perfect, but they do convey some information about an
executive's daily work habits.
        In this paper, we hand-collect minute-by-minute usage data from personal Bloomberg
accounts for CEO's, CFO's, and top executives from publicly traded firms, many of which are in
the S&P500 and are not financial firms. We use machine learning to estimate their work habits as
measures of effort provision, and perform cross-sectional and time series tests to examine how
effort affects firm value. We also revisit several agency issues that have received attention in the
past, such as the effect of compensation discontinuities and leisure activities on executive behavior.
        Bloomberg terminals are typically located at work, but its platform can be accessed
remotely. It is not an attractive source of leisure. It is obvious by mere inspection of the platform
that it is for work use and does not provide any sort of entertainment. But, three hundred and
ninety-five firms (97 financial and 298 non-financial) in the S&P500 use Bloomberg in their
business activities and it is often used by executives in Corporate America as source of financial



1
 Direct monitoring has been used to assess how executives spend their time (e.g., Mintzberg, 1973; Bandiera, Hansen,
Pratt, and Sadun, 2020). But explicit monitoring and self-reported data present obstacles when trying to quantify how
compensation affects moral hazard problems like effort provision.


                                                         1
information, and for risk management, investor relations, communications with analysts, and
competitive industry analysis. 2
         What is under-appreciated though, especially by academics, is that Bloomberg is also a
powerful social network that significantly pre-dates platforms like Facebook. The platform gives
all users access to each other via texting and encourages the exchange of information between
traders and among corporate leaders. When individuals sign user agreements, they are given the
opportunity to communicate with each other via messaging technology. Users are readily identified
as "online" to others if they are logged into their personal account. So, whether someone is actively
using the software is publicly observable.
         We collect minute-by-minute user data during 2017-2020. Figure 1 provides an example
of where we obtained this activity. 3 The green dot by Michael Bloomberg's name indicates that
he is actively using his personal account. If he were to become inactive for greater than 15 minutes,
the dot would turn yellow. If an executive is offline, the dot is red, and if a telephone icon appears,
it indicates he/she is using the mobile application.
         We use this dataset to detect how often each executive is engaged in a work-related task
and estimate the length of time they work each day. 4 We do not use the intensity or total time on
the terminal in our tests, because we expect top executives to have a diverse set of responsibilities
that do not involve being on Bloomberg all day. But, as we describe, the machine learning
algorithm that we employ uses the login patterns over time to describe typical work habits, which
parameterizes their effort provision.
         We start by providing evidence that supports the plausibility of Bloomberg usage as an
effort measure. We show that Bloomberg activity spikes around earnings announcements for both
CEO's and CFO's, and that its intensity of use was higher during the COVID pandemic when



2
  See https://www.bloomberg.com/professional/expertise/c-suite/
3
  It is important to note that we did not collect any private information about what the executives actually did on the
terminal: we did not observe any information about messaging, news search, or trading-related activities. As we are
only interested in the simple usage of the terminal as a proxy for work effort, we do not collect any sensitive
information from corporate firms and keep all identities anonymous in our analysis.
4
  Use of this data was approved by Bloomberg Finance L.P. Additionally, we carefully reviewed the following
contracts and disclosures with General Counsel at Rice University: Bloomberg's user agreement with Michigan State,
Bloomberg's Terms of Service, and Bloomberg's Privacy Policy. See "Disclosure of Your Personal Information" in
https://www.bloomberg.com/notices/privacy/ and https://www.bloomberg.com/notices/tos/. Once subjects were
matched to compensation and firm information, their identities were anonymized and the investigators were made
blind as to particular identities and results. We do not disclose subject identities in any of the results reported in this
paper.


                                                            2
exectuives were confined at home. Importantly, we show that the account activity that we measure
directly depends on the owner of each account, not someone else at the firm. We amass a dataset
of events where an executive is participating or speaking, and document almost no simultaneous
activity on the Bloomberg platform. For example, we show that during analyst and investor days,
the Bloomberg account for every single executive in our sample is inactive.
        Figure 2 shows a histogram of the annual daily usage for an executive in our sample. For
each minute of a 24-hour period, the y-axis measures the probability that the executive is active
on their Bloomberg account during the course of a year. As is common in our data, there is a peak
mid-morning and in the afternoon, with a dip during lunchtime. The machine learning algorithm
uses the observation that this function appears to be similar to a mixed distribution of two normal
distributions, one for the morning and one in the afternoon. The estimation-maximization (EM)
algorithm provides estimates of the underlying moments of the two distributions and we construct
a distance measure called the Gaussian Mixture Length (GML) to proxy for the length of each
executive's workday. 5
         We investigate the effect of effort on firm performance in several ways. To make causal
statements, we include individual executive fixed effects to control for all time-invariant,
unobserved characteristics. We also include measures of insider trading to account for the
influence that private information potentially has on earnings surprises and abnormal returns. First,
using a measure of standardized unexpected earnings (SUE; Foster, Olsen, and Shevlin, 1984), we
find that higher effort is associated with subsequent earnings surprises.
        Then, we show that effort provision has a positive and persistent effect on cumulative
abnormal returns (CAR) following earnings announcements. A one-hour increase in the average
workday length is associated with a CAR of 25-50 basis points that persists for 10 weeks following
the announcement. Motivated by this result, we form calendar-time portfolios using a trading
strategy based on extreme changes in quarterly executive effort relative to past effort. We
document that a risk-adjusted, long-short effort portfolio yields 7.33 basis points per day (37 bps
over 5 days), a quantity that is plausible, robust, and statistically significant.
        Not surprisingly, fifty percent of the firms in our sample are from the finance industry. One
concern is that this is driving our results. To address this, we separately analyze the subset of non-


5
  Besides GML, as we discuss in the paper, we have also constructed three other measures of daily workday effort and
find our main results to be robust.


                                                         3
financial firms and find that our SUE and CAR results are at least as strong, if not stronger. For
non-financial firms, a one-hour increase in the average GML is associated with a CAR of 80-100
basis points at 7-10 weeks following an earnings announcement.
         Another consideration is that executives are frequently compensated based on their firm's
earnings or stock price. These measures might be subject to some degree of manipulation. To
address this, we collect data on credit default swaps that are traded on the firms in our sample. To
our knowledge, no executive is explicitly given incentives to improve the default risk of their firm
as measured by the credit default swap spread. Consistent with the earnings findings, we find that
an increase in average GML in one quarter is associated with an improvement in the firm's CDS
spreads in the next quarter. 6
         Our ability to estimate executive effort allows us to investigate several agency issues that
have received attention in the academic literature. The first is how executives behave when there
are discontinuities in their compensation (Healy, 1985; Degeorge, Patel, and Zeckhauser, 1999;
Murphy, 2000). 7 The mere presence of goals and targets induces kinks, whereby earning
compensation may be outside an executive's locus of control.
         To investigate this, we study changes in executive GML in response to firm performance
within the fiscal year. Specifically, we consider whether firm performance in the 1st half of the
year affects whether earning a cash bonus is within an executive's locus of control for the second
half. 8 We document a large, positive, and statistically significant change in GML when midyear
performance is on pace with set targets. But, when midyear earnings are either exceeding or
lagging behind compensation targets, executives employ less effort. Since the targets do not
change, but beliefs about achieving them do, this within-executive result is a causal effect.
         The next agency issue deals with the possibility that executives engage in leisure activities,
rather than employ effort (Yermack, 2014; Biggerstaff, Cicero, and Puckett, 2017). 9 To capture


6
  The magnitudes are small, but statistically significant. A one hour increase in average GML is associated with a
reduction of -1.50 basis points. Firms in our sample have an average of $34.7 billion in long-term debt. This amounts
to an annual savings of $5.2 million. While small, this does appear to be an economically plausible effect.
7
  For example, Healy (1985) shows that floors and caps in compensation plans give executives the incentive to manage
earnings.
8
  For the executives in our sample, their compensation contracts did not change within the year. We confirm this by
reviewing 8-K filings for the firms in our sample and screening for disclosures under item 5.02.
9
  Both Yermack (2014) and Biggerstaff, Cicero, and Puckett (2017) find evidence consistent with an agency cost
hypothesis by studying leisure activities like vacation travel and golf habits. However, both acknowledge that it may
be impossible to precisely identify what business activities potentially took place during those times because
monitoring executive behavior explicitly is challenging.


                                                         4
conditions that may encourage such activity, we examine the local weather. Specifically, we study
cloud cover, daylight hours, precipitation, as well an adjusted temperature index ­ the Universal
Thermal Climate Index (UTCI) ­ that is designed to capture the human physiological reaction to
the outdoor thermal environment (i.e., temperature, radiation, humidity, and wind speed). 10 We
find that executive effort is reduced during quarters in which weather is more favorable for outdoor
activities. We find the result to be the most pronounced among CEOs and CFOs where a one-
standard-deviation improvement in good weather is associated with 18-20 fewer hours in the office
during the quarter.
           The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we describe the data
collection and provide sample statistics. There we construct our variables of interest and provide
support for using our measure of effort. Section 3 provides an analysis of executive effort and firm
outcomes. In Section 4, we study agency and other incentives to employ effort. Section 5
concludes.


2. Data and Sample Statistics
2.1 Sample Construction and Summary Statistics


User Data: When Bloomberg users are assigned accounts, the company records their "status" by
default. 11 Status is either designated as "online", "idle", "offline", or "mobile". When users first
log on to the platform, their status changes from offline to online, and it remains that way while
they use Bloomberg. However, if they stop using it for 15 minutes, the user's status automatically
changes to "idle". Eventually, and depending on the users' settings, a user is logged off after a
long period of inactivity. Also, when users are logged in via the "Bloomberg Anywhere"
application on their mobile device, the status is listed as "mobile". While using the mobile app,
access to an assigned desktop terminal is restricted, so there is no possibility of double-counting.
           Other users of the terminal can detect the status of any other Bloomberg user by employing
the "PEOP" function, the "BIO" function, or by directly navigating to a user's profile. Figure 1
gives an example of a profile search for Michael Bloomberg. The green dot by Michael
Bloomberg's name indicates that he is online and active. Other status indicators are as follows: a


10
     See Bröde et al. (2012).
11
     Users may set their profile status to "private", but only 9.5% of Executives do so.


                                                             5
red dot means that a user is offline, a yellow dot means that a user is idle, and a gray dot indicates
that a user has chosen to be private. If a user is online via the mobile app, a mobile phone icon
appears. Note the full functionality of the software to contact people who use the platform.
       During 2017-2020, we used the profile search and followed 2,734 users with executive in
their title (e.g., "Chief Financial Officer", "Chief Executive Officer", etc.). We recorded their
name, title, location, firm name, and followed their user status continuously over the entire time
series. At no time did we collect the content of their use: we did not observe their text messaging,
news search, or trading activity. The only data we collected is the time that each person actually
uses the platform.
       The majority of the 2,734 executives in our user dataset work in private firms. Of that
number, 474 are "named executives" at 308 unique public firms. Executives list their geographic
location in their profile. While there are concentrations in the Northeast, Texas, Chicago, and
California, there is a large geographic dispersion. Forty-three states plus the District of Columbia
are represented. When we analyze the effect of effort on abnormal returns, we analyze 1128
executive-quarter observations. To study the effect of contracting on effort, we use the ISS
Incentive Lab database, which collects compensation information from proxy statements and
provides it in tabular format. After merging the set of named executives with the Incentive Lab
database, we are left with 252 top executives from 174 publicly-traded companies, and 520
executive-year observations. In our sample, 27% of executive-year observations are for CEOs
while 45% are for CFOs. The remainder are named executives with other roles.
       Table 1 provides summary statistics at the executive-fiscal year level for the executives in
our sample. Panel 1.A presents statistics on firm characteristics. Size is the market capitalization
(in millions of dollars) of the firm's stock (CRSP item prc times shrout) at the end of the previous
fiscal year; Q is Tobin's Q; leverage is long term debt (Compustat item dltt) plus debt in current
liabilities (Compustat item dlc) all divided by total assets (Compustat item at); productivity is
revenues (Compustat item sale) divided by total assets. The mean market capitalization for the
executives' firms is $43 Billion, with a median of $12.9 Billion. We use the natural logarithm of
size in our regressions (ln_size). Tobin's Q is about 1.58, on average. The average ratios of debt
to assets is 0.31, and average ratio of revenues to assets is 0.35.
       Panel 1.B breaks executive-year observations into industries based on the 4-digit SIC code
of their firms according to the Fama-French 12 industry classifications. The panel shows that



                                                  6
roughly half of the observations are from executives at financial firms, which is not surprising
given the nature of Bloomberg terminals. The next most common industry (12.5% of the
observations) is "Other", which consists of firms in industries with fewer firms that do not fit into
the remaining 11 industries. "Energy" is the third most common industry (9.2% of observations),
followed by Utilities (6.3%), and Healthcare (6.2%). Business Equipment, Chemicals,
Manufacturing, Telecommunications, Consumer NonDurables, Consumer Durables, and
Wholesale and Retail collectively make up the remaining 11.2% of observations.



2.2 Patterns of Bloomberg Usage
        First, we examine patterns in the raw activity data and then provide evidence that the user
data captures a plausible measure of effort provision. While we collect data through 2020, much
of our analysis uses data from 2017-2019. This is due to the need to collect other variables and the
highly unusual events that arose during the COVID pandemic.
        Table 2 provides some summary statistics of user activity. For the 520 executive-year
periods that we collect between September 2017 and December 2019, we have an average of 178
days of data per executive-year. On average, 129 of those are workdays, which we define as
Monday through Friday. There is an average of 31 weeks per executive-year.
        The "Bloomberg Usage" section of Table 2 provides statistics for active platform and
mobile usage for various timeframes. On average, executives in our sample are actively using
Bloomberg for 6.92 hours per week and they spend much less time on the mobile app than on the
platform ­ about 30 minutes per week, on average. They spend very little time on Bloomberg on
the weekend or at night, which we define as 6pm on a given day to 3am the following morning. 12
Also, executives tend to spend little time on Bloomberg on holidays, about thirty minutes per day
on average.
        These patterns tend to suggest that Bloomberg use is a work activity, rather than one of
leisure. To see this visually, Figure 3 presents the average percentage of executives that actively
use the platform during each minute of workdays. Active use is very limited, on average, before
about 7am, and after about 6pm. There is also a drop in activity during the lunch hour. Thus, the
general activity level is concentrated during the traditional 9 to 5 workday. In Figure 4, we examine

12
  These times are based on each executive's local time. We extend the nighttime window to include 3 am in case
they work late and because activity on the platform is at a daily minimum at 3am.


                                                        7
average activity throughout the week. The histogram shows that activity is generally higher at the
beginning of the workweek and declines throughout the week. During a typical workweek, effort
is typically lowest on Friday. 13
           To further explore the plausibility of Bloomberg usage as a proxy for time spent at work,
we next examine whether activity is higher on days with important firm-level events. Figure 5
Panel A shows the average number of active hours in event time for all executives, relative to their
firm's quarterly earnings announcement. A trend line is fitted (using OLS) separately for the
periods before and after the announcement date. The day with the highest amount of activity is the
earnings announcement date. Following the announcement, activity drops and steadily increases
until the next announcement. Panel B shows the same figure for the subset of Chief Financial
Officers, where the pattern is more pronounced. Panel C presents the figure for the subset of
CEOs. Again, activity is the highest on the announcement date, but is also high the following day.
           It is also constructive how usage changed during the COVID-19 pandemic of 2020, once
executives experienced restricted travel, less access to leisure activities, and more time at home.
Figure 6 provides a comparison of daily activity in 2020 with previous years (2018 and 2019) for
the months of March, April, May, and June. By inspection, it is apparent that Bloomberg activity
increased during the pandemic and use of the platform extended later into the evening hours. These
findings are consistent with more remote work habits and substituting time on a computer for travel
or leisure when they are made less available. Also, this appears to provide support for the idea that
Bloomberg usage is in fact helpful in describing the work habits of its users.
           Finally, we attempt to rule out the possibility that an executive's personal account is being
accessed by other people such as their assistants or underlings. To investigate this, we look at usage
habits by excecutives during key firm level events where we they are not only likely to be in
attendance, but speaking as an active participant. These include shareholder meetings, earnings
releases, and conference calls.
           We collect this information using the Bloomberg corporate events calendar (function
"EVTS") which includes the name, type, and timing of each event as well as a description.
Categories include earnings calls, earnings releases, annual meetings, investment banking
conferences/presentations, analst days, and investor days, among others. For each event for which
we know the date and start time, we examine executive activity on the terminal during the first 30

13
     In the figure, we use GML as our measure of activity. We describe this variable in detail in Section 2.3.


                                                             8
minutes of the event. We use a short window since the lengths of the events vary and the end-time
is not always documented. We count the number of executives who are not active on the terminal
at any point during that 30 minute window and aggregate by executive role and event.
       We use Bloomberg's categories and descriptions to categorize events. For the investment
banking conferences/presentations and analyst and investor days, we examine the event transcripts
on Factiva in order to determine who was present. Executives who were not present are excluded
from those two categories. The vast majority of annual meetings do not have transcripts on Factiva.
Table 3 provides terminal usage statistics for each of these categories.
       The results are striking. For the analyst and investor days, the Bloomberg account for every
every single executive is inactive. During investment banking conferences, more than 99% of
excecutives are not active on the terminal. In the full sample of almost 1,500 observations, there
are only 6 cases (4 unique executives) where there is activity on an executives' Bloomberg account
during an event. For annual meetings, more than 90% of the time, there is no activity on the
terminal for CEOs, CFOs, and other executives. These results are overwhelmingly consistent with
the notion that activity on the terminal is typically carried out by the executive him- or herself.
       For reference, Table 3 also presents results for two other events where the executive may
or may not have access to the Bloomberg terminal, depending on the situation ­ earnings releases
and earnings calls. The data suggest that there is relatively less inactivity during an earnings
release: 74.6% of CEOs are inactive, 72.4% for CFOs, and 81.3% for other excecutives. Finally,
during earnings calls, about 87% of CEOs, 89% of CFOs and 87% of other executives are not
actively using their Bloomberg account.


2.3 Effort Measures and Machine Learning
       At first glance, it might be attractive to create simple measures based on examining
individual days to evaluate when an executive is on the terminal, such as the average number of
days per week or the average daily time between the first and last login. However, while these
measures provide similar results and are intuitive, they underestimate the executives' work habits
if executives log into Bloomberg intermittently and at different times of the day. This is why we
aggregate each executive's activity across a fixed time period (one year or one quarter) and use
unsupervised machine learning to construct a distributional measure that better controls for the
intermittent, and perhaps erratic, usage of the terminal.



                                                  9
        Inspection of Figures 2 and 3 reveals that the overall usage pattern looks like a distribution
that results from the mixture of two normal distributions, one for the morning and one after lunch.
Clearly, the pattern in the data is not derived from a distribution per se, but we use this observation
to construct our primary workday length measure, Gaussian Mixture Length (GML), which is
based on a mixture of normal distributions that we construct as follows.
                                                                        
        For each executive and year, we know the probability  that the executive is logged on
every minute of the day     {12: 00 , 11: 59 }. We construct a pdf by computing
                                                           
                                                            
                                               =         
                                                          
                  
By construction,   = 1. We then assume that the constructed distribution is a mixture of
                                                                 2
two normal distributions   {1, 2}, each with mean µ and variance   , where µ2 > µ1 . This
captures the idea that executives may have different morning and afternoon work habits. Also, as
described above, a dip in activity around lunchtime is very frequent in our sample.
        For the mixed distribution, there is a probability  that any realization is drawn from
distribution 1 and probability (1 -  ) that it was drawn from distribution 2. The mixed distribution
                           2
has mean µ1,2 and variance 1,2 , which can be measured for each executive. We also have the

following relationships:
                                          1,2 = 1 + (1 -  )2
                             2     2          2                  2
                             1,2 = 1 + (1 -  )2 + 1 -  )(2 - 1 )

Using these two equations, we perform an expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm to estimate
                                                  2 2
all five parameters for each executive (, 1 , 2 , 1 , 2 ).
        The EM algorithm consists of two steps: the estimation step (E-Step) and the maximization
step (M-Step). In the E-Step, the expectation of the log likelihood function is calculated for a
given set of candidate parameters. In the M-Step, the parameters are re-chosen in order to
maximize the expectation. The process continues, iterating between the E-Step and the M-Step
until the sequence converges. In our case, the likelihood function involves the likelihood of
observing the data given that there are two unobservable Gaussian distributions generating the
data. We implement the procedure using the scikit-learn library for Python. 14


14
  We use the sklearn.mixture.GaussianMixture method with a convergence threshold of 0.001 and K-Means clustering
to initialize the parameters.


                                                      10
       For each executive, we create the daytime length measure GML with the estimated vector
          2 2
(1 , 2 , 1 , 2 ), which is computed as follows:
                                    = (2 - 1 ) + 1 + 2
The distance GML measures the difference between the means of the two distributions and adds a
standard deviation on each side. As such, it allows for the more diverse work habits that are present
in our executive sample.
       Figure 7 provides three visual examples of how GML is constructed. The shaded blue area
is each executive's underlying Bloomberg activity, which has been converted into a pdf. The two
yellow curves are the normal distributions derived from the EM algorithm and the red curve is the
resultant mixed distribution. As can be appreciated, the estimated mixture closely approximates
the underlying activity, and captures differences in morning versus afternoon work activity. The
variable GML is the distance between the two solid lines in the plot.
       The last panel in Table 2 also provides summary statistics for GML. The mean level of
GML during the sample is about 9.5 hours with a standard deviation of about 2 hours. This is likely
to be a superior measure of executive work habits as its magnitude is more consistent with what
we would intuitively expect. Figure 8 provides a histogram that provides a distribution of GML for
executives in our sample.


3. Effort Provision and Firm Outcomes
       Now, we address a long-standing question whether and how much incentives and effort
provision improve firm value. From a theoretical perspective, higher effort should increase the
probability of good outcomes. Alternatively, effort may be inefficient in many cases or misguided.
Either way, as Murphy (1999) points out, studying this has been challenging in the past: because
changes in executive compensation or ownership grants are public information, equity prices
adjust quickly (i.e., markets are efficient). Therefore, previous studies have been constrained
because investigators had to connect incentives to firm value directly, without measuring the
intermediate step of effort provision. That is, investigators had no better information than equity
market participants. However, since we are able to measure executive effort directly here and this
is not observable to (or followed by) equity market participants, we can now revisit these issues.
       We start by examining whether executives' effort provision during the fiscal quarter affects
firm earnings surprises. We use Standardized Unexpected Earnings (SUE), which is defined as the



                                                  11
difference in the current quarterly earnings per share and the earnings per share 4 quarters prior,
divided by the standard deviation of these differences measured over the previous eight quarters
(Foster, Olsen, and Shevlin, 1984).
         The independent variable is D_GML, which is defined as the difference in GML during the
fiscal quarter minus the same measure during the fiscal quarter 4 quarters prior. In our regression,
we focus on CEOs and CFOs and include measures of insider trading to control for private
information that may be related to both effort provision and earnings. The variables D_purchase
and D_sell are defined as the change in the log value of open market insider purchases and sells
that the executive made, relative to 4 quarters prior. Two analogous variables D_purchase_all and
D_sell_all capture changes in buying and selling by all insiders at the firm. Because we take
differences in both the key independent and dependent variables, we are in essence studying a
within-executive effect that controls for time-invariant, unobservable characteristics. 15
         According to Table 4, effort has a positive effect on SUE in all specifications. Roughly, a
one standard deviation increase in D_GML leads to a 0.13 standard deviation increase in SUE. In
the final specification of Table 4, we examine whether this result is present in non-financial firms,
which make up about half of the sample. The results are significant and the point estimates are in
fact larger when focusing on this subset of executives. 16
         Next, we study the effect of effort provision on cumulative abnormal returns (CARs)
around firm earnings announcements. To measure abnormal returns, we use a Fama French 3-
Factor model to estimate factor loadings using a year of past returns (after skipping the most recent
week) and create daily alphas. Then, we regress cumulative abnormal returns on GML from day
1 post-earnings announcement through 50 trading days (10 weeks), just prior to the next earnings
announcement season. We include standardized unexpected earnings, SUE, to capture the impact
of the earnings surprise on returns. Additionally, to capture information that may be known to
insiders at the firm, but not yet public, we include our four measures of insider trading by the
executive and other insiders (log_purchase, log_sell, log_purchase_all, and log_sell_all). We
include executive individual fixed effects to control for time-invariant executive characteristics.



15
   We have also run regressions using quarterly GML levels with an executive fixed effects and find similar qualitative
results.
16
   In untabulated resuts, we verify that our results also hold for non-financial firms using the first 7 specifications
from Table 3.


                                                         12
       Table 5 shows that effort has a positive and persistent effect on returns. Panel 4.A examines
all executives. The coefficients indicate that an increase in the length of the executive's workday
by an hour is associated with a one-day abnormal return of 27.35 basis points. This increases over
time and plateaus in a persistent 30-50 basis point CAR at 4-10 weeks. In Panel 4.B, we focus on
executives at non-financial firms and find larger coefficients, though statistical significance is
slightly lower over some horizons. These findings imply that unobserved effort that is not fully
anticipated by an efficient market becomes incorporated into asset prices over time. Before now,
where hidden effort was undetectable, this effect could not be appreciated. But, as we document,
it is significant and independent of other executive attributes.
       Motivated by the results in Table 5, we study the effect of effort on stock returns by forming
calendar-time portfolios. We form portfolios using an implementable trading strategy based on
extreme changes in quarterly executive effort relative to past effort. We create two portfolios,
High_Effort, and Low_Effort. To be included in the high effort portfolio on a given day, we require
(1) the change in GML for a stock's executive relative to GML four quarters prior to be in the top
10% for all executives for the same fiscal quarter end; and (2) the earnings announcement must
have occurred within the past five trading days. The low effort portfolio is defined analogously,
with the change in GML in the bottom 10% of all executives with the same fiscal quarter end. To
reduce noise, when there are fewer than 2 stocks satisfying the two criteria on a given day, we
substitute the risk free rate of return. Portfolio returns are value-weighted using each stock's
market capitalization. We also form a portfolio that is long High_Effort and short Low_Effort.
Both raw returns and risk-adjusted returns are reported. We use the Fama-French 3-factor model
to adjust for risk. Factor loadings are estimated using a year of past daily stock returns (skipping
the most recent week).
       Table 6 presents the mean returns and standard errors in basis points per day. According to
the results, the risk-adjusted long-short portfolio yields 7.33 basis points per day, or 37 bps over 5
days. This quantity is plausible and statistically significant.
       One concern that might arise is that measuring the effect of effort on firm value using
earnings or stock prices might be confounded by the fact that executives are typically given
bonuses based on these metrics. In some circumstances, these quantities may be subject to
manipulation. To address this, we study the relationship between GML and a firm's credit default




                                                  13
swap spread. To our knowledge, no executive in our sample is compensated based on this, so it is
not subject to management or manipulation.
         We obtain CDS spread data from DataStream for the firms in our sample. We use the 5-
year CDS contracts, which have the broadest coverage. For each firm and quarter, we keep the
spread quote from the last available day in the quarter. Since not all firms have active contracts
during our sample period, our final sample includes 574 observations over 89 executives and 57
firms.
         We report the results in Table 7, where we run regressions of firm CDS spreads in quarter
t+1 on executive effort (GML) in quarter t, the firm's CDS spread (Spread) in quarter t, measures
of insider trading in quarter t, and other firm characteristics. In Specifications 1-3, we only include
Spread during quarter t and the GML during quarter t. A one hour increase in GML is associated
with a reduction of -0.79 to -0.929 basis points in CDS spreads. Once we control for firm
characteristics and include executive fixed effects (Specification 5), the magnitudes increase to
negative 1.50 basis points. Including executive fixed effects ensures that we measure the impact
of the individual executive effort on CDS spreads.
         Next, controlling for insider trading activity during quarter t (Specifications 6 and 7) does
not alter our findings. This alleviates the concerns that GML is high (or low) due to the firm
performance during the quarter, which is associated with subsequent CDS spreads. In the last two
specificaitons we exclude financial firms. Note that the coefficient estimates are not materially
different from what is reported in the other specificaitons. However, the low number of
observations makes the estimation noiser, which reduces the statistical significance levels. Finally,
although we use an AR1 model throughout our specifications (i.e., controlling for Spread t), a first
differences model (i.e., Spread t+1 ­ Spread t) virtually provides the same set of results.


4. Effort Provision and Agency
4.1 Incentives and the Locus of Control


         Healy (1985) was the first to consider how executives behave when there are
discontinuities in their compensation. When targets and goals are included in employment
contracts, this introduces kinks into the compensation that executives may earn based on
performance. Healy (1985) and others focused on how these discontinuities affected earnings



                                                  14
management and investment within the firm (Degeorge, Patel, and Zeckhauser, 1999; Murphy,
2000).
         A natural question to consider is how executives employ effort in similar circumstances.
What is at issue is whether earning more money is within their locus of control. If firm performance
is such that an executive is far from attaining a goal or is well past a target, then employing extra
effort is unlikely to yield a marginal benefit. In such cases, earning compensation is outside of
their locus of control. In contrast, if an executive is on pace to earn extra compensation (i.e., at a
compensation kink), there is a higher marginal benefit of effort and securing extra compensation
is within their locus of control. 17
         In the Definitive Proxy Statement (SEC form DEF 14A), public firms disclose their
compensation contracts from the previous fiscal year for "named executives". Proxy statements
are filed in advance of each firm's annual shareholder meeting, which typically are released during
Q1. Item 402(a)(3) in SEC Regulation S-K defines the named executives as the CEO, the CFO,
and at least three other executives with the highest compensation, and up to two former executives
that served during the year and would have been in the previous category.
         Proxy statements provide information on the type of compensation that each executive
would receive ­ fixed wage, cash bonus, equity, option grant ­ as well as the target metric that
would be used to compute end-of-year compensation (e.g., EBITDA, EPS, or Sales). While each
proxy statement is backward looking, this allows us to study how ex ante contracting affects
subsequent effort. For example, the 2019 proxy statement for a particular firm describes the
compensation package and goals that its top executives received at the beginning of 2018.
         For our purposes here, we use the ISS Incentive Lab database, which collects compensation
information from proxy statements and provides it in tabular format. After merging the set of
named executives with the Incentive Lab database with our Bloomberg data, we are left with 252
top executives from 174 publicly-traded companies, and 520 executive-year observations.
         Table 8 provides statistics on these executives' compensation contracts. We define the
following variables: value_stock_owned as the dollar value of the executive's stockholdings in the
firm measured using price at the beginning of the fiscal year; salary is the executives' fixed salary



17
   As noted earlier, Healy (1985) describes this as the presence of floors and caps in compensation plans. An executive
is outside their locus of control when they earn the floor or the cap and are well away from the incentive zone of their
compensation scheme.


                                                          15
during the fiscal year; cash_perf is the target dollar amount of the cash-based performance
incentive bonus from the executive's compensation contract for the fiscal year; stock_perf is the
target dollar amount of the stock-based performance incentive bonus from the contract; stock_time
and option_time are the values of the time-based stock and option grants, respectively, from the
contract; Predicted compensation, pred_comp, is the sum of salary, cash_perf, stock_perf,
stock_time, and option_time.
       The top section of Table 8 indicates that 27% of executive-year observations are for CEOs
while 45% are for CFOs. The remainder are named executives with other roles. The middle section
of the panel provides summary statistics on compensation contracts. The mean value of the firm's
own stock held by the executive is about $69 Million, with a median of $10.7 Million. Executives
in the sample own about 0.77% of the firm, on average, but this is highly skewed with a median
of only 0.07% The average annual predicted compensation is roughly $7.2 million, and is broken
into incentive compensation of roughly $3.7 million that depends on attaining particular targets
(cash_perf and stock_perf) and fixed compensation of roughly $3.5 million that is guaranteed
while the executive is employed by the firm (salary, stock_time, and option_time).
       The final section of Table 8 provides a breakdown of the average weights of the metric
types that determine the performance-based cash bonuses. While Incentive Lab provides many
metrics (e.g., EBIT, customer satisfaction, etc.) as well as the metric types (e.g., Accounting), it
does not provide the value-weight of each metric in the compensation formula. That is, for a
particular executive, Incentive Lab determines the frequency with which a target or metric is used,
not the proportion of the bonus that is linked to that particular measure. Consequently, we gather
this information manually from the proxy statements. We find that accounting metrics make up
about 62.8% of the metric types in the performance formulas in our sample. Metrics in the "Other"
category make up about 27.6% of the formulas, on average. These are non-accounting based
metrics that are typically industry- or firm-specific. Individual (stock price) performance makes
up about 7.1% (2.5%) of the weight on average in our sample.
       The way we investigate the effect of locus of control on effort is to examine changes in
GML in response to firm performance within a fiscal year. Specifically, we study whether
executive effort varies based on how close or far away from the targets firm performacnce is as
the year goes on. When achieving bonuses is within the locus of control for an executive, we would
expect them to exert more effort to secure higher compensation.



                                                16
        While compensation contracts are known to executives in advance and are typically not
subsequently changed, firms do occasionally modify contracts during the year for various reasons.
Such material changes necessitate the filing of Form 8-K with the SEC. If these changes are present
in our sample, it may affect the interpretation of our results. To address this issue, we examine all
8-K filings issued by firms from the sample used in Table 9. We focus on Item 5.02 in the 8-K
which includes changes in compensation. Within that subset of filings, we identify those that
include the words "compensation", "change" or "modify". Next, we carefully read the resulting
filings to identify the exact nature of the event that triggered the 8-K as well as the specific
executive associated with the event, if any. We find no evidence of any changes in contracts during
the year in this sample.
        We proceed to examine whether and when executives increase effort in the 2nd half of the
fiscal year, in response to firm performance in the 1st half. We posit that when earnings per share
in the first half of the year are on pace to finish close to the annual EPS target specified in the
executive's cash bonus contract, executives will employ more effort to ensure that they attain their
set EPS goals. For each executive whose cash bonus contract includes an earnings-per-share target,
and for whom we have Bloomberg profile activity data for at least one fiscal quarter in the first
half of the year and one quarter in the second half of the year, we measure the quantity
2  1 + 2 -  / , where 1 and 2 are the firm's earnings per

share in the 1st and 2nd fiscal quarter, and EPS Target is the executive's annual EPS target. This
measures the absolute percentage projected deviation from the earnings target based on the first
half of the year. The variable target_1_pct is equal to 1 when this quantity is less than 1% and 0
otherwise.
        In Table 9, we regress the change in GML from the first half of the fiscal year to the second
half on the interaction between target_1_pct and pct_cash_perf and other control variables. The
coefficient on the interaction term is positive, large in magnitude, and statistically significant. This
implies that when a firm's midyear performance is far from compensation targets (high or low),
and achievement of a bonus is outside their locus of control, they employ less effort in the second
half of the year. It is when success or failure is within their potential control that they exert more




                                                  17
effort. Also, because we study changes in GML ­ a within-executive effect ­ this supports a causal
relationship.


4.2 Effort and Leisure

        As noted earlier, both Yermack (2014) and Biggerstaff, Cicero, and Puckett (2017) study
leisure activities like vacation travel and golf habits and find evidence consistent with an agency
cost hypothesis. Here, we add to this by studying the effect of weather conditions on effort
provision. The primary question is whether executives tend to shirk when weather conditions make
it attractive to engage in outside activities.
        Clearly, this will depend on the locale in which the executive tends to reside. For example,
a 50-degree, partly cloudy day in February will be perceived differently by an executive who
resides in Chicago than one who is in San Diego. So, simply regressing temperatures or sunny
days on effort provision is insufficient to capture executives' tendencies to employ less effort.
        To this end, we construct a comfort/weather measure based on local weather conditions.
We use the Universal Thermal Climate Index (UTCI) which is designed to capture the human
physiological reaction to the outdoor thermal environment (i.e., temperature, radiation, humidity,
and wind speed; Bröde et al., 2012). In contrast to other comfort indexes, it was designed to
capture thermal comfort in an outdoor setting. Moreover, it's highly correlated with survey-based
measures of human thermal comfort (e.g., Zare et al., 2018).
        Using meteorological data from the website Weather Underground, we gather temperature,
humidity, and wind speed data in order to calculate UTCI. 18 We identify the hours during the
quarter in which UTCI falls in the "thermal comfort zone", which is between 18°C and 26°C
(64.4°F to 78.8°F). 19 Additionally, we gather data from Weather Underground on precipitation,
cloud cover, and daylight hours. Then, we create the variable good_weather which is defined as
the percentage of hours during a time interval in which (a) UTCI is in the "thermal comfort zone",
(b) there is no precipitation, (b) the sky is not overcast, and (c) and the sun is up.
        For illustrative purposes, Figure 9 plots good_weather at the month frequency for 4 cities
­ San Diego, CA, Honolulu, HI, New York, NY, and Houston, TX. The figure shows that the


18
  To calculate UTCI, we use the Python pythermalcomfort package (Tartarini and Schiavon, 2020).
19
  See The Commission for Thermal Physiology of the International Union of Physiological Sciences (2003) and
Bröde et al., 2012


                                                      18
percentage of hours considered to be "good" varies greatly by location and by time. Summer
months in New York and San Diego tend to have the most good weather hours. By contrast, in
Honolulu and Houston, summer months are too hot or humid to fall within the thermal comfort
zone. In those cities, spring, fall, or winter (especially in Honolulu) tend to provide more
opportunity to enjoy the weather. Across the 1,593 executive-quarter observations in our sample,
good_weather has an mean (median) of 8.6% (7.1%) and a standard deviation of 7.7%.
        To examine whether executives are less likely to spend as much time in the office when
the weather is particularly good, we regress quarterly GML on good_weather, as well as a
combinations of year, executive role, location, and executive fixed effects. Specifications (1)
through (5) in Table 10 include the full sample of 1,593 executive-quarter observations. The
coefficient on good_weather varies between about -2.3 and -2.5 and is statistically significant at
1% across all five specifications, suggesting that executives shorten their work day length in
quarters in which the weather is particularly favorable for outdoor activities. The coefficient
indicates that a one-standard-deviation increase in good_weather in a given quarter is associated
with about 10 fewer minutes per day in the office. With about 66 weekdays in a quarter, this
translates to about 12 hours out of the office.
        In the specifications (6), (7), and (8), we examine whether this behavior varies across
executive roles. The results indicate that it is particularly strong for CEOs and CFOs, and not
significant for other named executives. For a CEO and CFO, a one-standard-deviation increase in
good_weather is associated with about 20 and 18 fewer hours in the officer per quarter,
respectively.


4.3 Effort and Competition

        The last consideration that we explore is how executives respond to competition in the
product market place. To measure competition, we focus on the firm's growth in quarterly sales
relative to its peers. The idea is that an increase in peer firm sales relative to the firm should induce
more effort since executive performance is also assessed by market share. To construct a
representative set of peers, for each firm, we include up to 10 closest peers (when the data allows),
using the GICS6 industry classification. Closest peers are defined based on the smallest absolute
difference in firm market cap.




                                                   19
        Our measure of growth in quarterly sales (%Chng_Sales) is defined as the percentage
change in the firm's sales during fiscal quarter t relative to the firm's quarterly sales 4 quarters
prior [(Sales t - Sales t-4)/Sales t-4)] in %. In a similar manner, %Chng_PeerSales is defined as
the percentage change in the firm's peers' sales during fiscal quarter t relative to the firm's peers'
quarterly sales 4 quarters prior. We then calculate the market-cap value-weighted average across
all peers.
        We report the results in Table 11. Following the same methodology in Table 4, we run
quarterly regressions of changes in executive effort (D_GML) on lagged changes in quarterly firm
sales and lagged changes in quarterly peer firms' sales. As in Table 4, change in executive effort
(D_GML) is defined as the difference in GML during the fiscal quarter minus the same measure
during the fiscal quarter 4 quarters prior.
        All specifications include executive fixed effects, thus the analysis is conducted at the
executive level. In Specifications 1-3, we explore the effect of both firm growth in sales and peer
growth in sales on changes during quarter t-1 on GML over the next quarter. Strikingly, while the
firm's own growth in sales does not predict subsequent changes in GML, growth in peer firms'
sales has a positive and significant effect on GML. The effect is economically significant. A 5%
increase in peer firms sales is associated with an increase of 0.40 hours during the next quarter
(0.078 x 5=0.40). Note that the quarterly financial results are reported toward the end of the first
month of the subsequent quarter. Thus, our estimates likely underestimate the true effect, since
GML is estimated over the entire quarter period.
        Controlling for firm characteristics slightly attenuates the effect of peer firms (0.06,
Specification 6). Including changes in sales in quarter t-2 confirms that executives do respond to
the changes in sales of the most recent quarter (i.e., t-1). In the last two specificaitons, we exclude
financial firms. The coefficient estimates are not materially different from what is reported in the
other specificaitons. However, as in Table 7, the low number of observations makes the estimation
noiser, which reduces statistical significance.


5. Conclusion

        While hidden action problems are ubiquitous in firms and markets, technology is making
it easier to assess hidden action problems. Indeed, the use of cookies and web traffic surveillance




                                                  20
makes it easier to follow peoples' actions, even when they do not suspect it. We predict that such
monitoring may eventually shed light on many unresolved issues in economics.
       In this paper, we do not employ such tactics, but rely on a publicly-available measure to
characterize how effort affects firm-value. While we are careful not to collect information about
the nature of how actually executives use Bloomberg (for privacy reasons), we are able to conclude
that higher attention to their firm and higher work intensity appear to be associated with positive
earnings surprises and abnormal stock returns. This was not obvious ex ante, since it could have
been the case that effort was inefficient or possibly misguided.
       Finally, we consider several agency issues that have been highlighted in the academic
literature. We find that executives do decrease effort when the benefit of receiving higher
compensation is outside of their locus of control and when weather conditions make it attractive
to engage in outside activities. In contrast, effort provision does appear to respond positively to
competition within an executive's industry, measured by sales growth by competing firms.




                                                21
References

Aboody, D., Johnson, N. B., and Kasnik, R. "Employee stock options and future firm
performance: Evidence from option repricings". Journal of Accounting and Economics 50: 74­
92, 2010.

Bandiera, O., Hansen, S., Pratt, A., and Sadun, R. "CEO Behavior and Firm Perfomance". Forth
coming in Journal of Political Economy.

Bebchuk, L. A., and Fried, J. M. "Executive Compensation as an Agency Problem". Journal of
Economic Perspectives 17: 71­92, 2003.

Bennett, B., Bettis, J. C., Gopalan, R. and Milborn, T. "Compensation goals and firm
performance". Journal of Financial Economics 124: 307­330, 2017.

Berle, A., A. and Means, G. C. The Modern Corporation and Private Property, New York, 1932.

Bertrand, M. and Mullainathan, S. "Are CEO's rewarded for luck? The ones without principals
are". Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(3): 901-932, 2001.

Biggerstaff, L., Ciceero, D.C., and Puckett, A. "FORE! An Analysis of CEO Shirking".
Management Science 63(7): 2302-2322, 2017.

Bröde, P., Fiala, D., Blaejczyk, K., Holmér, I., Jendritzky, G., Kampmann, B., Tinz, B., and
Havenith, G. "Deriving the operational procedure for the Universal Thermal Climate Index
(UTCI)." International Journal of Biometeorology 56, no. 3 (2012): 481-494.

Cogwill, B. and Zitzewitz, E. "Incentive Effects of Equity Compensation: Employee-level
evidence from Google". Working paper, Dartmouth College.

Coughlan, A. T. and Schmidt, R.M. "Executive compensation, management turnover, and firm
performance". Journal of Accounting and Economics 7: 43­66, 1985.

Core, J. and Guay, W. "The Use of Equity Grants to Manage Optimal Equity Incentive Levels".
Journal of Accounting and Economics 28: 151­84, 1999.

Core, J. and Guay, W. "Estimating the Value of Employee Stock Option Portfolios and Their
Sensitivities to Price Volatility". Journal of Accounting Research 40: 613­30, 2002.

Degeorge, F., Patel, J. and Zeckhauser, R. "Earnings management to exceed thresholds." Journal
of Buriness 72(1): 1-33, 1999.

Edmans, A. and Gabaix, X. "Executive Compensation: A Modern Primer". Journal of Economic
Literature 54(4), 1232-1287, 2016.




                                               22
Edmans, A., Gabaix, X., and Jenter, D. "Executive Compensation: A Survey of Theory and
Evidence". Chapter 9 in Benjamin E. Hermalin and Michael S. Weisbach (eds.), Handbook of
the Economics of Corporate Governance, Elsevier: Amsterdam, 383-539, 2017.

Foster, G., Olsen, C. and Shevlin, T. "Earnings releases, anomalies, and the behavior of security
returns." Accounting Review 59(4): 574-603, 1984.

Frydman, C. and Saks, R.E. "Executive Compensation: A New View from a Long-Term
Perspective, 1936­2005". Review of Financial Studies 23(5): 2099- 2138, 2010.

Gormley, T. A., Matsa, D. A., and Milborn, T. "CEO compensation and corporate risk: Evidence
from a natural experiment". Journal of Accounting and Economics 56: 79-101, 2013.

Hall, B. J., and Liebman, J. B. "Are CEOs Really Paid Like Bureaucrats?" Quarterly Journal of
Economics 113: 653­91, 1998.

Hall, B.J. and Murphy, K.J. "Stock Options for Undiversified Executives". Journal of
Accounting and Economics 33(1): 3-42, 2002.

Hayes, R.M., Lemmon, M., and Qui, M. "Stock options and managerial incentives for risk-
taking: Evidence from FAS 123R". Journal of Financial Economics 105: 174-190, 2012.

Healy, P.M. "The Effect of Bonus Schemes on Accounting Decisions". Journal of Accounting
and Economics 7: 85-107, 1985.

Holmstrom, B. and Milgrom, P. "Aggregation and Linearity in the Provision of Intertemporal
Beliefs". Econometrica 55(2): 303-328, 1987.

Jensen, M. C. and Murphy, K.J. "Performance Pay and Top-Management Incentives". Journal of
Political Economy 98(2): 225-264, 1990.

Mehran, H. "Executive compensation structure, ownership, and firm performance". Journal of
Financial Economics 38: 163­184, 1995.

Mintzberg, H. The Nature of Managerial Work Harper and Row., New York, 1973.

Morck, R., Shleifer,A., and Vishny, R.W. "Management owenership and market valuation: An
empirical analysis". Journal of Financial Economics 20: 293-315, 1988.

Murphy, K. J. "Corporate Performance and Managerial Remuneration: An Empirical Analysis".
Journal of Accounting and Economics 7:11­42, 1985.

Murphy, K.J. "Executive Compensation" in Orley Ashenfelter and David Card (eds.) Handbook
of Labor Economics, Vol. 3b, Elsevier Science North Holland, Chapter 38: 2485-2563, 1999.




                                               23
Murphy, K. J. "Performance Standards in Incentive Contracts," Journal of Accounting and
Economics 30 (3): 245-78, 2000.

Tartarini, F., Schiavon, S., 2020. pythermalcomfort: A Python package for thermal comfort
research. SoftwareX 12, 100578. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.softx.2020.100578

The Commission for Thermal Physiology of the International Union of Physiological Sciences
(2003) Glossary of terms for thermal physiology. Journal of Thermal Biology 28:75­106.
doi:10.1016/S0306-4565 (02)00055-4

Yermack, D. "Do corporations award CEO stock options effectively?". Journal of Financial
Economics 39: 237-269, 1995.

Yermack, D. Tailspotting: "Identifying and profiting from CEO vacation trips". Journal of
Financial Economics 113: 252-269, 2014.

Zare, S., Hasheminejad, N., Shirvan, H. E., Hemmatjo, R., Sarebanzadeh, K., and Ahmadi, S.
"Comparing Universal Thermal Climate Index (UTCI) with selected thermal
indices/environmental parameters during 12 months of the year." Weather and Climate
Extremes 19 (2018): 49-57.




                                              24
Tables and Figures:

Table 1. Summary Statistics:

The table reports the summary statistics of firm characteristics (Panel A) of executives' firms, executives' and
their industries (Panel B). Our full sample includes data 520 executive-year observations for 252 named
executives online on Bloomberg with accounting data on Compustat. Size is the market capitalization of the
firm's stock (measured in millions of dollars), Q is Tobin's Q, Leverage is long term debt (Compustat item dltt)
plus debt in current liabilities (Compustat item dlc) all divided by total assets (Compustat item at). productivity
is revenues (Compustat item sale) divided by total assets. Industries in Panel B are defined using the Fama
French 12 industry definitions which are available on Kenneth French's website.



Panel 1.A ­ Firm Characteristics

           Variable                   N        Mean       Std Dev 25th Pctl Median 75th Pctl
           size                      520       43,194      68,842   5,389   12,894  51,390
           Q                         520        1.588       1.102   1.018    1.179   1.755
           Leverage                  520        0.314       0.239   0.118    0.269   0.455
           productivity              520        0.353       0.393   0.060    0.237   0.494




                                                        25
Panel 1.B ­ Industries

                  Industry                    N OBS   Pct of Sample
                  Finance                      284        54.6%
                  Other                         65        12.5%
                  Energy                        48         9.2%
                  Utilities                     33         6.3%
                  Healthcare                    32         6.2%
                  Business Equipment            17         3.3%
                  Chemicals                     10         1.9%
                  Consumer NonDurables          10         1.9%
                  Telecommunications            9          1.7%
                  Manufacturing                 8          1.5%
                  Wholesale and Retail          3          0.6%
                  Consumer Durables             1          0.2%




                                         26
Table 2. Effort Measures

The table reports the summary statistics of terminal usage by executives as well as the derived effort measure.
Our sample includes data for 252 named executives that are online on Bloomberg during sample period at firms
with data in the Compustat database. Summary statistics for Bloomberg usage are presented for both "Active"
and "Mobile", where Active indicates that the executive is actively using the Bloomberg terminal and Mobile
indicates that the executive is actively using the Bloomberg Professional mobile application. The effort measure
GML (Gaussian Mixture Length) is our measure of workday length (in hours) during the fiscal year. See Section
2.3 for details on the construction of GML. Data used in the table cover the period from September 2017 to
December 2019 and effort and usage variables are measured over the fiscal year of a given executive's firm.



Sample Coverage:
         named executives:                        252
         executive-year obs:                      520
         mean days:                               178
         mean workdays (Mon-Fri):                 129
         mean weeks:                               31
                                                             Active                         Mobile
Bloomberg Usage:                                 Mean        Median    St Dev     Mean      Median     St Dev
        weekly                                   6.92         5.31      5.81      0.45       0.15       0.96
        evenings (Mon-Fri)                       0.13         0.06      0.29      0.05       0.01       0.11
        weekend (per day)                        0.06         0.00      0.19      0.02       0.00       0.08
        holidays                                 0.54         0.14      0.86      0.04       0.00       0.27

Effort Measure:                                  Mean        St Dev   25th pctl   Median 75th Pctl
          GML (Gaussian Mixture Length)          9.47         2.10      8.13       9.19   10.46




                                                        27
Table 3. Executive Activity During Events

The table provides statistics on executive activity on Bloomberg Terminals during investment banking
conferences/presentations, analyst days, investor dayss, annual meetings, earnings releases, and earnings calls.
Executives are considered "inactive" if they are not actively using the Bloomberg Terminal at any point during
the 30 mintues following the beginning of the event. For the Conference/Presentation and Analyst/Investor Day
events, we examine transcripts of the events on Factiva to determine whether the executive was present. For
those two events, we exclude any active executives who are not listed as participants in the event. Data on event
descriptions, dates, start times, and other details are collected from the Bloomberg terminal using the "EVTS"
function. Data cover the fiscal years 2017 ­ 2019.


                                       CEOs                          CFOs                      Other
                              events inactive pct           events inactive pct        events inactive pct
Conference/Presentation        410      408   99.5%          784      783   99.9%       287     284    99.0%
Analyst/Investor Day            35       35  100.0%           55       55  100.0%        27      27   100.0%
Annual Meeting                  70       66   94.3%          122      111   91.0%        67      61    91.0%
Earnings Release               327      244   74.6%          543      393   72.4%       316     257    81.3%
Earnings Call                  312      271   86.9%          544      486   89.3%       303     263    86.8%




                                                       28
Table 4. Effort and Earnings Surprise

The table provides results of regressions of earnings surprises on changes in CEO and CFO effort, measures of
insider trading, and firm characteristics. The measure of earnings surprise is Standardized Unexpected Earnings
(SUE), which is defined as the difference in the current quarterly earnings per share and the earnings per share
4 quarters prior divided by the standard deviation of these differences measured over the previous eight quarters.
Change in effort (D_GML) is defined as the difference in GML during the fiscal quarter minus the same measure
during the fiscal quarter 4 quarters prior. The first 7 specifications include executives in all industires while
specification 9 is limited to those in non-financial firms. Four measures of insider trading are included in the
regressions based on differences in insider trading between the fiscal quarter and the fiscal quarter 4 quarter
prior. The variables D_purchase, and D_sell, are the differences in log dollar amount of open market insider
purchases and sales, respectively, by the executive during the fiscal quarter associated with the earnings
announcement minus the amounts 4 quarters prior. The variables D_purchase_all and D_sell_all are the log
dollar amount of open market insider purchases and sales by all insiders at the firm during the fiscal quarter
minus the amounts 4 quarters prior. Insider trading data are from the SEC Edgar database. Terminal activity are
from Bloomberg, analyst forecast and earnings per share data are from I/B/E/S, and Fama-French 12 industry
definitions are from Ken French's website. Firm characteristics, size, leverage, productivity, and Tobin's Q are
from CRSP and Compustat and are included where indicated. An intercept is estimated in each regression, but
not reported. Standard errors are clustered by executive and are reported in parentheses. Statistical significance
at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level is indicated with *, **, and ***, respectively.



Variable                  (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)          (8)          (9)
D_GML                   0.063        0.058        0.078       0.075       0.062        0.054        0.062        0.053        0.077
                      (0.027) **   (0.026) **   (0.025) *** (0.024) *** (0.026) **   (0.025) **   (0.026) **   (0.025) **   (0.035) **
D_purchase             -0.008        0.022       -0.015       0.016       -0.018       0.008       -0.018        0.008       -0.106
                      (0.054)      (0.051)      (0.055)     (0.052)      (0.051)     (0.047)      (0.051)      (0.047)      (0.030) ***
D_sell                 -0.011       -0.001       -0.009      -0.001       -0.015      -0.003       -0.015       -0.003        0.002
                      (0.014)      (0.013)      (0.012)     (0.011)      (0.011)     (0.010)      (0.011)      (0.010)      (0.020)
D_purchase_all                      -0.030                   -0.031                   -0.027                    -0.027       -0.049
                                   (0.012) **               (0.012) **               (0.013) **                (0.013) **   (0.020) **
D_sell_all                          -0.011                   -0.007                   -0.015                    -0.015       -0.028
                                   (0.008)                  (0.009)                  (0.009) *                 (0.009) *    (0.015) *
Non-Fin Firms Only?    NO           NO           NO          NO           NO          NO           NO           YES          YES
Firm Controls?         NO           NO           YES         YES          YES         YES          YES          YES          YES
Industry FE?           NO           NO           NO          NO           YES         YES          YES          YES          YES
Executive Role FE?     NO           NO           NO          NO           NO          NO           YES          YES          YES
N OBS                  436          436          436         436          436         436          436          436          187
R-Squared             0.010        0.026        0.100       0.115        0.166       0.184        0.166        0.184        0.287




                                                               29
Table 5. Effort and Earnings Announcement Returns

The table provides results of regressing cumulative abnormal stock returns (in basis points) around earnings
announcements on executive effort measured during the fiscal quarter associated with the earnings as well as
standardized unexpected earnings (SUE), and measures of insider trading during the fiscal quarter. Panel A
provides results for all executives. Panel B provides results for executives at non-financial firms. Each reported
coefficient represents a single regression using GML. Cumulative returns are measured using the Fama-French
3 Factor model where factor loadings are estimated using a year of past daily stock returns (skipping the most
recent week). Cumulative abnormal returns are presented for ranges of 1 through 50 trading days where the first
day is the trading day that includes the announcement. Terminal activity are from Bloomberg and stock price
data are from CRSP. Fama French factor portfolios are from Ken French's website. SUE is defined as the
difference in the current quarterly earnings per share and the earnings per share 4 quarters prior divided by the
standard deviation of these differences measured over the previous eight quarters. Four measures of insider
trading are included in the regressions. The variables log_purchase, and log_sell, are the log dollar amount of
open market insider purchases and sales, respectively, by the executive during the fiscal quarter associated with
the earnings announcement. The variables log_purchase_all and log_sell_all are the log dollar amount of open
market insider purchases and sales by all insiders at the firm during the fiscal quarter. Insider trading data are
from the SEC Edgar database. To be included in the sample, an executive must have been active on Bloomberg
for at least four fiscal quarters. 1,128 observations are included in the regressions. All regressions include
individual executive fixed effects. Standard errors, clustered by executive, are reported in parentheses. Statistical
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level is indicated with *, **, and ***, respectively.




                                                        30
Panel 5.A ­ All Executives
Variable            1-day         2-day      3-day      4-day     5-day      6-day      7-day      8-day      9-day
GML                   27.35         29.46      25.99      23.27     25.07      27.79      27.21      28.56      31.90
                   (14.01) *     (13.37) ** (12.12) ** (12.24) * (12.42) ** (12.12) ** (12.68) ** (14.00) ** (14.86) **
SUE                   19.43         21.52      20.27      20.49     19.73      19.11      17.79      17.16      17.72
                     (8.68) **   (10.29) ** (10.60) * (10.84) * (11.51) * (12.77)      (12.79)    (13.14)    (13.64)
log_purchase          20.45         21.05      15.56       5.33      9.04       3.92       8.15      10.89       7.50
                   (10.74) *     (13.84)    (11.25)    (13.75)   (14.19)    (12.69)    (14.31)    (15.92)    (17.23)
log_sell               1.74          2.50       2.48       1.55      1.63       1.20      -0.06       0.64       2.42
                     (3.96)        (4.25)     (4.10)     (4.21)    (4.36)     (4.52)     (4.67)     (4.73)     (4.98)
log_purchase_all       2.91          3.60       3.40       4.15      1.59       4.42       5.84       3.75       1.98
                     (4.41)        (4.84)     (5.09)     (4.92)    (4.91)     (4.87)     (5.40)     (5.36)     (5.52)
log_sell_all           0.23         -0.53      -1.70      -1.14     -0.89      -1.95      -2.03      -0.57      -0.29
                     (2.49)        (2.70)     (2.85)     (2.94)    (3.06)     (3.16)     (3.42)     (3.38)     (3.46)
Executive FE?         YES           YES        YES        YES       YES        YES        YES        YES        YES
N OBS               1,128         1,128      1,128      1,128     1,128      1,128      1,128      1,128      1,128
R-Squared            0.16          0.16       0.15       0.13      0.13       0.13       0.12       0.13       0.13

Variable           2-week        3-week      4-week     5-week 6-week         7-week     8-week       9-week    10-week
GML                   26.72         26.73       32.85      39.51     44.36       47.05      47.34        47.26     49.16
                   (14.96) *     (14.34) *   (16.63) ** (18.20) ** (20.23) ** (22.68) ** (23.06) **   (24.57) * (26.09) *
SUE                   15.91         20.90       30.39      26.07     14.47       19.43      14.41        17.35     17.46
                   (13.24)       (14.48)     (15.39) * (14.29) * (16.72)      (17.37)    (18.12)      (18.40)    (19.54)
log_purchase           5.31         -4.79       -6.92      -6.08    -21.11     -21.79     -14.80       -24.49     -22.02
                   (19.15)       (20.63)     (23.07)    (25.84)    (25.85)    (29.91)    (30.02)      (31.07)    (32.68)
log_sell               2.35          3.58        4.55       4.19       3.34       2.03       3.15         1.35      -2.35
                     (5.39)        (5.47)      (6.36)     (7.14)    (7.49)      (7.24)     (7.15)       (7.58)    (8.10)
log_purchase_all       1.93          4.45        5.24       5.26     11.17       12.73      16.64        21.07     19.47
                     (5.63)        (5.81)      (6.30)     (7.60)    (8.64)      (8.74)     (9.43) *   (10.22) ** (10.85) *
log_sell_all          -0.95         -2.57       -4.92      -7.45      -7.57      -7.55      -7.92        -9.13    -10.52
                     (3.61)        (4.02)      (4.50)     (4.86)    (5.09)      (5.28)     (5.27)       (5.61)    (5.79) *
Executive FE?         YES           YES         YES        YES       YES         YES        YES          YES       YES
N OBS               1,128         1,128       1,128      1,128      1,128      1,128      1,128        1,128      1,128
R-Squared            0.13          0.13        0.14       0.15       0.14       0.15       0.15         0.14       0.12




                                                            31
Panel 5.B ­ Executives at Non-Financial Firms
Variable           1-day          2-day        3-day      4-day             5-day          6-day          7-day      8-day           9-day
GML                   43.91          43.19        33.64      33.91             33.61          35.18          35.33      42.05            49.16
                    (19.33) *      (21.67) *    (18.07) * (15.26) *          (15.57) *      (15.77) *      (16.61) * (20.88) *         (24.13) *
SUE                   34.64          41.87        44.85      45.59             47.96          49.14          44.28      42.16            39.93
                    (17.02) *      (25.21)      (28.07)    (27.63)           (27.56)        (28.71)        (28.60)    (25.68)          (27.94)
log_purchase          25.34          11.49        15.82      -1.15              4.13          -2.29           1.77       6.05            -3.70
                     (6.12) ***    (11.34)       (8.93)    (14.48)           (10.95)        (18.59)        (16.59)    (18.80)          (24.51)
log_sell               1.18           2.96         1.74       0.56              2.29           3.51           3.25       2.85             6.36
                     (6.26)         (6.35)       (6.29)     (7.63)            (7.29)         (6.42)         (6.63)     (6.51)           (6.10)
log_purchase_all       3.32           5.25         5.27       7.78              2.63           6.71           7.17       5.54             3.52
                    (10.28)         (9.98)      (11.06)    (10.73)           (10.23)         (9.56)        (11.32)    (10.42)          (10.37)
log_sell_all          -2.42          -3.71        -5.98      -6.16             -6.03          -8.08          -8.83      -6.30            -5.98
                     (5.13)         (4.68)       (6.10)     (6.19)            (5.53)         (4.99)         (6.47)     (5.07)           (4.82)
Executive FE?        YES            YES          YES        YES               YES            YES            YES        YES              YES
N OBS                457            457          457        457               457            457            457        457              457
R-Squared           0.196           0.19        0.175       0.15              0.15           0.15           0.14       0.14            0.14


Variable           2-week         3-week       4-week        5-week         6-week         7-week         8-week        9-week       10-week
GML                   39.16          42.05        58.50         69.11          88.63          95.07          91.33         96.37        104.38
                    (22.00)        (20.94) *    (29.94) *     (29.49) **     (28.90) **     (26.85) ***    (27.33) **    (26.83) *** (26.61) ***
SUE                   39.69          42.64        50.16         49.77          24.43          35.23           9.51         14.76          11.47
                    (29.89)        (37.26)      (30.21)       (29.56)        (28.83)        (27.83)        (33.68)       (67.41)       (75.52)
log_purchase         -12.69         -29.57       -44.45        -57.07         -66.04         -80.73         -72.36        -81.99        -90.72
                    (32.33)        (35.57)      (37.47)       (43.39)        (50.01)        (61.47)        (50.40)       (56.71)       (61.07)
log_sell                6.34           2.10        3.63          0.85           0.58           -1.97          0.42          -0.94         -7.32
                     (5.81)         (4.96)       (6.20)        (5.18)         (5.08)         (4.64)         (6.15)        (4.66)         (8.17)
log_purchase_all        4.53           1.58        1.39          1.66           5.62            8.08         13.07         26.26          19.93
                     (9.09)         (9.62)       (7.82)        (8.29)        (10.10)         (7.69)        (10.24)       (16.78)       (14.85)
log_sell_all           -6.73          -8.84      -14.09        -16.00         -18.07         -20.43         -21.77        -22.44        -22.74
                     (3.85)         (4.44) *     (5.35) **     (3.59) ***     (4.11) ***     (5.65) ***     (6.56) **     (6.43) ***     (6.67) ***
Executive FE?         YES            YES          YES           YES            YES            YES            YES           YES          YES
N OBS                 457            457          457           457            457            457            457           457          457
R-Squared            0.14           0.13         0.15          0.18           0.16           0.18           0.17          0.17         0.14




                                                                     32
Table 6. Calendar Time Portfolio Returns

The table reports mean returns of calendar time portfolios around earnings announcements based on changes in
executive effort during the fiscal quarter relative to the fiscal quarter one-year prior, where effort is defined using
GML. We report results for two portfolios, High_Effort and Low_Effort, as well as a portfolio that is long High
Effort and short Low Effort. To be included in the High Effort portfolio on a given day, we require the change
in GML for the stock's executive to be in the top 10% for all executives in the sample with the same fiscal quarter
end, and the earnings announcement corresponding to the fiscal quarter must have occurred within the past five
trading days. The Low Effort portfolio is defined analogously, with change in GML in the bottom 10%. The
High minus Low portfolio is the return of the High Effort portfolio minus the return of the Low Effort Portfolio.
Portfolio returns are value-weighted using market capitalization weights. To reduce noise, if the number of
stocks on any given day in a portfolio drops below 2, we replace the portfolio return with the risk free rate. Both
raw returns and risk adjusted returns are presented in basis points. The Fama-French 3-factor model is used to
adjust for risk. Factor loadings are estimated using a year of past daily stock returns (skipping the most recent
week). Terminal activity are from Bloomberg and stock price data are from CRSP. Fama French factor portfolios
are from Ken French's website. Newey-West standard errors using 5 lags are reported in parentheses. Statistical
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level is indicated with *, **, and ***, respectively.




                                                                    Mean
                                    Portfolio                       (bps)
                                    Raw Return
                                        High_Effort                 4.678
                                                                   (2.498) *
                                        Low_Effort                 -2.520
                                                                   (2.822)
                                        High minus Low              7.198
                                                                   (3.686) *
                                    Risk-Adjusted Return
                                        High_Effort                 4.579
                                                                   (1.569) ***
                                        Low_Effort                 -2.751
                                                                   (2.355)
                                        High minus Low              7.330
                                                                   (3.129) ***




                                                         33
Table 7. Effort and Credit Default Swap Spreads

The table provides results of regressions of firm CDS spreads in quarter t+1 on executive effort (GML) in quarter
t, the firm's CDS spread (Spread) in quarter t, measures of insider trading in quarter t, and other firm
characteristics. Daily data of 5-year CDS spreads are obtained from DataStream. For each firm and quarter, we
keep the last trading day in that quarter. We keep firms with active CDS contracts during our sample period and
end up with 574 observations over 89 executives and 57 firms. Due to the persistence in CDS spreads, we control
for lagged Spread (i.e., an AR1 model). However, using first difference (Spread t+1 ­ Spread t) virtually provides
the same results. To reduce the effect of outliers, we trim observations where the quarterly changes in spread are
at the top and bottom 1% of their distribution. We include four measures of insider trading include Purchase
(Sell), which is the log dollar amount of open market insider purchases (sales) by the executive during quarter
q, and Purchase_All (Sell_All), which is the log dollar amount of open market insider purchases (sales) by all
insiders during quarter q. Insider trading data are from the SEC Edgar database. Terminal activity are from
Bloomberg, analyst forecast and earnings per share data are from I/B/E/S, and Fama-French 12 industry
definitions are from Ken French's website. Firm characteristics, size, sales, leverage, productivity, and Tobin's
Q are from CRSP and Compustat and are included where indicated. An intercept is estimated in each regression,
but not reported. All specifications include year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by executive and are
reported in parentheses. Statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level is indicated with *, **, and ***,
respectively.


Variable                     (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)         (9)
GML                      -0.791      -0.879      -0.929      -0.976      -1.504      -1.486      -1.410      -0.964      -1.113
                        (0.320) ** (0.330) *** (0.380) ** (0.390) ** (0.600) ** (0.600) ** (0.590) ** (0.720)           (0.690)
Spread                    0.996       0.995       0.998       0.994       0.700       0.700       0.704       0.672       0.591
                        (0.040) *** (0.040) *** (0.040) *** (0.040) *** (0.150) *** (0.150) *** (0.150) *** (0.194) *** (0.185) ***
log_Purchase                                                                         -0.277
                                                                                    (0.730)
Log_Sell                                                                             -0.104
                                                                                    (0.100)
Log_Purchase_all                                                                                 -0.269
                                                                                                (0.240)
Log_Sell_All                                                                                     -0.097
                                                                                                (0.130)
Firm Controls?           NO          NO          NO          YES         YES         YES         YES         NO          YES
Industry FE?             NO          NO          YES         YES         YES         YES         YES         YES         YES
Executive FE?            NO          NO          NO          NO          YES         YES         YES         YES         YES
Excluding Financials?    NO          NO          NO          NO          NO          NO          NO          YES         YES
N OBS                    574         574         574         574         574         574         574         260         260
R-Squared                0.924       0.924       0.923       0.925       0.928       0.928       0.928       0.940       0.943




                                                              34
Table 8. Ex-Ante Incentive Contracts
The table reports the summary statistics of the excutives' compensation and targets. This sample consists of
252 executives with compensation data in ISS Incentive Lab. value_stock_owned is the dollar value of the
executive's stockholdings in the firm. salary is the executives' fixed salary during the fiscal year. cash_perf is
the target dollar amount of the cash-based performance incentive bonus from the executive's compensation
contract for the fiscal year. stock_perf is the target dollar amount of the stock-based performance incentive
bonus from the contract. stock_time and option_time are the values of the time-based stock and option grants,
respectively, from the contract. Predicted compensation, pred_comp, is the sum of salary, cash_perf,
stock_perf, stock_time, and option_time. The cash performance metric types Accounting, Individual, Stock
Price, and Other are the weights of the categories for the metrics that determine the executive's cash based
incentive program. Metrics are categorized by incentive lab and the weights of each metric are collected from
the proxy statements.



      Variable                              N         Mean        Std Dev      25th Pctl   Median       75th Pctl
Executive Role
     CEO                                   520         27%
     CFO                                   520         45%
Compensation Contracts
     value_stock_owned                     520       68,952       239,370       3,081       10,693       38,826
     pct_firm_owned                        520       0.77%         3.81%        0.02%       0.07%        0.21%
     pred_comp                             520        7,227        14,706       2,203        4,178        7,696
     salary                                520         783          452          500          675         1,000
     cash_perf                             520        1,180        1,944         138          643         1,350
     stock_perf                            520        2,530        3,963         360         1,239        3,016
     stock_time                            520        2,154        12,269          0          345         1,295
     option_time                           520         566         1,304           0           0           497
Cash Performance Metric Types
     Accounting                            520       62.79%
     Other                                 520       27.60%
     Individual                            520        7.08%
     Stock Price                           520        2.53%




                                                        35
Table 9. Incentive Contracts and Effort ­ Earnings Targets
The table provides results of regressions of changes in GML between the 1st half of the fiscal year and the 2nd
half of the fiscal year on a target_1_pct, which indicates that earnings per share in the 1st half of the fiscal year
are on an annualized pace to finish within 1% of the annual target in the executive's cash bonus compensation
contract, on the variable pct_cash_perf, and on an interaction between the two variables. target_1_pct is equal
to 1 if the quantity 2  1 + 2  -  /  is less than 1%, where Q1 and Q2
indicate the first two fiscal quarters of the year and EPS Target is the EPS target in the executive's bonus contract.
Additional control variables include the logarithm of predicted compensation, log_pred_comp, the logarithm of
the value of shares of the firm's stock owned by the executive, and the firm characteristics leverage, size,
productivity, and Tobin's Q, as well as executive role fixed effects, industry fixed effects, and fiscal year fixed
effects, where indicated. The final specification includes GML (measured over the entire fiscal year) as a
dependent variable. The prefixes log on the compensation variable indicates a natural logarithm of the variable
while the prefix pct indicates that the variable has been scaled by predicted compensation, pred_comp. CEO and
CFO fixed effects indicate whether the executive's role is that of the Chief Executive Officer or Chief Financial
Officer, respectively. Terminal activity data are from Bloomberg. Target bonus award amounts and other
compensation data are from ISS Incentive Lab and variables are defined in Table 2. Twelve Fama French
Industry Fixed Effects and Fiscal Year fixed effects are included. Data from 55 executives with profile activity
data on Bloomberg for at least one quarter in the first half of a fiscal year and one quarter in the second half are
included in the regressions. Standard errors are clustered by executive and are reported in parentheses. Statistical
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level is indicated with *, **, and ***, respectively.




                                                         36
                                          GML_CHANGE                   GML
Variable                      (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)
pct_cash_perf*target_1_pct    21.068        22.724       19.669
                             (7.251) **    (7.715) **   (7.769) **
target_1_pct                  -5.193        -5.495       -4.575
                             (1.949) **    (2.141) **   (2.257) **
log_pred_comp                  0.471         0.822        0.739       -0.129
                             (0.417)       (0.449) *    (0.581)      (0.483)
pct_cash_perf                 -1.617        -1.911       -1.378        2.720
                             (2.253)       (2.262)      (2.153)      (1.470) *
log_shares_owned              -0.033        -0.061       -0.076       -0.057
                             (0.236)       (0.271)      (0.281)      (0.192)
Firm Characteristics           YES           YES          YES          YES
Executive Role FE?             NO            YES          YES          YES
Industry FE?                   NO            NO           YES          YES
Fiscal Year FE?                NO            NO           YES          YES
N OBS                          91            91           91            91
R-Square                      0.13          0.17         0.25          0.39




                                    37
Table 10. Effort and Leisure
The table provides results of regressions of changes quarterly GML on the variable good_weather, as well as
various fixed effects. The effort measure GML (Gaussian Mixture Length) is a measure of workday length (in
hours) during the fiscal year. See Section 2.3 for details on the construction of GML. The variable good_weather
is the percentage of hours during the fiscal quarter in the executive's work location in which (a) the Universal
Thermal Climate Index (UTCI) is in the "thermal comfort zone", (b) there is no precipitation, (c) the sky is not
overcast, and (d) it is a daylight hour. Year fixed effects, Executive Role fixed effects (CEO, CFO, or other),
location fixed effects, and executive fixed effects are included where indicated. Specifications (1) through (5)
include regressions across the full sample of executives. Specifications (6), (7), and (8) are the subsamples of
CEOs, CFOs, and other executives, respectively. Terminal activity data are from Bloomberg. Data from 1596
executive-quarter observations are included. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. Statistical significance
at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level is indicated with *, **, and ***, respectively.


                                           All Executives                          CEOs         CFOs       Others
Variable             (1)           (2)          (3)         (4)        (5)          (6)          (7)         (8)
good_weather        -2.512        -2.373      -2.541      -2.324      -2.404        -4.030      -3.637      0.242
                   (0.860) ***   (0.863) *** (0.859) *** (0.836) *** (0.715) ***   (1.340) *** (1.171) *** (1.180)
Year FE?             NO            YES         YES         YES         YES           YES         YES         YES
Exec Role FE?        NO            NO          YES         YES         NO            NO          NO          NO
Location FE?         NO            NO          NO          YES         NO            NO          NO          NO
Executive FE?        NO            NO          NO          NO          YES           YES         YES         YES
N OBS               1597          1597        1597          1597      1597          416         717          460
R-Squared           0.01          0.01        0.02          0.22      0.51          0.54        0.48         0.55




                                                            38
Table 11. Effort and Industry Competition

The table provides results of quarterly regressions of changes in executive effort (D_GML) on lagged changes
in quarterly firm sales and lagged changes in quarterly peer firms' sales. Change in effort (D_GML) is defined
as the difference in GML during the fiscal quarter minus the same measure during the fiscal quarter 4 quarters
prior. %Chng_Sales is defined as the percentage change in the firm's sales during fiscal quarter t relative to the
firm's quarterly sales 4 quarters prior [(Sales t - Sales t-4)/Sales t-4)] in %. In the table, Lag1 (Lag2) means the
%Chng_Sales in quarter t-1 (t-2). In a similar manner, %Chng_PeerSales is defined as the percentage change
in the firm's peers' sales during fiscal quarter t relative to the firm's peers' quarterly sales 4 quarters prior. For
each firm, include up to 10 closest peers based on the GICS6 industry classification, where closest peers are
defined based on the smallest absolute difference in firm market cap. To aggregate the peer information, we
calculate the market-cap value-weighted average across all peers. To reduce the effect of outliers, we trim
%Chng_Sales and %Chng_PeerSales at the top and bottom 1% of their distribution. Terminal activity are from
Bloomberg, analyst forecast and earnings per share data are from I/B/E/S, and Fama-French 12 industry
definitions are from Ken French's website. Firm characteristics, size, leverage, productivity, and Tobin's Q are
from CRSP and Compustat and are included where indicated. An intercept is estimated in each regression, but
not reported. All specifications include year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by executive and are
reported in parentheses. Statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level is indicated with *, **, and ***,
respectively.


Variable                       (1)       (2)           (3)          (4)       (5)           (6)          (7)          (8)        (9)
Lag1_%Chng_Sales            0.003                  -0.006       -0.003                  -0.008       -0.015       -0.026     -0.023
                                                  (0.017)      (0.016)                 (0.016)      (0.019)      (0.042)    (0.034)
Lag1_%Chng_PeerSales                   0.075        0.078                   0.057        0.060        0.054        0.081      0.040
                                     (0.030) **   (0.034) **              (0.025) **   (0.027) **   (0.026) **   (0.053)    (0.048)
Lag2_%Chng_Sales                                                                                     -0.016
                                                                                                    (0.013)
Lag2_%Chng_PeerSales                                                                                  0.029
                                                                                                    (0.027)
Firm Controls?              NO        NO           NO           YES        YES          YES          YES          NO         YES
Industry FE?                YES       YES          YES          YES        YES          YES          YES          YES        YES
Executive FE?               YES       YES          YES          YES        YES          YES          YES          YES        YES
Excluding Financials?       NO        NO           NO           NO         NO           NO           NO           YES        YES
N OBS                       506       506          506          506        506          506          493          180        180
R-Squared                   0.063     0.082        0.080        0.077      0.086        0.084        0.092        0.138      0.170




                                                               39
Figure 1. Bloomberg Screenshot

The figure provides a screenshot for Michael Bloomberg that was obtained using the profile search on the
Bloomberg terminal. The green dot by Michael Bloomberg's name indicates that he is online. Other possible
status indicators are a red dot (offline), a yellow dot (idle), a gray dot (private, opted out), and a mobile phone
icon indicates (user is on the mobile Bloomberg app).




                                                        40
Figure 2. Example of an Executive's Annual Terminal Activity

This figure describes the Bloomberg terminal activity for a CFO in our sample. The x-axis is each time
(minute) during 24-hours. The y-axis measures the probability during the year that the CFO is active on the
terminal at each time, given that the day is not a holiday and it is a weekday.




                                                      41
Figure 3. Executive Intraday Terminal Activity

The figure provides the average percentage of executives that are active on the Bloomberg terminal at a given
time on weekdays (Monday through Friday) across the sample period. Panel A averages based on the Eastern
time zone, while Panel B includes averages based on the local time zone of the Executive. Data are from
Bloomberg.




                                                     42
Figure 4. Effort by Day of the Week

The figure provides the average GML measure for each day of the week for the full sample.


                                                              GML by Day of the Week
                                      10.00
                                                     9.05           9.20               9.19
                                                                                                      8.88
                                       9.00                                                                         8.39
                                       8.00

                                       7.00

                                       6.00
                                GML




                                       5.00

                                       4.00

                                       3.00

                                       2.00

                                       1.00

                                       0.00
                                                    Monday         Tuesday         Wednesday        Thursday        Friday


Figure 5. Executive Activity and the Earnings Announcement Cycle

The figure includes executive terminal activity through the quarter relative to the firm's earnings announcement.
Effort is defined as hours online on the terminal. Panel A presents results for all executives in the sample while
Panel B presents results for CFOs and Panel C presents results for CEOs.

Panel 5A: Executive Activity
                         3.0




                         2.5




                         2.0
  Average Active Hours




                         1.5




                         1.0




                          .5




                          .0
                               -50            -40     -30    -20           -10         0       10      20      30            40   50
                                                                                 Event Time




                                                                                  43
Panel 5B: CFO Activity
                        3.5




                        3.0




                        2.5
 Average Active Hours




                        2.0




                        1.5




                        1.0




                         .5




                         .0
                              -50   -40   -30   -20   -10       0        10   20   30   40   50
                                                            Event Time




Panel 5C: CEO Activity
                        2.5




                        2.0
 Average Active Hours




                        1.5




                        1.0




                         .5




                         .0
                              -50   -40   -30   -20   -10       0        10   20   30   40   50
                                                            Event Time




                                                            44
                       0
                                  0.1
                                               0.2
                                                                                                                               0




                           0.05
                                        0.15
                                                     0.25
                                                            0.3
                                                                                                                                   0.05
                                                                                                                                          0.1
                                                                                                                                                0.15
                                                                                                                                                       0.2
                                                                                                                                                             0.25
                                                                                                                                                                    0.3
             0:01:00                                                                                                 0:01:00
             0:26:00                                                                                                 0:26:00
             0:51:00                                                                                                 0:51:00
             1:16:00                                                                                                 1:16:00
             1:41:00                                                                                                 1:41:00
             2:06:00                                                                                                 2:06:00
             2:31:00                                                                                                 2:31:00
             2:56:00                                                                                                 2:56:00                                                                                         from Bloomberg.
             3:21:00                                                                                                 3:21:00
             3:46:00                                                                                                 3:46:00
             4:11:00                                                                                                 4:11:00
             4:36:00                                                                                                 4:36:00
             5:01:00                                                                                                 5:01:00
             5:26:00                                                                                                 5:26:00
             5:51:00                                                                                                 5:51:00
             6:16:00                                                                                                 6:16:00
             6:41:00                                                                                                 6:41:00
             7:06:00                                                                                                 7:06:00
             7:31:00                                                                                                 7:31:00




                                                                          Panel 6B ­ Activity during April
             7:56:00                                                                                                 7:56:00
                                                                                                                                                                                  Panel 6A ­ Activity during March




             8:21:00                                                                                                 8:21:00
             8:46:00                                                                                                 8:46:00
             9:11:00                                                                                                 9:11:00
             9:36:00                                                                                                 9:36:00
            10:01:00                                                                                                10:01:00




     2018
                                                                                                             2018
            10:26:00                                                                                                10:26:00
            10:51:00                                                                                                10:51:00
            11:16:00                                                                                                11:16:00
            11:41:00                                                                                                11:41:00




45
            12:06:00                                                                                                12:06:00




                                                                  April
                                                                                                                                                                          March




     2019
                                                                                                             2019
            12:31:00                                                                                                12:31:00
            12:56:00                                                                                                12:56:00
            13:21:00                                                                                                13:21:00
            13:46:00                                                                                                13:46:00
            14:11:00                                                                                                14:11:00
            14:36:00                                                                                                14:36:00




     2020
                                                                                                             2020
            15:01:00                                                                                                15:01:00
            15:26:00                                                                                                15:26:00
            15:51:00                                                                                                15:51:00
            16:16:00                                                                                                16:16:00
            16:41:00                                                                                                16:41:00
            17:06:00                                                                                                17:06:00
            17:31:00                                                                                                17:31:00
            17:56:00                                                                                                17:56:00
            18:21:00                                                                                                18:21:00
            18:46:00                                                                                                18:46:00
            19:11:00                                                                                                19:11:00
            19:36:00                                                                                                19:36:00
            20:01:00                                                                                                20:01:00
            20:26:00                                                                                                20:26:00
            20:51:00                                                                                                20:51:00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Figure 6. Executive Intraday Terminal Activity during the COVID-19 Pandemic




            21:16:00                                                                                                21:16:00
            21:41:00                                                                                                21:41:00
            22:06:00                                                                                                22:06:00
            22:31:00                                                                                                22:31:00
            22:56:00                                                                                                22:56:00
            23:21:00                                                                                                23:21:00
            23:46:00                                                                                                23:46:00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     The figure provides the average percentage of executives that are active on the Bloomberg terminal at a given

                                                                                                                                                                                                                     C), and June (Panel D) for the years 2018, 2019, and 2020. Averages are based on the local time zone. Data are
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     time on weekdays (Monday through Friday) for the months of March (Panel A), April (Panel B), May (Panel
                       0
                                                                                                                             0




                           0.05
                                  0.1
                                        0.15
                                               0.2
                                                     0.25
                                                            0.3
                                                                                                                                 0.05
                                                                                                                                        0.1
                                                                                                                                              0.15
                                                                                                                                                     0.2
                                                                                                                                                           0.25
                                                                                                                                                                  0.3
             0:01:00                                                                                               0:01:00
             0:26:00                                                                                               0:26:00
             0:51:00                                                                                               0:51:00
             1:16:00                                                                                               1:16:00
             1:41:00                                                                                               1:41:00
             2:06:00                                                                                               2:06:00
             2:31:00                                                                                               2:31:00
             2:56:00                                                                                               2:56:00
             3:21:00                                                                                               3:21:00
             3:46:00                                                                                               3:46:00
             4:11:00                                                                                               4:11:00
             4:36:00                                                                                               4:36:00
             5:01:00                                                                                               5:01:00
             5:26:00                                                                                               5:26:00
             5:51:00                                                                                               5:51:00
             6:16:00                                                                                               6:16:00
             6:41:00                                                                                               6:41:00
             7:06:00                                                                                               7:06:00
             7:31:00                                                                                               7:31:00
                                                                                                                                                                              Panel 6C ­ Activity during May




                                                                         Panel 6D ­ Activity during June
             7:56:00                                                                                               7:56:00
             8:21:00                                                                                               8:21:00
             8:46:00                                                                                               8:46:00
             9:11:00                                                                                               9:11:00
             9:36:00                                                                                               9:36:00
            10:01:00                                                                                              10:01:00




                                                                                                           2018




     2018
            10:26:00                                                                                              10:26:00
            10:51:00                                                                                              10:51:00
            11:16:00                                                                                              11:16:00
            11:41:00                                                                                              11:41:00




46
                                                                                                                                                                        May




            12:06:00                                                                                              12:06:00




                                                                  June
                                                                                                           2019




     2019
            12:31:00                                                                                              12:31:00
            12:56:00                                                                                              12:56:00
            13:21:00                                                                                              13:21:00
            13:46:00                                                                                              13:46:00
            14:11:00                                                                                              14:11:00
            14:36:00                                                                                              14:36:00
                                                                                                           2020




     2020
            15:01:00                                                                                              15:01:00
            15:26:00                                                                                              15:26:00
            15:51:00                                                                                              15:51:00
            16:16:00                                                                                              16:16:00
            16:41:00                                                                                              16:41:00
            17:06:00                                                                                              17:06:00
            17:31:00                                                                                              17:31:00
            17:56:00                                                                                              17:56:00
            18:21:00                                                                                              18:21:00
            18:46:00                                                                                              18:46:00
            19:11:00                                                                                              19:11:00
            19:36:00                                                                                              19:36:00
            20:01:00                                                                                              20:01:00
            20:26:00                                                                                              20:26:00
            20:51:00                                                                                              20:51:00
            21:16:00                                                                                              21:16:00
            21:41:00                                                                                              21:41:00
            22:06:00                                                                                              22:06:00
            22:31:00                                                                                              22:31:00
            22:56:00                                                                                              22:56:00
            23:21:00                                                                                              23:21:00
            23:46:00                                                                                              23:46:00
Figure 7. Gaussian Mixture Length Examples

The figure provides an example of the GML measure for three executive-year observations. The blue bars
represent the empirical probability density function based on activity on Bloomberg. The red curve is the
estimated Gaussian Mixture Model pdf using the iterative Expectation-Maximization (EM) algorithm. The two
orange curves are the two underlying Gaussian pdfs. The dashed vertical bars are the estimated means of the
two distributions. The two black lines represent the beginning and end of the GML measure, or the interval
(1 - 1 , 2 + 2 ).

Panel 7.A - Example 1




                                                    47
Panel 7.B - Example 2




Panel 7.C - Example 3




                        48
Figure 8. Effort Measure Histogram

The figure provides a histogram of the effort measure GML (Gaussian Mixture Length)




                                                   49
Figure 9. Effort and Leisure

This figure provides an example of the measure good_weather calculated monthly for 4 cities ­ San Diego, CA,
Honolulu, HI, New York, NY, and Houston, TX. The variable good_weather is the percentage of hours during
the month in which (a) the Universal Thermal Climate Index (UTCI) is in the "thermal comfort zone", (b) there
is no precipitation, (c) the sky is not overcast, and (d) it is a daylight hour.


                                                                                           good_weather by Month for 4 Cities
                 50%

                 45%

                 40%

                 35%

                 30%
  good_weather




                 25%

                 20%

                 15%

                 10%

                 5%

                 0%
                                                                                                                 Jul-18




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Jul-19




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Jul-20
                                         Nov-17




                                                                                                        Jun-18




                                                                                                                                                     Nov-18




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Jun-19




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Nov-19




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Jun-20
                                                                                      Apr-18
                                                                                               May-18




                                                                                                                                                                                                  Apr-19
                                                                                                                                                                                                           May-19




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Apr-20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       May-20
                                                  Dec-17
                                                           Jan-18


                                                                             Mar-18




                                                                                                                          Aug-18




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Aug-19




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Aug-20
                       Sep-17




                                                                    Feb-18




                                                                                                                                   Sep-18



                                                                                                                                                              Dec-18
                                                                                                                                                                       Jan-19
                                                                                                                                                                                Feb-19
                                                                                                                                                                                         Mar-19




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Sep-19



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Dec-19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Jan-20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Feb-20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Mar-20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Sep-20
                                Oct-17




                                                                                                                                            Oct-18




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Oct-19




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Oct-20
                                                                                                                                                                                     Month


                                                            San Diego                                                                Honolulu                                                              New York                                                                Houston




                                                                                                                                                                                50
