                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES


          TO WHAT EXTENT DOES IN-PERSON SCHOOLING CONTRIBUTE TO
                         THE SPREAD OF COVID-19?
                EVIDENCE FROM MICHIGAN AND WASHINGTON

                                         Dan Goldhaber
                                       Scott A. Imberman
                                       Katharine O. Strunk
                                        Bryant Hopkins
                                          Nate Brown
                                        Erica Harbatkin
                                          Tara Kilbride

                                       Working Paper 28455
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28455


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                          February 2021, Revised February 2021


We are grateful to the Michigan Department of Education, the Michigan Center for Educational
Performance Information, the Michigan Department of Health and Human Services, and the
Washington Office of Superintendent of Public Instruction and the Washington Department of
Health for providing some of the data necessary to conduct this research. In particular, we thank
Roderick Bernosky, Josh DeBradbander, Tom Howell, Carl Jones, Joshua Long, Sarah Lyon-
Callo, Michael McGoarty, and Holly Willson from Michigan, as well as Jessica Vavrus from
Washington. In addition, we appreciate research assistance from Jeremy Anderson, Trevor Gratz,
Emily Mohr, Jesse Nagel, and Meg Turner. We would also like to thank Alyssa Bilinski, Sarah
Cohodes, James Cowan, Todd Elder, Mike Garet, Elizabeth Halloran, Doug Harris, and Roddy
Theobald for providing valuable feedback on this work at various points along the way. Any
errors are our own. In addition, all opinions expressed in this paper are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of our institutions or funders, nor do they necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Dan Goldhaber, Scott A. Imberman, Katharine O. Strunk, Bryant Hopkins, Nate
Brown, Erica Harbatkin, and Tara Kilbride. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
To What Extent Does In-Person Schooling Contribute to the Spread of COVID-19? Evidence
from Michigan and Washington
Dan Goldhaber, Scott A. Imberman, Katharine O. Strunk, Bryant Hopkins, Nate Brown, Erica
Harbatkin, and Tara Kilbride
NBER Working Paper No. 28455
February 2021, Revised February 2021
JEL No. I1,I2

                                          ABSTRACT

The decision about how and when to open schools to in-person instruction has been a key
question for policymakers throughout the COVID-19 pandemic. The instructional modality of
schools has implications not only for the health and safety of students and staff, but also student
learning and the degree to which parents can engage in job activities. We consider the role of
instructional modality (in-person, hybrid, or remote instruction) in disease spread among the
wider community. Using a variety of regression modeling strategies , we find that simple
correlations show in-person modalities are correlated with increased COVID cases, but
accounting for both pre-existing cases and a richer set of covariates brings estimates close to zero
on average. In Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) specifications, in-person modality options are not
associated with increased spread of COVID at low levels of pre-existing COVID cases but cases
do increase at moderate to high pre-existing COVID rates. A bounding exercise suggests that the
OLS findings for in-person modality are likely to represent an upper bound on the true
relationship. These findings are robust to the inclusion of county and district fixed effects in
terms of the insignificance of the findings, but the models with fixed effects are also somewhat
imprecisely estimated.


Dan Goldhaber                                        Katharine O. Strunk
Center for Education Data & Research                 College of Education
University of Washington                             Michigan State University
3876 Bridge Way N Ste 201                            238 Erickson Hall
Seattle, WA 98103                                    620 Farm Lane
dgoldhab@uw.edu                                      East Lansing, MI 48824
                                                     kstrunk@msu.edu
Scott A. Imberman
Michigan State University                            Bryant Hopkins
486 W. Circle Drive                                  Education Policy Innovation Collaborative
110 Marshall-Adams Hall                              Michigan State University
East Lansing, MI 48824-1038                          236 Erickson Hall
and NBER                                             620 Farm Lane
imberman@msu.edu                                     East Lansing, MI 48824
                                                     hopki213@msu.edu
Nate Brown
Center for Education Data & Research
University of Washington
3876 Bridge Way N Ste 201
Seattle, WA 98103
nathanael.brown12@gmail.com

Erica Harbatkin
Education Policy Innovation Collaborative
236 Erickson Hall
620 Farm Lane
East Lansing, MI 48824
harbatki@msu.edu

Tara Kilbride
Education Policy Innovation Collaborative
Michigan State University
236 Erickson Hall
620 Farm Lane
East Lansing, MI 48824
kilbrid9@msu.edu
1.      Introduction
         There is substantial concern about the extent to which in-person K-12 schooling may
increase the spread of COVID-19, both within schools and their wider communities. As of late
autumn, 2020, school systems around the nation have been in flux. Many districts ­ and in
particular large, urban districts ­ have been for the most part operating remotely since March of
2020 (Meckler & Strauss, 2020). In other districts, many students have been learning in-person
at least a portion of the time since the beginning of the 2020-2021 school year (Sawchuk, 2020).
As COVID infection rates reach unprecedented levels across the United States (Hanna & Wolfe,
2020), many state and local education policymakers are shuttering school buildings in favor of
remote learning while others are making plans to remain in-person or to open buildings for in-
person learning (Education Policy Innovation Collaborative, 2020; Sawchuk & Gewertz, 2020). 1
         As policymakers consider whether and how to open school buildings for in-person
instruction or shift to remote learning, they are forced to balance fears about COVID risk with
the potential for severe learning loss for school-age children (Dorn et al., 2020). There is a
growing concern that remote schooling is not working well for students in general, and in
particular for students who have been traditionally underserved by the public school system:
Black, Latino, and low-income students, as well as students with disabilities (Agostinelli et al.,
2020; Dorn et al., 2020). These concerns are beginning to be borne out in the literature: Evidence
of learning loss is apparent across the country and in other countries where schools closed
(Donaldson, 2020; Kuhfeld, Soland, Tarasawa, Johnson, Ruzek, & Liu, 2020a). 2 There are also
concerns about the impact of school closures on the economy as parents--and women in
particular--are forced to reduce work hours to provide childcare and support remote learning
(Green et al., 2020; Miller, 2020).
         The debate about whether or not to open schools for in-person learning has become
heavily intertwined with political beliefs about the risk-reward tradeoffs inherent in the pandemic
(Valant, 2020). In the summer of 2020, for instance, President Trump noted the importance of
schools being open in the fall, "So what we want to do is we want to get our schools open. We
want to get them open quickly, beautifully, in the fall" (Trump, 2020). 3 Trump's Council of
Economic Advisors has also stressed the view that having students back in schools in person is
key to economic recovery from the pandemic as it allows parents of young children to return to
work (Council of Economic Advisors, 2020).
         President Trump and his administration are hardly alone in their view that schools should
be open for in-person learning. In the midst of rapidly growing COVID spread across the
country, a bipartisan (though mainly Democratic) group of seven northeastern governors released
a statement in November 2020 in favor of in-person schooling (with appropriate protections),
despite the growing spread of COVID (Blad, 2020a), and President Joseph R. Biden Jr. has
1
  Schools in Detroit, New York City, Indiana, and Kentucky, for instance, had been open for in-person schooling for
some students, but went fully remote in the face of rising COVID rates (Balingit, 2020; Richards, 2020; Wisely,
2020). Michigan closed all high schools for in-person learning for three weeks starting on November 18, 2020
(Oosting et al., 2020). This "pause" was extended through the winter holiday break. As a result, there was a 200%
increase in the proportion of districts operating fully remotely in December relative to the beginning of November
(Education Policy Innovation Collaborative, 2020).
2
  Notably, Kuhfeld et al (2020) cautions that there is likely bias in NWEA estimates of learning loss, as a full
quarter of students ­ largely low-income and minority students ­ are "missing" from the sample.
3
  President Trump also, at the time, encouraged adherence to Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
guidelines for school openings. Interestingly, those guidelines were removed from the CDC website on October 29th,
2020 (Frick, 2020).


                                                                                                                 1
called on Congress to provide necessary funding to safely reopen schools during his first 100
days in office (Blad, 2020b). The view that schools can be open in person with a reasonable
degree of safety also reflects positions held by various groups such as the American Academy of
Pediatrics, the National Association of School Nurses, and the National Academy of Sciences,
Engineering, and Medicine, all of which emphasized the importance, during the summer of 2020,
of having students physically present in schools (American Academy of Pediatrics, 2020). Most
recently, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention issued guidance that schools could
safely operate in-person (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2021a).
         Yet these professional and academic groups have not unequivocally backed in-person
schooling. Rather, they have recommended in-person schooling only with appropriate safety
measures (and funding for these measures) to mitigate the risk of COVID transmission. This is
broadly consistent with the position taken by the nation's two largest teachers' unions, although
the unions have demanded far more stringent mitigation strategies than have many other
stakeholders, going so far as to support local decisions to sue or strike should teachers feel
unsafe when required to return to in-person instruction (Perez Jr, 2020; Reiss & Bellware, 2021;
Will, 2020).
         One of the reasons for uncertainty about whether schools should be open for in-person
education has been the shifting evidence about whether children transmit the coronavirus, at all
and/or at rates that might be dangerous for in-school or community spread. President Trump, for
instance, suggested at several points in the summer of 2020 that children do not transmit COVID
(Dale et al., 2020). Since then, the CDC has made it clear that children, while typically having
milder reactions to infection, can transmit the virus both to other children and to adults (Lopez et
al., 2020). 4
         While it is now clear that children do transmit the virus, a growing number of health
experts suggest that they are less likely to be vectors of the disease than are adults (see, for
example, Weisberg et al., 2020). As evidence of this, researchers point to school systems both in
the U.S. and around the world, noting that there are few places where schools appear to be
vectors for large COVID outbreaks (Barnum, 2020; Lewis, 2020). 5 Indeed, the best evidence to
date ­using data from the United States and from Germany and Sweden ­ suggests that schools
are not major spreaders of the coronavirus (Isphording et al., 2020; Oster, 2020; Stage et al.,
2020; von Bismarck-Osten et al., 2020). That said, there are documented cases of outbreaks tied
to spread inside school buildings (Furfaro & Bazzaz, 2020), so the question of community spread
is whether having in-person schooling changes the rate of spread in the communities in which
students are enrolled in schools. This will depend both on the use of measures to prevent COVID
spread in schools as well as the counterfactual of how students and their families might behave if
they were not in school.
         In this paper we use data from two states ­ Michigan and Washington ­ on COVID case
rates at the county level linked to information on school district instructional modality to assess
the relationship between in-person schooling and the spread of COVID in communities. We
estimate a series of models that predict county-level COVID rates, growth, and spread (the
amount of time it takes to for COVID cases to double) and account for previous trends in

4
  There is mixed evidence about the likelihood that children are more likely than adults to transmit the virus
(Garabedian and Haffajee, 2020), but the most current evidence is that older children are more likely than younger
children to pass the virus on to others (Lewis, 2020).
5
  Other developed countries generally appear to prioritize keeping schools open, while closing bars, restaurants, etc.
(Cook, 2020; Porter, 2020).


                                                                                                                     2
COVID spread. We also estimate models that separately predict COVID incidence and spread by
age group. This allows us to examine whether or not there are differential impacts of in-person
schooling on COVID rates for those who are school-age relative to adults within various age
ranges.
         The estimated relationship between instructional modality and COVID outcomes is likely
to be correlated with various district and county level factors. The ordinary least squares (OLS)
models we estimate include a rich set of covariates designed to control for these, such as mask
wearing, geographic and population features, and political partisanship. In addition, we estimate
specifications with school district or county fixed effects, exploiting within district or county
(over time) variation so as to better control for unobserved factors that may influence COVID
spread, particularly in ways that may cause spurious correlations between instructional modality
and disease outcomes.
         On the whole, our findings suggest that school districts' choices to offer hybrid or fully
in-person instruction are not significantly contributing to COVID spread in communities when
there are low or modest pre-existing case rates in the population. But there are some important
reasons to be cautious about this conclusion. In particular, we do find, consistent with
epidemiological predictions, that in-person schooling is predicted to lead to community COVID
spread when pre-existing case rates in the counties in which school districts are located are high.
Our estimates suggest that this relationship becomes statistically significant around the 95th
percentile of pre-existing COVID case rates during our observation period in Michigan and the
75th percentile in Washington. And, as we describe below, community case rates in Michigan
and Washington were quite different during the period we model, so the case rate in which in-
person schooling is estimated to lead to increased community spread in Washington is
considerably lower than the case rate in Michigan.
         We reach our conclusions based on a number of econometric models and specification
checks. It is clear the correlation in simple regressions between in-person and hybrid school
district modalities and COVID case rates is positive. Models that account for the potential that
the effects of in-person schooling could differ by community case rates and include covariates
that attempt to control for compliance with social distancing and virus mitigation strategies result
in significant reductions of the coefficients on instructional modality. In these models, on
average, the relationships between instructional modality and COVID case rates are close to zero
and no longer statistically significant. We estimate alternate models that use districts' estimated
proportion of students actually attending school in each modality and find that, in Michigan,
districts in which low proportions of students return to school in person or in hybrid modalities
are particularly unlikely to contribute to spread, though even at higher levels of in-person take-up
there is no evidence that returning to classrooms drives COVID outcomes in the surrounding
communities, except at very high levels of existing community spread. In Washington, it appears
that how districts bring students back to school buildings matters; when case rates in surrounding
communities are at the 50th percentile or above, districts in which the far majority (over three-
quarters) of students attend school in-person appear to contribute to COVID spread. These
findings also hold for different age categories in the population.
         There are three important caveats about the above findings. First, our analyses focus on
the relationship between school modality and COVID case rates in the fall of 2020, which
predates the spread of new strains of the coronavirus that are believed to be more transmissible
(Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2021b). Second, our characterization of what
constitutes "low", "moderate", and "high" (describe in more detail below) community case rates



                                                                                                  3
are based on the data we utilize from the fall of 2020. But this corresponds to a period when
COVID spread was far less extensive than they are in the winter of 2020-2021.
        Finally, we are cautious about overinterpretation of the point estimates given the strong
possibility that our results could be biased based on unobserved factors that affect school
modality offerings or choices to attend in-person schooling and are also related to COVID spread
in communities. Our findings from models that include district or county fixed effects help
account for unobserved heterogeneity and are broadly consistent with the OLS in terms of the
insignificance of the findings for in-person schooling. Because these models are also somewhat
imprecisely estimated, we employ a bounding exercise suggested by Altonji et al. (2005) and
Oster (2019) to assess the degree to which our main results may be biased by unobserved factors
that are correlated both with instructional modality decisions and community spread. This
exercise suggests the OLS findings on in-person modality likely represent an upper bound on the
true relationship. In other words, if the estimates from our OLS models are biased, it is likely in
the direction that would overstate rather than understate the relationship between in-person
modality and COVID spread. All together these results across multiple model specifications that
address different types of statistical bias suggest that we can reasonably rule out modest positive
average causal effects of modality on COVID spread in communities with low to moderate levels
of pre-existing COVID case rates.

2.       Background
        The tension between school safety and potential and realized learning losses associated
with remote schooling underscores the debate about whether schools should offer in-person
instruction. While there is some documentation of COVID spread that can be traced to individual
schools (Furfaro & Bazzaz, 2020; Martin & Ebbert, 2020; Razzaq, 2020; Stein-Zamir et al.,
2020; Wisely, 2020), the public narrative, buoyed by safe school openings in parts of Asia,
Europe, and Australia (Macartney et al., 2020; Yoon et al., 2020), is that in-person schooling is
not associated with significant increased viral transmission (Harris & Carpenter, 2020; Issa,
2020; Oster, 2020; Simchuk, 2020). However, it remains unclear if this holds during periods of
increasing infection rates like the U.S. experienced in late autumn of 2020.
        At the same time, emerging research suggests that many students are not well served by
the shift to remote instruction. 6 There is mounting concern about students suffering from
learning loss. This is especially true for lower performing students (Hart et al., 2019; Heppen et
al., 2017; Loeb, 2020) . Estimates from a variety of different localities suggest significant
learning losses among already disadvantaged students (Dorn et al., 2020; EmpowerK12, 2020;
Hoffman & Miller, 2020; Korman et al., 2020; Kuhfeld, Soland, Tarasawa, Johnson, Ruzek, &
Lewis, 2020; Kuhfeld, Soland, Tarasawa, Johnson, Ruzek, & Liu, 2020b; Malkus, 2020; von
Hippel, 2020). 7 These learning losses are estimated to have lasting negative impacts both on the

6
  There are concerns that teachers and schools may lack the necessary resources to transition to remote learning
(Cummings et al., 2020; Kamenetz, 2020; Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, 2020; Weir,
2020), and that student engagement may be lower with remote than in-person instruction (Dorn et al., 2020). One
estimate suggests that as many as three million students across the United States have not received any formal
education since schools closed their physical doors in March 2019 (Korman et al., 2020).
7
  A large literature on summer slide provides some context for understanding the implications for learning loss that
researchers and policymakers can extrapolate to pandemic-driven school closures (von Hippel, 2020). More
recently, however, losses are estimated based on interim tests. One such study found that third- through eighth-grade



                                                                                                                   4
future earnings of these students and the U.S. economy as a whole (Azevedo et al., 2020;
Hanushek & Woessmann, 2020; Psacharopoulos et al., 2020).
         Evidence for school closure as a mitigation strategy for the spread of COVID-19 comes
largely from retrospective analyses of school closures during prior flu outbreaks and pandemics.
These studies, many of which focused on the 2009 H1N1 pandemic, largely found that
efficiently timed school closure during a flu outbreak was an effective measure for reducing
spread (Bin Nafisah et al., 2018; Jackson et al., 2014, 2016). Descriptive studies of non-
pharmaceutical interventions during the 1918 flu pandemic found that cities that closed schools
had lower death rates than cities that did not close schools and that cities that implemented
control measures that included school closure had lower spread (Bootsma & Ferguson, 2007;
Winslow & Rogers, 1920). School closures during the 1918-1919 flu pandemic did not appear to
have negative effects on student learning or future adult outcomes such as wages--though these
closures lasted for shorter periods than COVID closures (Ager et al., 2020).
         While knowledge from past pandemics provided a foundation for developing virus
mitigation measures early in the current pandemic, there are health reasons to wonder about the
degree to which school closures may not have the same mitigating effects on the spread of
COVID as they appeared to have on earlier outbreaks, and on influenza outbreaks specifically
(Viner et al., 2020). In particular, children are more likely to become infected with the flu and
transmit the flu than are older adults (Wallinga et al., 2006), whereas there is some evidence that
children may be less likely to become infected with COVID than older adults (Goldstein et al.,
2020; Lee et al., 2020). 8 A literature review on children's role in the spread of COVID-19 finds
that while children do transmit the virus, they are less likely to seed outbreaks (Ludvigsson,
2020). However, another study finds evidence that children do, in fact, both contract COVID at
similar rates to their teachers and spread it even when they are asymptomatic (von Bredow,
2020). The closest analogy to schools and COVID-19 transmission may therefore come from
research on school closures in response to other coronaviruses, such as the 2013 severe acute
respiratory syndrome (SARS) outbreak, when closures did not appear to reduce spread (Cowling
et al., 2008; Pang, 2003; Viner et al., 2020).
         The handful of studies that have examined whether COVID infections in schools appear
to spread within and outside of the school reach mixed conclusions. Two retrospective case
studies--one in three schools in northern France and one in two Helsinki area schools--find that
infected students did not appear to spread COVID beyond the school setting (Dub et al., 2020;
Fontanet et al., 2020). A study of children who were infected with the virus in Mississippi finds

students performed similarly in reading in fall 2020 as their counterparts in fall 2019, while math achievement was
5-10 percentile points lower for these students. Note, however, that the magnitudes of these effects are a bit
uncertain for two reasons in particular. First, a large number of students were not tested. Second, the exams were
taken at home and were not proctored (Kuhfeld, Soland, Tarasawa, Johnson, Ruzek, & Lewis, 2020). Region-
specific data from the United States point to much more troubling trends (e.g., EmpowerK12, 2020; Donaldson,
2020). A study drawing from national exams taken in person in the Netherlands found that students lost
approximately 20% of a school year following an eight-week lockdown (Engzell et al., 2020).
8
  Children are also less likely to exhibit COVID-19 related symptoms or to exhibit only mild symptoms (Nikolai et
al., 2020), though it is not clear whether the presence of asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic cases would increase
or decrease spread. On the one hand, being asymptomatic may be indicative of lower viral load (Zhou et al., 2020)
and hence a reduced risk of transmission to others. But it is also possible that asymptomatic but infected students are
more likely to infect others because they are not identified as being contagious. Even children without symptoms
can carry viral loads high enough to infect others (Hu et al., 2020; T. C. Jones et al., 2020), and limited testing
capacity, combined with lower demand for testing among those who are asymptomatic or at lower risk for severe
symptoms, may lead to an undercount of cases among children (Couzin-Frankel et al., 2020).


                                                                                                                     5
that children who were infected were no more likely to have attended school or child care than
control group children who were not infected (Hobbs et al., 2020). However, a study tracing a
large outbreak in an Israeli high school shows that the outbreak was seeded by two cases and
spread beyond the school (Stein-Zamir et al., 2020). Most recently, studies from North Carolina
and Wisconsin have shown that within-school transmission of COVID is extremely limited
especially when mitigations strategies are in place (Falk, Benda, Falk, Steffen, et al., 2021;
Zimmerma, Ibukunoluwa, Brookhart, Boutzoukas, et al., 2021). One can also look to higher
education for evidence; Mangrum and Niekamp (2020) show that students returning from spring
break led to large increases in COVID cases in the wider communities around colleges, and there
is also evidence of higher death rates in communities in close proximity (Ivory et al., 2020).
         There are also concerns that school-based spread could impact the adults who work in the
schools. Indeed, this has been one of the primary arguments from the national teachers' unions.
One study found that 42 to 51% of school employees had increased risk or potentially increased
risk of severe COVID (Selden et al., 2020). But there is also little evidence about how adults in
K12 schools are impacted by in-person schooling, with two observational studies and one
simulation providing evidence that in-person schooling may contribute to higher rates of
infection among staff and their partners, while a third suggests that childcare providers did not
have a higher risk of infection (Cohen et al., 2020; Gilliam et al., 2020; Ismail et al., 2020;
Vlachos et al., 2020). 9
         A growing literature has examined the role of instructional modality in community spread
of COVID. A small number of papers investigate whether school openings are associated with
increased community spread, including three rigorous studies that employed quasi-experimental
approaches to isolate the impact of school re-opening. This research has found that re-opening
K12 schools was not associated with increased community spread (Isphording et al., 2020; Stage
et al., 2020; von Bismarck-Osten et al., 2020). 10 A U.S.-based study found that school openings
were not associated with increased hospitalizations when baseline hospitalization rates were low,
but that openings may be associated with increased hospitalizations when baseline rates were
high (Harris et al., 2021).
         A larger set of papers examine whether school closures are an effective strategy for
mitigating community spread. The majority of these studies are correlational and yield mixed
results; several suggest that closing school buildings is associated with reductions in COVID
spread (Auger et al., 2020; Haug et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2020; Yehya et al., 2020), whereas
others find that building closures were ineffective in stemming the spread of the disease (Chang



9
 A study of school transmission in England found higher rates of incidence among staff than students and higher
rates of staff-to-staff and student-to-staff transmission than the other way around (Ismail et al., 2020). A study
comparing infection rates of parents, teachers, and teachers' partners under in-person versus remote learning in
Sweden found that the group exposed to in-person instruction was more likely to test positive for COVID-19
(Vlachos et al., 2020). A simulation drawing from data in one Washington county suggested in-person schooling
would increase the infection rate of students, teachers, and staff in the school building (Cohen et al., 2020). By
contrast, a study using self-reported survey data from United States child care providers in spring 2020 found that
exposure to child care was not associated with increased risk of infection (Gilliam et al., 2020).
10
   Two of these studies employed quasi-experimental methods by exploiting exogenously determined staggered
school reopening dates after summer break in Germany and found that re-openings were not associated with
increased case counts (Isphording et al., 2020; von Bismarck-Osten et al., 2020). A descriptive paper on school re-
openings found that openings in Denmark and Norway were not associated with increased community transmission
(Stage et al., 2020).


                                                                                                                      6
et al., 2020; Iwata et al., 2020). 11 One of the quasi-experimental studies on re-openings in
Germany also examined school closures and found that they were not associated with significant
decreases in transmission among children or adults (von Bismarck-Osten et al., 2020).
         There is to date a dearth of evidence from the U.S., where extant studies are either
survey-based (Gilliam et al., 2020) or draw on data aggregated to the state-level to estimate the
effect of statewide mandates, or both (Auger et al., 2020; Yehya et al., 2020). Because local
context and the timing of the modality decision play significant roles in the extent to which
school closures mitigate spread or school openings exacerbate it, the effect of these local
decisions on community spread is relevant yet relatively unexplored thus far in the literature.
         The role of in-person schooling in community COVID spread is of central importance to
children, teachers and other school staff, families, and the broader economy and has been at the
heart of the public debate about local, state, and national responses to the pandemic. There are,
however, two significant empirical challenges associated with determining whether instructional
modality ­ in-person, remote, and hybrid variations in between ­ influences the community
spread of COVID. The first is that there is no systemic data collection about transmission in
schools. This is perhaps best exemplified by the fact that Robert Redfield, at the time the
Director of the CDC, referenced a voluntary (schools self-report) COVID tracker for virus spread
inside K-12 schools. 12 Particularly problematic for this work is the fact that limited COVID
testing capacity, combined with lower demand for testing among those who are asymptomatic or
at lower risk for severe symptoms, may lead to an undercount of cases among children (Couzin-
Frankel et al., 2020). Even when children do get tested, rapid antigen tests appear less likely to
detect the virus (Albert et al., 2020). When cases are identified, inadequate resources for contact
tracing may undermine the ability to trace cases back to schools. Limited resources for testing
and contact tracing are especially evident in the United States, where testing has not kept pace
with the rising infection rates (Johns Hopkins University, 2020).
         A second challenge is that there are good reasons to think that associations between
instructional modality and COVID spread could be driven by spurious relationships. On the one
hand, it is likely that any relationship between in-person schooling and COVID incidence or
spread in the United States is inflated given that in-person schooling in the U.S. has been highly
politicized. There is evidence, for instance, that political sentiment was a stronger predictor of
school opening decisions than local case counts at the beginning of the 2020-21 school year
(Center on Reinventing Public Education, 2020; Gross et al., 2020; Valant, 2020). More
specifically, districts are opting to open in-person in communities that are more heavily
Republican-leaning, and/or that have a greater tolerance for the risks of COVID spread in
school. 13 In addition, there is mounting evidence that Republicans are less likely to practice

11
   An interrupted time series analysis of statewide school closures in the U.S. found they were associated with
reduced state-level incidence of COVID-19 in spring 2020 (Auger et al., 2020), and an observational study of virus
mitigation strategies in the U.S. found that states that closed schools later in the outbreak experienced higher rates of
mortality (Yehya et al., 2020). Two studies examining the effects of closures across multiple countries found that
closure was among the most effective mitigation strategies for reducing COVID-19 spread (Haug et al., 2020; Liu et
al., 2020). By contrast, another multiple-country study found that school closure was the least effective mitigation
strategy (Banholzer et al., 2020), and observational studies in Australia and Japan also found that school closures did
not appear to reduce incidence of covid-19 (Chang et al., 2020; Iwata et al., 2020).
12
   For more detail on this tracker, see https://covidschooldashboard.com.
13
   Additionally, teachers unions, which have more power in blue states where mask-wearing and social distancing
are more prevalent (Allcott et al., 2020; Katz et al., 2020), have opposed what they see as "reckless re-openings" and
threatened strikes in response to planned re-openings (Cassella et al., 2020).


                                                                                                                       7
physical distancing amidst the pandemic, and that political ideology matters more for the use of
COVID mitigation strategies than other factors such as COVID rates and demographic
characteristics (Adolph et al., 2020; Brenan, 2020; Clinton et al., 2020; Gollwitzer et al., 2020;
Grossman et al., 2020; Schneider, 2020; Van Kessel & Quinn, 2020). Yet these same
communities, on average, have higher rates of COVID-19 infection and death (Jones & Kiley,
2020). As such, it is difficult to disentangle whether in-person schooling is causing COVID rates
to increase, or whether any relationship between in-person schooling and COVID rates is caused
by the surrounding communities' COVID risk tolerance which drives both COVID spread and
the decision to return to in-person schooling.
         Assigning the likely direction of bias in models estimating the relationship between in-
person schooling and COVID spread is not straightforward. There may be factors that lead to a
spurious relationship in the opposite direction, suggesting a relationship between remote
instruction and COVID spread where there may be none. In particular, there is evidence that U.S.
schools in urban areas and with high rates of low-income families were more likely to begin the
2020-21 school year with remote learning (Center on Reinventing Public Education, 2020; Gross
et al., 2020). Lower income workers are also less likely to have the opportunity to work from
home. As a result, we might expect differential spread among adults at work based on income
(Gould & Shierholz, 2020; Schaner & Theys, 2020). This makes it possible, and even likely, that
there is increased COVID spread in the same communities in which districts are opting for
remote instruction, but for reasons unrelated to modality decisions, thus creating a spurious
correlation between remote schooling models and COVID incidence. In addition, the concern
raised above about inadequate testing leading to artificially low COVID case rates could be
particularly the case in communities that offer in-person schooling. If in-person schooling
suggests a higher tolerance for risk and/or lesser concern about the potential dangers associated
with the disease, then it may be that communities that embrace in-person instruction are
precisely those that are less likely to get tests in the event they feel ill or are asymptomatic after
encounters with a COVID-positive person. This would lead to an underestimate of COVID
spread in communities with in-person schooling, which would then bias any estimates of the
relationship between instructional modality and COVID rates or growth.
         It is also worth noting that the estimated effect of in-person schooling on COVID spread
greatly depends on what students and staff are doing under the counterfactual condition of no in-
person schooling. While it may be natural to assume that removing students from contexts in
which they are in close quarters in school buildings will allow for greater social distancing and
COVID mitigation practices, the counterfactual for students and school personnel who are not in
public school buildings is not necessarily a safer environment. For instance, some families whose
schools closed for in-person education formed "learning pods," in which groups of students learn
together with a tutor, parents, babysitter, or a certified teacher (Blum & Miller, 2020). In other
communities, local community centers and nonprofits helped families to form pods and provided
an adult caregiver who could help to oversee students' remote learning (Pillow, 2020). These
pods may be in private homes or other contexts that do not require or allow for social distancing
and mitigation strategies. Moreover, it is likely that individuals mix across and beyond their
pods, as students in a pod then socialize with other children or family members outside of school
hours (Natanson, 2020). Some families are moving their children to private schools, which are
more likely to offer in-person schooling and may have varied safety practices (Dickler, 2020).
Other families are sending their children to child care centers or hiring babysitters, both of which
require the mixing of adults and children across family units and thus could on their own foster



                                                                                                    8
disease spread (Gilman, 2020). In short, we do not know what students do if school buildings are
not open for instruction, but it is unlikely that the majority of students learn by themselves from
home and do not interact with other children or adults outside of their family units. Thus,
COVID spread can occur at the same or even greater rates in communities that are keeping
school buildings closed.
        It is also critical to consider the possibility of heterogenous modality effects. There is
variation across school districts by a given modality in the local level of COVID cases. Having
schools open in a local context where there are high levels of the virus would likely play a
different role in community spread than doing so where the virus is less pervasive (Auger et al.,
2020; Cohen et al., 2020; von Bismarck-Osten et al., 2020). Thus it is important that researchers
consider the level of pre-existing community COVID rates when modeling instructional
modality effects on COVID outcomes.
        For all these reasons, it is important to be cautious when interpreting findings about the
role of instructional modality in COVID spread. In the next section, we describe how we attempt
to control for the various non-school factors that could influence community spread, and account
for the potential of heterogeneous effects across counties. Our paper adds to the extant literature
in several ways. First, we are able to include a near-census of districts in two states that have
reacted very differently to the pandemic, Michigan and Washington. In these two states, we have
data on the instructional modality as well as estimated enrollment by modality for nearly every
school district in each state, which we pair with county-level measures of COVID case rates.
Second, we examine the relationship between instructional modality and COVID outcomes for
different age groups, enabling us to better understand whether public schools induce COVID
spread across the age spectrum. Third, we are able to assess not only the initial school re-opening
decisions in each district, but also changes they made in each month of the fall semester. This
enables us to assess the relationship between changes in modality and changes in community-
based COVID spread within individual counties, thus holding constant many of the unobservable
characteristics that may contribute to the COVID incidence and to district decisions about
instructional modality.
        The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows: Section 3 reviews our data from both
Michigan and Washington, highlighting similarities and differences across the two contexts.
Section 4 outlines our methods of estimating the relationship between instructional modality and
COVID spread in the surrounding communities. Section 5 describes our results. Section 6
concludes with a discussion of our results and implications for decisionmakers during this time
of uncertainty.

3.     Data and Measures
        We focus our study on two states that have approached responses to COVID quite
differently since the beginning of the pandemic ­ Michigan and Washington ­ and use data from
several sources to understand how districts' instructional modality decisions (fully in-person and
fully remote schooling at the extremes) and students' attendance by modality influence the
spread of COVID-19. We primarily utilize data on reported COVID-19 cases collected by the
CDC, as well as the respective state health agencies (i.e., Michigan Department of Health and
Human Services [MDHHS] and the Washington Department of Health [WADoH]). District-level
information on educational modality is collected by each of the states' departments of education,
in Michigan from the Michigan Department of Education and the Center for Educational
Performance Information and in Washington from the Washington Office of the Superintendent


                                                                                                  9
of Public Instruction, via monthly surveys administered to school districts. The data used for the
analysis are relatively consistent across both states, but, below, we provide details on slight
differences between states in the data as well as context about COVID incidence and school
modality in each.

COVID-19 Data in Michigan and Washington

         Daily counts of newly confirmed COVID cases are available publicly for all counties in
both Michigan (N=83) and Washington (N=39). As we show in Figure 1, both states experienced
significant increases in new reported COVID cases relatively early in 2020. Like nearly every
state, infections again rose during the summer months and reached unprecedented levels in
November. However, the patterns of community spread across the two states are somewhat
different. In particular, while both states show relatively low and slightly growing cases from the
late summer through mid-October, cases in Michigan start to pick up and grow exponentially
around mid-October. We do not see evidence of exponential growth in Washington, though there
is some acceleration in November.
         We calculate average daily COVID incidence counts across a rolling 7-day window,
creating a more stable measure compared to single-day counts which tend to fluctuate due to
reporting irregularities, particularly on weekends and holidays. We then use county population
estimates from the 2019 U.S. Census county population totals to convert these average counts to
relative rates per 100,000 county residents. The resulting 7-day average rates per 100,000
residents form the basis of the main outcome measure of COVID growth used in our analysis:
the 7-day average rate on the first day of the month. We also examine our outcomes for COVID
cases broken down by age groups by county using the following categories: 0-19, 20-39, 40-59,
60 years and older. In Michigan, these daily rate data are obtained through a data use agreement
with the MDHHS. In Washington, these data are publicly available as weekly rates via the
Washington Department of Health. We are particularly interested in the 0 to 19 year age group,
as these numbers should reflect COVID spread amongst the school-age population, arguably
where school related COVID outcomes would most likely appear.
In addition to the average daily COVID incidence counts, we examine three additional measures
of COVID spread as specification checks for our main models. The first is the relationship
between modality and community spread using unadjusted COVID-19 case counts and a
negative binomial specification to account for the fact that underlying case counts are integers
and do not drop below zero, which could generate specification bias in OLS models. The second
is the rate of exponential growth in 7-day averages (calculated as described above) between the
last and penultimate weeks of the month. A number of studies estimate this measure of growth to
model the exponential nature of viral spread and to correct for outliers with very high case rates
(Bursztyn et al., 2020; Courtemanche et al., 2020; Lyu & Wehby, 2020; Mangrum & Niekamp,
2020). Exponential growth is widely used to model spread in the early phases of epidemics when
cases are relatively low (Bertozzi et al., 2020). 14 Since the 2020-21 school year began prior to
the second wave, an exponential growth model could capture the beginning of the fall wave. The
third outcome is COVID-19 doubling time (Muniz-Rodriguez et al., 2020), or the number of

14
  As is evident in Figure 1, there does not appear to be exponential growth occurring until relatively late in the fall
of 2020 for Michigan (and not in Washington), so we consider these growth measures to be specification checks for
our main measure.



                                                                                                                     10
days it would take to double the cumulative case count. A higher doubling time points to lower
transmission while a smaller doubling time points to higher transmission. For context, the
doubling time in the United States was estimated at 2.7 days in the early peak (Lurie et al.,
2020). 15 Following Ebell & Bagwell-Adams (2020), we calculate doubling time using the 5-day
rolling average. As with the 7-day averages described above, this approach helps to mitigate
noise from local reporting idiosyncrasies in small counties.

District Instructional Modality Data

         Both states' departments of education are surveying school districts monthly to collect
information about the mode in which instruction is being delivered during the pandemic. In
Michigan, districts are asked to indicate how they plan to deliver instruction in each upcoming
month, while in Washington, districts report the mode in which instruction was delivered on the
final day of the month. In order for the timing of the surveys to align as closely as possible across
states, we assign Washington end-of-month surveys to the subsequent month. (e.g., Michigan
districts' modalities at the beginning of October are compared to Washington districts'
modalities on September 30th). Michigan modality data are available for the months of
September, October, and November. Because the first Washington survey was conducted on the
last day of September (which we infer as representing instructional modalities for the beginning
of October), these data are only available for the months of October and November.
         The definitions of instructional modalities vary slightly between the two states due to
differences in the ways their surveys are structured. For Michigan, the definitions of instructional
modality are based on what districts offer their general education students. We define "in-
person" districts as those that provide general education students with the opportunity to receive
full-time in-person instruction; in some cases students may opt for either hybrid or remote
instruction. "Hybrid" districts are those that offer some or all of their general education students
in-person schooling at least some portion ­ usually two to three days ­ of a week. "Remote"
districts are as those that provide all instruction in a remote or virtual format for all of their
general education students. These definitions are mutually exclusive and are based only on the
mode of instruction provided to general education students and therefore may not reflect the
modality provided to special populations of students. For instance, if a district provides fully
remote instruction to all general education students and fully in-person instruction to all special
education students, it would be classified as a remote district. (See Education Policy Innovation
Collaborative (2020) for more detail on the Michigan modality definitions.)
         Washington districts are classified as "in-person" if they indicated they provided
"typical/traditional in-person" instruction to elementary, middle, and/or high school students,
classified as "remote" if all of their students, or all except small subgroups of students, received
fully-remote instruction, and classified as "hybrid" if all students received "partially in-person"
instruction or the district used a "phase-in" approach where some students received partially or
fully in-person instruction while others still received remote instruction.
         One concern with discrete district instructional modality data is that not all students
choose to enroll in the in-person or hybrid modality even if it is offered. Districts in each state
were also asked to approximate the share of students who received different modes of instruction

15
  In Michigan, the doubling time was 2.7 prior to the March 24, 2020 stay-at-home order (Executive Order 2020-
21) and 21.5 when the order was in place. In Washington, it was 4.3 prior to the March 23, 2020, stay-at-home order
and 31.9 during the order (Lurie et al, 2020).


                                                                                                                11
(in Michigan districts were asked to estimate in-person and hybrid separately and in Washington
they were asked whether students were "receiving some level of in-person instruction"). In
Michigan, districts were asked to select one of the following percentage ranges: 0%, 1-24%, 25-
49%, 50-74%, 75-99%, or 100%. The Washington survey is structured similarly, but uses
slightly different percentage ranges: 0%, 1-10%, 11-25%, 26-50%, 51-75%, or 76-100%. In
various specifications we use these estimates of student enrollment by modality to assess the
relationship between estimated actual in-person or hybrid enrollment and COVID case rates and
spread.

Community Characteristics

         We utilize a rich set of covariates that are hypothesized to influence both instructional
modality and COVID-19 incidence. First, we consider factors associated with an increased risk
of spreading COVID-19 and/or an increased risk of adverse outcomes for members of the
community who contract the virus. We use population size and age group estimates from the
American Community Survey (ACS) to capture information about private school enrollment to
county population and the age distribution within each county. 16 We focus specifically on the
proportions of county residents that are school-aged children (because their risk of exposure is
most impacted by decisions to open or close school buildings) and adults aged 65 or above
(because they are at a higher risk of severe illness if infected). To account for the high levels of
risk among nursing home residents and staff, we estimate the proportion of residents living in
these facilities using the total number of occupied beds reported in the COVID-19 Nursing Home
Dataset (Centers for Medicare and Medicaid). We also include the numbers of religious
institutions and religious adherents per capita from the U.S. Religion Census (Religious
Congregations and Membership Study, 2010), as gathering in churches or similar community
institutions other than schools may pose more opportunities for the virus to spread.
         We also consider contextual factors believed to shape local responses to the pandemic.
As a proxy for efforts taken by members of a community to mitigate the risk of COVID-19
spread, we include county-level estimates of mask usage from a July 2020 survey conducted by
The New York Times and Dynata and estimates of the share of people in a county who stay at
home in a given day from the Bureau of Transportation statistics at the US Department of
Transportation. 17 To capture local economic conditions, we include 2019 unemployment rates
from the Local Area Unemployment Statistics program (Bureau of Labor Statistics) and
individual poverty rates from ACS. For information about the political climate of a county, we
also include the share of votes from each county in the 2016 presidential election that were cast
for Donald Trump (drawn from the County Presidential Election Returns 2000-2016 dataset from
the MIT Election Data and Science Lab).
         Table 1 provides summary statistics by state, month, and modality. School districts in
Michigan were far more likely than those in Washington to offer in-person schooling. In
September, 58% of Michigan districts offered fully in-person instruction, typically as one option

16
   We use 1-year estimates of county population and age distribution from the 2019 ACS, and 5-year estimates of
private school enrollment and poverty from the 2014-2018 ACS (as 1-year estimates are only available for counties
with populations of at least 65,000).
17
   NYTimes data are publicly available here: https://github.com/nytimes/covid-19-data/tree/master/mask-use. The
US DOT statistics are available at https://data.bts.gov/Research-and-Statistics/Trips-by-Distance/w96p-f2qv.



                                                                                                               12
available to parents along with hybrid or fully remote instruction. Twenty-four percent provided
only remote instruction with no fully or partially in-person options, and most of these districts
were located in or near large urban areas. The remaining 18% adopted a hybrid model where
students attend in-person for part of the week and participate in remote instruction for the
remainder of the week. By contrast, in Washington, the vast majority of districts were either in a
fully remote (64%) or hybrid (27%) model; the remaining 9% of districts, located predominantly
in rural areas, were in-person.
         In both states, districts that began the year with fully remote or hybrid instruction tended
to shift toward modalities with more in-person instruction in subsequent months. By the
beginning of November, 64% of Michigan districts provided fully in-person instruction to at
least some of their students, while 20% provided hybrid instruction, and the remaining 16% were
fully remote. In Washington, there were about half as many fully remote districts in November
(33%) as there were in October. Most of these districts shifted from fully remote to hybrid
instruction, while a few transitioned to fully in-person instruction; 48% of the state's districts
provided hybrid instruction in November, while 12% provided fully in-person instruction.
         Since we weight our regressions by student enrollment to better model the relationship
between modality and COVID spread, Table 1 provides weighted summary statistics. As can be
seen at the top of each panel of the table, the weighted shares of students enrolled in in-person
districts is much smaller than the share of districts offering that modality (reflecting the negative
correlation between district size in the likelihood of being in-person). In Washington, although
approximately 10% of districts offer in-person instruction across the two months, only
approximately 2% of students are enrolled in these districts, reflecting the largely rural and
smaller nature of in-person districts. Because of this small share we combine in-person and
hybrid districts into a single category for Washington.
         In both states, there are notable economic, political, and racial divides between districts
offering in-person and remote instruction. Remote districts in Michigan tend to have larger
shares of Black students than in-person and hybrid districts, and this gap widens after September.
Similarly, remote districts tend to have larger shares of Hispanic students compared to in-person
districts. Remote districts in both states also tend to be in counties with lower shares of votes cast
for Donald Trump in the 2016 election, and more frequent mask usage when compared to in-
person districts, while in Michigan remote districts tend to have more people staying at home
regularly. Although we observe discrepancies in poverty rates across in-person and remote
districts in both states, they occur in opposite directions. In Michigan, remote districts tend to be
in higher-poverty counties, while they tend to be in slightly lower-poverty counties in
Washington. In both states, these economic discrepancies increase in magnitude over time as
more districts shift toward in-person modalities.
         In each state there are a set of districts that did not report their instructional modality in
each month, as shown in Appendix Table 1A. Less than 3% of districts in Michigan are missing
modality data in any given month. In Washington, approximately 3% of districts are missing data
in October and 10% in November. The districts with missing modality data are similar to the
districts without missing data, although in Michigan districts with missing data have a larger
share of economically disadvantaged students and special education students, and in Washington
districts with missing data have a larger share of Black students and are more likely to be located
in suburban/town locales.




                                                                                                    13
4.       Methods

       To begin to examine the association between school district instructional modality
choices and county-level COVID-19 incidence, we estimate equation (1) by ordinary least
squares:

,+1 =  +   ,   + 1  + 2 ct + 3  +
      
        +  +  (1)

where COVID is one of three measures of COVID-19 incidence for county c at the beginning of
month t+1: a) 7-day average COVID cases per 100,000 individuals; and as specification checks
b) exponential COVID growth rate; 18 and c) doubling time 19. For outcome (a), we also include
lagged, 7-day average COVID-19 case rates per 100,000 individuals ending on the final day of
each of the last four weeks of month t-1, which we refer to as "pre-existing cases", along with
the square of this value. We include lagged COVID rates in this way to allow for growth rates to
be high when existing cases are low (exponential growth) but to slow at higher case rates as
behavioral responses and increased immunity "bend the curve" and start reducing growth. The
second and third specifications do not adjust for pre-existing COVID-19 cases in month, t-1 as
these are mechanically included in the dependent variable. In alternative specifications we also
estimate our models using unadjusted COVID-19 case counts and a negative binomial
specification, as well as age-specific outcomes for the following age groups: 0-19, 20-39, 40-59,
and 60 years and over. All regressions are weighted by district enrollment and standard errors are
clustered at the county level.
        Our primary interest is the extent to which community spread is influenced by
instructional modality, which is captured by the in-person (IP) and hybrid (H) variables for
school district j at time t. These variables are captured multiple ways and slightly differently by
state as described in Section 3. Hence, we utilize a few different specifications in how we
consider modality. First, in Michigan we estimate models using the modality chosen by the
school district:
                             1 :        ,     = 1        + 2          (2).

As noted in the prior section, in Washington, although approximately 10% of districts offer in-
person instruction, only about 2% of students are enrolled in these districts. Given this, we
combine the variables into a single combined indicator:

                                            1 :  ,   = 1 _                (3).

In both states, for outcome (a), we also estimate models that interact these indicators with pre-
existing COVID rates to allow for the impact of instructional modality to vary with baseline
COVID rates:

18
    = ln( + 1) - ln ,+1 + 1 where  , are total cases
at time t.
            (2)
19
    =           where t is time in days between observations and r is the percentage growth rate in
                         ln (1+         )
                                  100
the five-day rolling average of cases per 100k persons during period t.


                                                                                                    14
2 :   ,   = 1  + 2  + 3  ×  ,-1     (4)
                           2       2
    + 4  × ,-1 + 5   ×  ,-1 + 6  ×  ,-1

                                   2
2 :  ,   = 1 _ + 2 _ × ,-1 + 3 _ ×  ,-1


Importantly, many epidemiologists argue that in-person schooling is less likely to risk health and
safety if cases in the community are low, but considerably riskier when cases are high (Boyle,
2020). This specification provides us with the ability to estimate levels of existing COVID rates
where a given modality starts to affect overall disease spread.
         Our data also include measures of district reported shares of students who enroll in in-
person or hybrid modality when given the option. One issue with using the district modality
choice is that even if a district is in-person or hybrid they will often give parents the option of
keeping their children in a remote instruction, and evidence suggests that take-up of this option
may be substantial (e.g., Education Policy Innovation Collaborative, 2020). Hence, while the
district modality is a policy decision, the impact of modality on COVID rates is a function of the
interaction of modality preferences of parents and the district policy; for this reason, we interpret
findings on district modality as intent to treat estimates.

       In both states, districts report estimated shares of students in-person in ranges. Though as
we note above, the ranges and specificity by modality differ across states. We use this
information to estimate model (1) with the following modality variables:

     3 :  ,  
                                                      
                             1  + 2  + 3  ×  ,-1 +
     =                         2           2                                              (5)
               4  × ,-1 + 5  ×  ,-1 + 6  ×  ,-1
          

                                   2                                            
3 :  ,   = 1 _ + 2 _ × ,-1 + 3 _ ×  ,-1 
                          

                       
where     ,    , _      are indicators for whether the district reports student enrollment falls in
modality group g. In Michigan   (1% - 24%, 25% - 49%, 50% - 74%, 75% - 100%)
Washington   (1% - 25%, 26% - 50%, 51% - 75%, 76% - 100%). In both states,
remote-only districts are the omitted category.
        We also include variables designed to account for non-schooling risk factors for COVID
spread as controls.  is the share of individuals in county i, who report "always" wearing
face masks when in public as of July 2020. ct is the seven-day average from the
last week of month t of daily county-level estimates of the share of people who stay at home
calculated by the US Department of Transportation. These variables serve as proxies for
compliance with social distancing measures.  is the share of the 2016 presidential
election vote for President Trump, which serves as a measure of political leanings in the county.
X is a vector of time-invariant county-level characteristics including the 2019 county
unemployment rate; the 2018 individual poverty rate; the shares of the population that attend
county public schools, the share of the school population in private schools, is age 65 or older,


                                                                                                   15
and lives in a nursing home, share of population that is not White or Asian (underrepresented
minority groups), urbanicity, the shares of religious congregations and religious adherents per
capita in 2010 (the most recent year of data available), whether the county has a college or
university, and whether the county has a prison; 20  is a month fixed effect; and  is an error
term. The vector also includes the share of public school students relative to the population of
each county as we might expect the risk of community COVID spread due to in-person
schooling to depend on how important the student population is in a county. 21
         The above models will produce unbiased estimates of the influence of in-person
schooling on community spread if  ( ,  ) = 0 and  ( ,  ) = 0.
But, as we described in Section 2, there are reasons to believe that instructional modality
decisions are correlated with unobserved COVID mitigation strategies by individuals or
institutions. However, the signs of ( ,  ),  ( ,  ) are uncertain.
On the one hand, it is reasonable to assume that counties that emphasize safety are likely to both
limit in-person schooling and take other steps to mitigate COVID transmission that are not
accounted for by the covariates in equation (1). This would lead the estimates on modality to be
biased upward. Alternatively, the counterfactuals to students (and teachers) being in public
schools could be less safe in terms of COVID spread (e.g., learning pods) and parents may seek
social engagement for children in non-socially-distanced environments. Again, if the covariates
fail to account for this, the estimates would be biased, but possibly downward.
         To try to account for unobserved heterogeneity in mitigation strategies across counties,
we exploit the longitudinal nature of the data (i.e., the repeated observations of COVID cases and
instructional modality) by estimating specifications of all models that include district fixed
effects. These models identify the impact of in-person modality based on within district variation
and have the advantage of accounting for any time-invariant characteristics of districts that are
associated with COVID spread. 22 Note that in these models we cannot include the pre-existing
COVID rates as they generate a specification bias when including the fixed effect. These models
are "two-way fixed-effects" models that, by exploiting changes in modality over time, provide
difference-in-differences estimates of the impact of modality on COVID spread. Because the far
majority of districts in both Michigan and Washington move from relatively remote to relatively
in-person modalities (see Table A2 in the Appendix for a transition matrix detailing this modality
changes), this fixed effects strategy for the most part isolates the effect of "school opening," or
moving from remote to hybrid or in-person schooling. 23 We also estimate county fixed effects
models to confirm results from our district fixed effects strategy.



20
   Our measures of COVID case rates exclude cases in prisons, but we nonetheless control for whether the county
has a prison as cases in prisons could themselves spread to local communities.
21
   Variables with missing values are set to the overall mean. We include indicators for whether a variable is missing
in the regressions.
22
   In specifications with district fixed-effects, time-invariant county-level characteristics included in previous
specifications are automatically dropped from the models.
23
   For instance, in Michigan, no districts that were in-person in September switched to remote in October, and 1%
switched to a hybrid modality. By contrast, 11% of hybrid and 14% of remote districts in September switched to in-
person in October and 14% of remote districts switched to in-person. Similarly, between October and November,
2% of in-person districts switched to remote and 0.4% switched to hybrid, whereas 5% and 9% of remote districts
switched to in-person and hybrid modalities, respectively. In Washington, between October and November, 38%
and 5% of remote districts switched to hybrid and in-person, respectively, and 11% and 0% switched from in-person
to hybrid (n=3) and remote, respectively.


                                                                                                                  16
5.       Results

         We are interested in describing the relationship between instructional modality and the
spread of COVID-19. The findings for COVID cases per 100,000 are reported in Table 2, but we
also report findings for the other measures of spread in Appendix A: COVID growth rate (Table
A3); doubling time (Table A4); and unadjusted cases counts (Table A5). 24 The findings for the
effect of instructional modality on all four of our COVID measures are qualitatively similar,
though we note a few ways in which they differ in the discussion below.
         Recall that we include three school modalities in Michigan (in-person, hybrid, and
remote) while we only include two for Washington (in-person/hybrid and remote) given the
small percentage of students (about 2%) who are in districts with in-person public schooling. The
models also differ across states because there is an additional wave of data for instructional
modality in Michigan, so the Michigan models include controls for both September and October,
while in the Washington models we only include a control for October. November is the
reference category in both states.
         Section 5.1 describes results from models that include district modality. In Section 5.2,
we discuss findings for models that replace these with the percentage of students who participate
in a particular modality type; in-person, hybrid, and remote for Michigan, and in-person/hybrid
versus remote for Washington. Finally, in Section 5.3, we describe the relationship between
instructional modality and the spread of COVID-19 among individuals in the following age
categories: 0-19, 20-39, 40-59, and 60+ years of age, both by reported district modality and the
district estimates of the percentages of students in each modality type.

5.1      COVID Spread and Instructional Modality

        In Panel A of Table 2 we present results from models predicting COVID community
spread (cases per 100,000) in Michigan and analogous models for Washington in Panel B. 25 We
begin with sparse models (column 1 for Michigan and 5 for Washington) that include only
instructional modality and controls for existing COVID cases per capita, the square of cases per
capita, and the month of the instructional modality measure. In Michigan, the coefficient on in-
person schooling is positive and significant and the coefficient for a school district having a
hybrid modality is also positive, albeit smaller in magnitude and only marginally significant.
Given that the standard deviation of the COVID case rate in Michigan is about 19, this naïve
specification suggests that a school district being in-person has a sizable effect on COVID case
rates per capita, nearly 30% of a standard deviation. In Washington, the combined in-
person/hybrid variable is positive but less precise and only very marginally significant (at the
p=0.13 level) but the suggested magnitude is similar, about 24% of a standard deviation. 26 In
both states the controls for pre-existing COVID rates suggests a parabolic relationship with cases
rising quickly at low levels of community infection, then leveling off and declining.


24
   Again, given the growth rates shown in Figure 1, we consider the growth measures of COVID spread more
informative in Michigan than Washington.
25
   Some covariates in each of these specifications are not reported in the accompanying tables. See the notes at the
bottom of each table for additional included control variables. The estimates for these are available from the authors
upon request. We also estimated models that include the share of students in a county enrolled in private schools and
the results were unaffected.
26
   The standard deviation of case rates per capita in Washington and Michigan is 11.4 and 19.1, respectively.


                                                                                                                   17
         In columns 2 and 6 we add several controls for community characteristics. These are
designed to account for physical features of communities that may affect disease spread (e.g.
urbanicity, religious congregations), demographic characteristics (i.e., county population over 65
years old per 100,000, percent of students in district who are underrepresented minorities), as
well as factors that may be related to the ability or desire to social distance (i.e., poverty rate,
percent reporting mask wearing, Trump 2016 vote share, share staying at home, religious
congregations and adherents). These covariates are jointly statistically significant in both
states, 27 and their inclusion in the model greatly diminishes the coefficients on instructional
modality in Michigan but not in Washington. In Michigan, none of the instructional modality
variables are close to being statistically significant and the standard errors suggest one can rule
out (with 95 percent certainty) that districts having in-person or hybrid instruction increases
spread of COVID by more than 2 cases per 100,000. 28 In Washington, however, in-
person/hybrid modality is statistically significantly associated with 2.9 cases /100,000.
         A key concern, however, is that instructional modality may matter more depending on the
overall number of COVID cases in a community. More specifically, if there are no COVID cases
in a community, then schools cannot be a risk factor contributing to spread. And, if everyone in a
community is infected, schools also cannot contribute to spread. To account for this
hypothesized nonlinear relationship between instructional modality and case counts, we estimate
a variant of the model that interacts the pre-period case count variables with the instructional
modality indicators (column 3 for Michigan and column 7 for Washington). In these models the
main effects of instructional modality remain insignificant, though they are more imprecisely
estimated. But here it is necessary to focus on both the main effects and the interactions to
understand how instructional modality is related to COVID spread along the pre-existing COVID
case rate distribution.
         In Figure 2, for Michigan (Panel A is for in-person and Panel B is hybrid) and Figure 3,
for Washington, we explore the extent to which there appear to be heterogeneous effects of
community COVID spread associated with instructional modality and the level of COVID case
rates in the communities in which districts operate. The estimates are generated based on model
3 (without district fixed effects) in Table 2, where we interact modality with a quadratic function
of COVID rates in the prior month, and are calculated as:

          :  =  1 + 3  +  5 ×   2
                                  (7)
          :  = 2 +  4  + 6 ×  2



         _ :  = 1 + 2  + 3 × 2


such that in these figures we show how COVID rates in a county are predicted to change if the
modality of all districts in the county shift from remote only to in-person or hybrid in Michigan
or remote to combined in-person/hybrid in Washington. The x-axes in these figures are set to the
99th percentile of COVID rate in Michigan. The 99th percentile in Washington is far lower, but
we keep the Michigan scale to preserve comparability across states, and, in each state mark the
50th, 75th, and 90th percentiles so as to show how these correspond with pre-existing COVID case

27
  The F-tests are 13.98 and 9.22 for Michigan and Washington, respectively.
28
  While not our primary focus, a few other findings are also notable. For instance, in both states, Trump share of the
vote in a county is positively correlated with COVID spread and mask wearing is negatively correlated in Michigan.
In Washington, mask wearing is positively correlated with COVID case rates and significant at the 10% level).


                                                                                                                   18
rates in communities. We note that as a result, Figure 3 shows estimates that are very far out-of-
sample in Washington as the 99th percentile of pre-existing COVID rates in Washington is 17
COVID cases per 100,000, but the scale (the X-axis) goes up to 30 cases per 100,000.
         Both figures suggest that shifts from remote to hybrid or in-person schooling has a
limited impact on community COVID spread at low case rates in the community. In Michigan
the results for hybrid modality are statistically indistinguishable from zero throughout most of
the range of pre-existing COVID rates, although very slightly positive and significant in the
range of 19 to 26 cases per 100,000 (Panel B). The results for the in-person modality (Panel A)
are statistically insignificant for case rates less than 21 but are marginally significant and positive
in the range of 21 to 37 cases per 100,000, and insignificant but still increasing beyond that
point. In Washington, the estimates of COVID spread associated with school districts being in-
person/hybrid compared to fully remote are not statistically different from zero until community
case rates rise to around 5 cases per 100,000. 29
         While the shape of the overall relationship across both states is similar, it is striking that
that school modality appears to influence community spread at far lower case rates in
Washington than in Michigan. We check whether these differences may be related to differences
across states in specification or data availability by re-estimating our main specification for
Michigan combining the in-person and hybrid classifications and excluding September modality
data (as in our Washington analyses). Neither of these specifications for Michigan (shown in
Appendix Figures A1 and A2) yield results similar to those in Washington in Figure 3. When we
exclude September from our data, we find estimates that are statistically indistinguishable from
zero throughout the entire range of pre-existing COVID rates. When we combine hybrid and in-
person modalities, we find that the operating schools in-person or hybrid contributes to COVID
spread when pre-existing case rates in the surrounding communities are greater than about 19
cases per 100,000.
         Another plausible reason that we see somewhat different patterns across states is the
nature of the comparisons in each state. In particular, it is the contrasts between the omitted and
included categories that inform the estimates in each state. While the omitted category in both
states is remote school districts, it is possible that community practices in the omitted category
relative to the included categories differ. For instance, if communities in Washington with in-
person schooling are relatively more likely to exercise COVID transmission mitigation
strategies, as compared to communities with in-person schooling in Michigan, the relative risk of
school-based transmissions could be more dangerous in Washington. Similarly, if communities
in Michigan with in-person schooling are being relatively safe, the relative risk of in-person
schooling might be lower. We cannot speak directly to these possibilities, but there is evidence in
Table 1 that, for instance, there is a bigger contrast between mask wearing in in-person and
remote districts in Michigan than there is in Washington. This might suggest that there are also
unobserved differences across states in the contrast between districts by modality.


29
  Models that estimate these interactions non-parametrically with dummy variables and interactions indicating case
rates below the 25th and above the 75th percentiles, provided estimates consistent with the quadratic functional
forms. Results available by request. We also estimated local linear models where we first estimate regressions of
COVID rates on the demographic and social distancing variables, then take the residuals from this regression and
estimate local linear regressions of COVID rates on lagged COVID rates and the interaction of lagged COVID with
modality. These regressions are centered at each integer value of lagged COVID and have bandwidths of 10 cases
per 100k on each side. These estimates are provided in Appendix Figures A3 and A4 and, while noisier, are
consistent with the parametric quadratic models.


                                                                                                                19
It is also important to stress that, in both states, the values where we find evidence of school
district mode-related spread are relatively low compared to COVID case rates as of mid-
December, which were 44 per 100,000 in Michigan and 36 per 100,000 in Washington.
However, at the times when pre-existing COVID rates in the regression models were recorded
(early August, September, and October in Michigan; early September and October in
Washington) statistical significance begins at the 95th and 75th percentiles of the county level
COVID rate distributions in Michigan and Washington, respectively. As a result, the point at
which our results suggest that district decisions to offer in-person (or in-person and hybrid in
Washington) instruction may have led to increases in COVID spread are only found in counties
with relatively high incidence rates as of early late summer/early autumn 2020. Moreover, Figure
2 shows that in-person modalities even in Michigan communities with high case rates are
associated with moderate increases in spread; at 21 pre-existing cases per 100,000 there are an
additional 3.56 cases per 100,000 associated with in-person modality. 30 The risk of additional
spread is higher in Washington relative to pre-existing rates, but since pre-existing case rates
were far lower than in Michigan (particularly toward the end of 2020, see Figure 1) the
differences between states in the point in the distribution of pre-existing cases in which in-person
schooling becomes significant is smaller. We return to the issue of heterogeneity of the
instructional modality findings with the pre-existing case rate distribution in Section 6 in the
context of discussing state guidance on school openings.
         As a check on these findings, in Appendix Tables A3 and A4, we report the results from
regressions using the exponential growth and doubling rates, Again, we do not include controls
for lagged COVID rates in the first two models since they are directly incorporated into the
construction of the dependent variables. Further, doubling rates should be interpreted as negative
values indicating more spread (the time to doubling decreases). For exponential growth (A3) the
estimates are statistically insignificant in all models. For doubling rates (A4), there are
statistically significant relationships with modality when we do not account for other factors, but
the estimates drop to statistical insignificance and close to zero when we add controls.
Nonetheless, we are most interested in these measures for Michigan, where growth rates appear
to be exponential (see Figure 1) from mid-October into November which is latter part of the time
period under study. 31
         The above analyses suggest that instructional modality is not strongly related to COVID
spread at low levels of pre-existing COVID rates, but it is at high levels of pre-existing COVID
rates. Nonetheless, as we emphasized earlier, there are good reasons to be concerned that the
instructional modality coefficients could be biased by unobserved heterogeneity across
communities that is related to both COVID spread and instructional modality decisions. We can
address heterogeneity related to time-invariant district factors leveraging the longitudinal nature
of the data and including school district fixed effects. In these specifications, which are reported
in columns 4 and 8 of Table 2, the estimates on the instructional modality variables are identified
based on within district variation in modality over time. 32 As noted previously, including prior
COVID rates as a control and fixed-effects at the same time creates specification bias, hence we

30
   With a standard deviation of 19 cases per 100,000 in Michigan over the time period under study, 3.56 cases per
100,000 is approximately 19% of a standard deviation increase associated with in-person instruction when pre-
existing COVID cases were at 21 cases per 100,000, or at the 95th percentile of the distribution of pre-existing
COVID rates.
31
   We provide results from a negative binomial specification using case counts (rather than counts per 100k
population) in Appendix Table A5. Adjusting for scale differences the results are similar to our baseline estimates.
32
   All of the time invariant district and county covariates are excluded from these models.


                                                                                                                   20
only include modality indicators and consider the average relationship. Given this, the
appropriate comparisons for columns 4 and 8 are the results in columns 2 and 6. The estimates
for Michigan are negative and insignificant while for Washington they are larger but also
insignificant. It is important to note that, given the limited number of districts switching
modality categories (see Appendix Table A2), the coefficients are far less precise (particularly in
Washington) than those reported in the earlier specifications that rely on both variation over time
and across districts. The 95% confidence intervals can rule out average effect sizes of in-person
modality of 2.2 cases/100,000 in Michigan but in Washington the upper bound is 12.4
cases/100,000. Nonetheless, the coefficients are substantively similar to those we see in models
without district fixed effects, hence we treat these models as a check on our OLS estimates. We
note, however, that the relationship between hybrid modality and doubling rates (Appendix
Table A4) in the Michigan estimates with district fixed effects are larger and marginally
significant. We also estimate a variant of the district fixed effects model, this time using county-
fixed effects. These results align with our district fixed effects estimates and are available from
the authors upon request. 33

5.2      Using District Estimates of Students Attending School Hybrid and/or in Person

        The above estimates of the association between district instructional modality and
COVID spread are useful to some extent in assessing the implications of district-wide modality
decisions, but the relatively crude modality measures may also mask variation in the degree to
which public school students are physically present in schools. It is unclear, for instance, from
our definition of a "fully in-person option" district in Michigan (classified as "in-
person") what percentage of students who are offered some form of in-person instruction take-up
that mode and spend time in the school building. Similarly, in Washington the definition of
"phase-in" suggests that some students are receiving instruction, at least partially, in-person, but
which grades (and fully or partially) are brought back is unclear.
        To understand if finer grain information about the proportion of students who are
attending schools suggests a different picture than the above modality findings, we turn to
surveys in each state of the proportion of students who are either in-person or in hybrid settings
(in Michigan) and who are in-person (in Washington). Specifically, we replace the district
modality measures used in Table 2 with a vector of categorical indicators for the proportion of
students who are attending schools in a particular modality. 34
        In Figures 4 and 5, we report the coefficient estimates from these models for Michigan
and Washington, respectively. Figures 4a, b, and c show estimates from the fully interacted
models and their 95% confidence intervals for the effects of in-person and hybrid enrollment in
Michigan districts on COVID cases in the surrounding counties when county-level pre-period

33
   We also considered estimating an instrumental variables model that uses the strength of local teachers' unions
(proxied by the restrictiveness of their negotiated collective bargaining agreements) to instrument for whether a
district offers in-person instruction. Such an approach would rely on the assumption that teachers' union power
influences instructional modality decisions but has no direct impact on community spread. We do not include any
details on this exercise as the first stage regression showed only a weak relationship between union strength and
district in-person instruction once we conditioned on appropriate pre-trends and relevant covariates.
34
   As we describe in Section 3, the Michigan survey was more precise than the Washington survey about the
percentages of students attending hybrid versus in-person schooling, but the Washington survey included more
categories for the percentage of students attending in-person. Washington also does not distinguish between fully in-
person and hybrid attendance for this measure.


                                                                                                                  21
COVID rates are at the 25th, 50th, and 75th percentiles of each state's COVID rate distributions,
respectively. Figure 5 provides the same estimates and confidence intervals for Washington, but
with in-person and hybrid enrollment combined. We have finer-grain categories for take-up of
in-person/hybrid instruction in Washington than we do in Michigan, as reflected by the
categories shown on the x-axes in Figures 4 and 5. In Michigan we see that none of the estimates
are statistically significantly different from zero at the 5% level. Nonetheless, there is some
indication that districts in which relatively few (less than 25%) students enroll in-person may
lead to slight reductions in COVID cases. Indeed, at low pre-existing case rate levels (below the
25th percentile), districts with only a few students in person see a reduction in cases relative to
those that are fully remote.
         In Washington, Figure 5 shows that county level COVID cases do not significantly
increase unless pre-existing cases are high (at the 75th percentile of pre-existing cases in the
community), though the point estimates for the 76+ (top) share of students in-person are
consistently higher than for the other categories. This suggests that additional COVID spread can
be kept low even at moderate levels of pre-existing community spread when districts are in-
person or hybrid provided that not all students return to school at the same time (e.g., because a
substantial portion of students choose a remote instruction alternative or because schools bring
back students in a cohort or phased approach). Nonetheless, we again caution that during our
study period, COVID rates in Washington were far lower than in the late autumn of 2020, and so
these results may not apply when rates are higher. Further, while they are not statistically
significant, the estimates are generally positive throughout the figure, indicating that this pattern
may be due to imprecision in the estimates.

5.3    Findings for Various Age Groups

         In Table 3 we report the findings for COVID cases per 100,000 for the various age
categories. Panel A has the findings for Michigan and Panel B for Washington. In each state and
for each age category, we report the results for hybrid or in-person schooling relative to remote
(or, as above, hybrid/in-person combined for Washington). We show the findings from the fully
saturated OLS model (from columns 3 and 7 of Table 2). To aid with interpretation, we present
estimates for the relationship between modality and COVID cases per 100,000 at the 25th, 50th,
and 75th percentile of pre-existing COVID cases per 100,000 individuals. We provide full model
results in Appendix Tables A6-1 through A6-4.
         The fact that younger individuals tend to experience less severe COVID symptoms
combined with the lack of universal testing raises some questions about which age categories
might be expected to show COVID spread due to instructional modality. That said, we believe it
is reasonable to assume that the 0 to19 year age category is likely to be most sensitive to spread
related to students being in public school buildings. The estimates of instructional modality are
insignificant in Michigan for the 0 to19 year age category and only significant at the 75th
percentile of pre-existing COVID rates in Washington. Nonetheless, despite the hypothesis that
we would see more spread emanating from instructional modality in school-age children,
estimates for other age categories, differ little from the 0 to19 year category in both states.
Further, only one of the other estimates in the table are statistically significant. In Washington
the estimates are similar to those for COVID rates across all ages shown in Figure 3.

5.4    Robustness/Bounding exercise



                                                                                                  22
        The major concern that we have tried to address in the models described above is
accounting for the potential that communities that choose a particular school modality may also
employ other strategies or practices that mitigate or exacerbate COVID spread. There is
evidence, for instance, from the table of means (Table 1) that, in both states, districts offering in-
person modality also tend to be relatively less likely to report mask wearing, more likely to have
voted for President Trump in 2016, and have higher unemployment rates. This is reflected in the
diminishment in the coefficient for in-person instruction from Columns 1 to 2 in Table 2 in
Michigan, and to a lesser extent from Columns 5 to 6 in Washington. These models of course
only account for observable factors in the models. The district fixed effects specifications
reported in columns 4 and 8 of the table account for all time-invariant models and are generally
consistent with the more saturated models, but they are also quite imprecise and could still be
subject to bias. In particular, COVID spread is often fast-moving in communities. It is not hard
to imagine that forward-looking public health or schooling officials might have information
based on conditions on the ground that inform school modality decisions, i.e., information that
varies over the fall of 2020 so is not fully addressed by the inclusion of district fixed effects.
        Thus, as a final robustness check, we employ methods outlined in Altonji et al. (2005)
and Oster (2019) that quantify the likely direction of bias and help to bound the estimates we
present. If we assume, as is common, that the selection on unobservables is comparable to
selection on the observables in the models (i.e., a  equal to 1 in the Oster (2019) framework), 35
we find for both states that the coefficient on in-person modality declines. In Michigan, it falls
from 0.34 to -1.79 (statistically insignificant). 36 In Washington, this robustness exercise leads to
an attenuation of the in-person/hybrid variable from 2.7 (significant at the 10% level) to 1.7 and
insignificant. Put another way, this robustness exercise suggests that the OLS model estimates
for COVID case rates are an upper bound on the relationship between districts offering an in-
person/hybrid modality and increased COVID spread.
        We repeat this exercise for exponential growth and doubling time. In Michigan there is
virtually no change in the school modality coefficients for growth, but both in-person and hybrid
coefficients become substantially larger and significant for doubling time (again with a  equal to
1), but recall that this indicates that in-person or hybrid modality offerings decrease the rapidity
of COVID spread. In Washington there is little change in the in-person/hybrid coefficient for
doubling time, but the coefficient becomes substantially larger and significant for growth. This is
unexpected given the bounding exercise suggests that all the other modality coefficients are
conservatively estimated, but it likely reflects the fact that our models of exponential growth in
Washington fit the data poorly given that COVID growth rates in Washington are not growing
exponentially in the fall of 2020 (see Figure 1).

35
   We use the models specified in columns 2 and 6 of Table 2 for this exercise to avoid the complexity of
programming associated with the interactions between the modality treatment and the pre-existing case rates (the
methods developed in Oster (2017) and Angrist et al. (2005) do not describe how to handle this type of model. As an
alternative, we estimate the same specifications for counties with COVID case rates above the 50th percentile and
apply the bounding exercise as above. These findings, available upon request, are broadly consistent with those
discussed below for all districts.
36
   The coefficient on hybrid schooling decreases from .34 to -1.03 and remains insignificant. In this robustness
check, we are implicitly treating the school modalities that we do not focus on as covariates. However, we also
estimate variants (in Michigan), where we compare in-person or hybrid to an excluded category that includes a
combination of the other two categories. Findings from this test are nearly identical to those where we treat the other
modality as a covariate.


                                                                                                                    23
        Last, we test the extent to which selection on unobservables may bias the age-specific
case rate results (reported in Appendix Tables A6-1 through A6-4). For every age category, the
bounding exercise shows decreased coefficient estimates assuming a  equal to 1 for both in-
person and hybrid coefficients in Michigan, and the in-person/ hybrid coefficients in
Washington. Thus, here too the bounding exercise suggests that the OLS coefficients we report
are a conservative upper bound on COVID spread.

6.     Discussion and Conclusion

        Using district and county level data from Michigan and Washington, we investigate how
the instructional modality in public K-12 schools ­ in-person, hybrid, or remote ­ in the wake of
the COVID-19 pandemic influences spread of COVID in the wider community. We find that
community COVID rates are strongly positively correlated with in-person and hybrid forms of
schooling in simple, naïve regression models. But for an important exception described above in
Section 5 and again summarized below, these findings do not persist when we allow the effects
of school modality to differ according to the level of community spread in the population and
add covariates that account for various district and community factors, such as mask wearing and
political preferences. These general findings hold up under a variety of OLS and fixed effects
model specifications.
        The important exception is that we do find some evidence that in-person modality is
associated with increased COVID spread in communities with relatively high pre-existing levels
of COVID. In Michigan, for instance, districts offering an in-person instructional modality show
increased COVID spread for daily average case counts over 21 cases per 100,000 (this is about
the 95th percentile of the pre-existing case count distribution in our data). Similarly, districts
offering a hybrid instructional modality show COVID spread for daily average case counts
between 19 and 26 cases per 100,000. In Washington, which has significantly lower average case
counts than Michigan during our study period, we find evidence that the offer of in-
person/hybrid modality is associated with additional community spread when average pre-
existing daily case counts are over 5 cases per 100,000 (about the 75th percentile), but not at
lower levels of pre-existing community spread. These findings are consistent with much of the
epidemiological literature that suggests that the risks of public schools leading to increased
COVID spread rise with the level of pre-existing COVID infection in communities. However,
we caution that we are basing these estimates on periods of time when COVID cases were low
relative to late autumn of 2020. Hence, any application of our results to the context of periods
with high case levels (such as in the winter of 2020-21) would be making out-of-sample
predictions that are highly sensitive to modeling assumptions.
        We also provide some evidence that uptake (as opposed to the district offer of a particular
modality) of the in-person or hybrid modality may matter. In particular, in Washington the state
survey of school systems asks districts to report the proportion of students attending schools in-
person in relatively narrow categories. Using this measure, rather than district modality
offerings, we see that the findings on modality, described above, appear to be driven mainly by
school systems with relatively high proportions of students, over 75%, attending schools in
person. Further, we see some evidence that districts in Michigan where less than 25% of students
are in-person may reduce COVID rates relative to remote-only instruction, provided existing
community spread is relatively low (at the 25th percentile of pre-existing COVID rates in the
community). While it is unclear why this occurs, one possibility is that for these children, in-



                                                                                                24
person instruction may substitute for social and educational engagements that are less structured
and less able to maintain social distancing (e.g., group childcare or teaching pods).
         All of the results above are important considering recent discussion about the need for
state guidance to help local districts determine when to offer in-person instruction, and what kind
of risk mitigation strategies might be important if students are in public schools, and when to
move to remote instruction in order to mitigate disease spread. As noted above, the CDC has
renewed calls for schools to open in-person. Many states, including Michigan and Washington,
have provided schools with guidance that calls for localities to make modality decisions based on
community transmission rates combined with the school system's capacity to carry out safety
measures (e.g., cleaning, physical distancing, ventilation, face covering) and the school and
health systems' capacities to monitor symptoms, provide sufficient testing, and conduct contact
tracing. However, states differ according to where they "draw the line" for safe in-person
learning amidst community spread, and strategies change quickly as more is learned about
COVID spread and its relative risks and dangers as well as about the likely damage caused to
children, families, and the economy as students are held out of school.
         Michigan's original guidance, released on June 30, 2020, calls for fully remote
instruction when local spread is very high and health care capacity is low. This roadmap lays out
a six-phase state reopening "Safe Start Plan" based on community spread, such that communities
in phases 1-3 (i.e., those with increasing cases, persistent spread, or even gradually declining
cases) must offer only remote instruction, while communities in Phase 4 (i.e., declining cases,
hospitalizations, and deaths) may provide in-person instruction with required face coverings in
common areas for all students and staff, and in classrooms for staff and students in grades 6-12
(COVID-19 Task Force on Education Return to School Advisory Council, 2020). Spacing desks
at least six feet apart is "strongly recommended" but not required. Requirements for safety
measures scale back as communities move into phases 5 and 6, the waning phases of the
pandemic. In general, these guidelines point to remote instruction when local cases and deaths
are consistently in decline, the local health system has sufficient capacity and personal protective
equipment availability to manage a surge, and testing and tracing efforts are sufficient. In early
fall 2020, the MDHHS released an updated guidance matrix that suggested school buildings in
counties with fewer than 15 cases per 100,000 should consider at least some degree of in-person
instruction with reduced density and the use of mitigation strategies. 37 As COVID rates increased
in the late fall, a statewide order was issued in mid- November to close all high schools for in-
person instruction, but since then began to again high schools to re-open. Most recently,
Michigan encouraged all districts to return students to in-person instruction, giving a target date
of March 1st, 2021 (French, 2021).
         The Washington guidance, updated Dec. 16, 2020, lays out an approach that would allow
some in-person instruction even in a high community transmission context. 38 It provides
guidelines for communities to classify community transmission as high, moderate, or low,
drawing from local case rates per capita, test positivity rates, and trends in cases and
hospitalizations. Specifically, the guidance suggests in-person learning for all students only after
the community has a case rate of less than 50 per 100,000 population and a test positivity rate of

37
   MDHHS guidance is available from https://massp.com/sites/default/files/inline-
files/SCHOOL%20MATRIX%20DRAFT%20091620.pdf and https://www.michigan.gov/coronavirus/0,9753,7-
406-100467_100913---,00.html
38
   Washington State Department of Health guidance is available at
https://www.doh.wa.gov/Portals/1/Documents/1600/coronavirus/DecisionTree-K12schools.pdf


                                                                                                 25
less than five percent, with decreasing trends. At higher levels of community transmission, the
state recommends a "phase in" approach beginning with grades pre-K through three and students
with special needs and providing small group instruction with cohorts of 15 students or fewer. In
general, the guidance does not call for a remote-only approach to all grades, but rather
recommends a targeted approach to in-person learning that focuses on the highest needs and
youngest students. The updated guidelines, for instance, point to mostly remote instruction
(which the state calls "phase in" for the youngest students), when the local case rate is higher
than 350 per 100,000 population over 14 days (or, in the terms we use in our models, 25 cases
per 100,000 per day), and the test positivity rate is higher than 10 percent.
         Our models are broadly consistent with the spirit of this guidance, at least in Washington,
as we find no significant impact of modality on COVID rates at low levels of community spread,
but significant impacts at higher pre-existing levels of spread. More generally, however, we
would urge caution against using the specific estimates in this study to set thresholds for shifting
to remote instruction as they are subject to many modeling assumptions and data limitations. The
key assumption is that we have accounted for potential confounders in estimating the
relationship between modality and COVID cases, more specifically that our observable measures
sufficiently account for behavioral responses of individuals and districts with respect to COVID,
such as social distancing, that also may be related to modality. While we attempt to address this
by using district (and county) fixed effects, this method only accounts for time-invariant sources
of bias. And while our fixed effects findings are consistent with the OLS results, they are
relatively imprecise.
         For the reasons noted above, we also attempt to bound our estimates using methods
developed by (Altonji et al., 2005) and Oster (2019). Given that the models described above
explain a large amount of the variation we observe in COVID cases, there is limited potential
that our estimates are biased based on unobservables. Thus, it is not surprising that the bounding
exercise suggests that the OLS estimates we describe are not likely to be significantly biased and,
in fact, represent an upper bound on the impact of COVID spread from in-person or schooling
relative to fully online/remote instruction.
         We also hesitate to offer specific recommendations about specific case rate thresholds
given that, as with any econometric model, there is uncertainty in our estimates. Moreover, given
sample size and associated power considerations, we are unable to rule out small changes in
COVID spread that may result from decisions to offer or enroll in in-person schooling. In
addition, statistical tests of significance rely on the use of 95% confidence intervals, which
means that we can assert with a certain degree of confidence that our results do not show
significant average relationships between in-person schooling modalities and COVID spread.
However, health experts, parents, and policymakers may wish to apply different standards when
interpreting relationships with this level of consequence and using different standards of
certainty could lead to different assessments of risk.
         We are also limited by the available data. We rely on COVID case rates at the county
level as it provides us a high frequency and high variability measure of COVID incidence. Case
rates, however, are not just a function of incidence but also testing. Hence if the likelihood of
getting tested at a given underlying incidence varies with modality, that could bias our estimates.
This concern is mitigated by the fact that unlike early in the pandemic, testing was widely
available during the period we study, but we do not know the degree or ways in which testing
might vary across communities. Nonetheless, in future work we will include models that predict
COVID test positivity rates to help assess the extent to which this should cause concern. It would



                                                                                                 26
also be useful to examine other measures of COVID impact, such as hospitalization and
potentially death rates.
        Another important concern is that the COVID pandemic has hit communities of color and
low-income communities much harder than others (e.g., Sandoiu, 2020). Ideally, we would be
able to conduct analyses that focus on the modality impacts in these communities as they may be
at higher risk of COVID spread. Unfortunately, our outcome data ­ which is at the county level
and not broken down by racial, ethnic, or income subgroups ­ make this infeasible. We
attempted to address this question by examining counties with large minority population shares.
However, our estimates primarily rely on cross-county variation and very few counties have high
enough minority populations to provide accurate evidence on this ­ in Michigan the county at the
75th percentile of underrepresented minority share (non-white and non-Asian) has only 10%
underrepresented minorities, while in Washington there is only a 5% underrepresented minority
population in counties at the 75th percentile of the distribution. Further, when we estimated
models restricted to these counties with (marginally) larger shares of underrepresented
minorities, our estimates are too imprecise to draw clear conclusions. Hence, we caution that our
overall results may not hold in these populations, but we are unable to determine the extent to
which this may or may not be the case.
        A further data limitation is that we do not have good information on what is happening
inside schools or other community institutions.39 In particular, there are no systematic data
collected about strategies that schools or school districts employ to mitigate contagion such as
mask requirements, temperature checks, social distancing among students and teachers, and other
risk mitigation strategies. Such risk mitigation strategies are thought to be influential in
determining COVID spread in schools (Guthrie et al., 2020). Clearly the collection of this type of
information would enhance the ability to understand the role instructional modality might play in
COVID spread and would be important for understanding how to mitigate risk in the case of
future disease outbreaks that make in-person schooling a risky endeavor.
        Even with these limitations, however, we believe this work can be useful to decision-
makers concerned with how best to balance protecting students, school staff, and the greater
community from COVID while working to ensure the academic and socioemotional well-being
of children. There are also, of course, considerations that differ across local contexts; for
instance, it has become well-established that low-income communities and communities with
high proportions of underrepresented minorities have been harder hit by the pandemic and may
have greater concerns about taking on additional risk via in-person schooling. Nonetheless, the
takeaway here is that in-person schooling modalities do not appear to contribute to COVID
spread above and beyond what is already occurring in the community at low-to-medium levels of
spread. We hope that these results help provide a roadmap for local and state decisionmakers as
they consider how and when to re-open school buildings and, equally important, how and when
to re-shutter them.




39
  For instance, as noted above, we do not have good information across all counties about higher education
institutions. We hope to add this in future updates to this work.


                                                                                                             27
References

        Adolph, C., Amano, K., Bang-Jensen, B., Fullman, N., & Wilkerson, J. (2020). Pandemic
Politics: Timing State-Level Social Distancing Responses to COVID-19. MedRxiv,
2020.03.30.20046326. https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.30.20046326

        Ager, P., Eriksson, K., Karger, E., Nencka, P., & Thomasson, M. A. (2020). School
Closures During the 1918 Flu Pandemic (No. w28246). National Bureau of Economic Research.
https://doi.org/10.3386/w28246

         Agostinelli, F., Doepke, M., Sorrenti, G., & Zilibotti, F. (2020). When the Great
Equalizer Shuts Down: Schools, Peers, and Parents in Pandemic Times.
https://faculty.wcas.northwestern.edu/~mdo738/research/ADSZ_Covid_1220.pdf

        Allcott, H., Boxell, L., Conway, J., Gentzkow, M., Thaler, M., & Yang, D. Y. (2020).
Polarization and Public Health: Partisan Differences in Social Distancing During the
Coronavirus Pandemic (SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 3574415). Social Science Research Network.
https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=3574415

       Altonji, J. G., Elder, T. E., & Taber, C. R. (2005). An Evaluation of Instrumental
Variable Strategies for Estimating the Effects of Catholic Schooling. Journal of Human
Resources, XL(4), 791­821. https://doi.org/10.3368/jhr.XL.4.791

        American Academy of Pediatrics. (2020, August 19). COVID-19 Planning
Considerations: Guidance for School Re-entry. American Academy of Pediatrics.
http://services.aap.org/en/pages/2019-novel-coronavirus-covid-19-infections/clinical-
guidance/covid-19-planning-considerations-return-to-in-person-education-in-schools/

        Auger, K. A., Shah, S. S., Richardson, T., Hartley, D., Hall, M., Warniment, A.,
Timmons, K., Bosse, D., Ferris, S. A., Brady, P. W., Schondelmeyer, A. C., & Thomson, J. E.
(2020). Association Between Statewide School Closure and COVID-19 Incidence and Mortality
in the US. JAMA, 324(9), 859­870. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2020.14348

        Azevedo, J. P., Hasan, A., Goldemberg, D., Iqbal, S. A., & Geven, K. (2020). Simulating
the Potential Impacts of COVID-19 School Closures on Schooling and Learning Outcomes: A
Set of Global Estimates. The World Bank. https://doi.org/10.1596/1813-9450-9284

       Balingit, M. (2020, November 21). As coronavirus cases rise, school leaders once again
confront tough choices. Washington Post. https://www.washingtonpost.com/education/as-
coronavirus-cases-rise-school-leaders-once-again-confront-tough-choices/2020/11/20/82df997c-
2b65-11eb-9b14-ad872157ebc9_story.html

        Banholzer, N., van Weenen, E., Kratzwald, B., Seeliger, A., Tschernutter, D., Bottrighi,
P., Cenedese, A., Salles, J. P., Vach, W., & Feuerriegel, S. (2020). Impact of non-pharmaceutical
interventions on documented cases of COVID-19. MedRxiv, 2020.04.16.20062141.
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.16.20062141




                                                                                               28
        Barnum, M. (2020, October 22). As more students head back, here's what we now know
(and still don't) about schools and COVID spread. Chalkbeat.
https://www.chalkbeat.org/2020/10/22/21528835/schools-covid-spread-research-questions

        Bertozzi, A. L., Franco, E., Mohler, G., Short, M. B., & Sledge, D. (2020). The
challenges of modeling and forecasting the spread of COVID-19. ArXiv:2004.04741 [q-Bio].
http://arxiv.org/abs/2004.04741

       Bin Nafisah, S., Alamery, A. H., Al Nafesa, A., Aleid, B., & Brazanji, N. A. (2018).
School closure during novel influenza: A systematic review. Journal of Infection and Public
Health, 11(5), 657­661. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jiph.2018.01.003

      Blad, E. (2020a, November 19). Seven Governors Stress In-Person Learning as Nation
Confronts Rising Virus Rates. Education Week. https://www.edweek.org/policy-politics/seven-
governors-stress-in-person-learning-as-nation-confronts-rising-virus-rates/2020/11

        Blad, E. (2020b, December 11). Biden's Call for School Reopening Relies on
Cooperation from Congress, a Divided Public. Education Week. https://www.edweek.org/policy-
politics/bidens-call-for-school-reopening-relies-on-cooperation-from-congress-a-divided-
public/2020/12

       Blum, D., & Miller, F. (2020, August 18). What Parents Need to Know About Learning
Pods. The New York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/article/learning-pods-coronavirus.html

       Bootsma, M. C. J., & Ferguson, N. M. (2007). The effect of public health measures on
the 1918 influenza pandemic in U.S. cities. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America, 104(18), 7588­7593. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0611071104

       Boyle, P. (2020, November 5). Kids, school, and COVID-19: What we know -- and what
we don't. Association of American Medical Colleges. https://www.aamc.org/news-insights/kids-
school-and-covid-19-what-we-know-and-what-we-don-t

        Brenan, M. (2020, July 13). Americans' Face Mask Usage Varies Greatly by
Demographics. Gallup. https://news.gallup.com/poll/315590/americans-face-mask-usage-varies-
greatly-demographics.aspx

        Cassella, M., Gaudiano, N., & Mays, M. (2020, August 18). Teachers unions test
goodwill with strike threats, hardball negotiations. Politico.
https://www.politico.com/news/2020/08/18/teachers-unions-school-reopening-coronavirus-
397997

      Center on Reinventing Public Education. (2020). Fall 2020: The State of School
Reopening. https://www.crpe.org/current-research/covid-19-school-closures

       Chang, S. L., Harding, N., Zachreson, C., Cliff, O. M., & Prokopenko, M. (2020).
Modelling transmission and control of the COVID-19 pandemic in Australia. ArXiv:2003.10218
[Cs, q-Bio]. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-19393-6



                                                                                              29
        Clinton, J., Cohen, J., Lapinski, J., & Trussler, M. (2020). Partisan pandemic: How
partisanship and public health concerns affect individuals' social mobility during COVID-19.
Science Advances, eabd7204. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.abd7204

       Cohen, J., Mistry, D., Kerr, C., Klein, D., Izzo, M., & Schripsema, J. (2020). Maximizing
education while minimizing COVID risk: Priorities and pitfalls for reopening schools. 12.

       Cook, C. (2020, December 19). Why British Kids Went Back to School, and American
Kids Did Not. The Atlantic. https://www.theatlantic.com/ideas/archive/2020/12/why-british-kids-
are-school-american-kids-arent/617438/

        Council of Economic Advisors. (2020, August 14). Reopening Schools Is Key to
Unlocking the Full Potential of America's Children. The White House.
https://www.whitehouse.gov/articles/reopening-schools-key-unlocking-full-potential-americas-
children/

      Couzin-Frankel, J., Vogel, G., & Weiland, M. (2020). Not open and shut. Science,
369(6501), 241­245. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.369.6501.241

        COVID-19 Task Force on Education Return to School Advisory Council. (2020). MI Safe
Schools: Michigan's 2020-21 Return to School Roadmap.
https://www.michigan.gov/documents/whitmer/MI_Safe_Schools_Roadmap_FINAL_695392_7.
pdf

        Cowling, B. J., Ho, L. M., & Leung, G. M. (2008). Effectiveness of control measures
during the SARS epidemic in Beijing: A comparison of the Rt curve and the epidemic curve.
Epidemiology and Infection, 136(4), 562­566. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0950268807008722

        Cummings, A., Kilbride, T., Turner, M., Zhu, Q., & Strunk, K. O. (2020). Education
Policy Innovation Collaborative | How did Michigan educators respond to the suspension of
face-to-face instruction due to COVID-19? | COVID19 Research - Education Policy. Education
Policy Innovation Collaborative. https://epicedpolicy.org/how-did-michigan-educators-respond-
to-the-suspension-of-face-to-face-instruction-due-to-covid-19/

        Dale, D., Subramaniam, T., Cohen, M., & Steck, E. (2020, July 23). Fact check: Trump
falsely suggests kids don't transmit coronavirus and that US case surge is due in part to protests
and Mexican migration. CNN. https://www.cnn.com/2020/07/22/politics/fact-check-trump-
coronavirus-briefing-july-22/index.html

       Dickler, J. (2020, November 8). Families jump to private schools as coronavirus drags
on. CNBC. https://www.cnbc.com/2020/11/08/coronavirus-why-families-are-jumping-to-private-
schools.html

        Donaldson, E. (2020, November 6). Huge learning losses during COVID-19 disruptions
may have DISD lowering its academic goals. Dallas News.
https://www.dallasnews.com/news/education/2020/11/06/huge-learning-losses-during-covid-19-
disruptions-may-have-disd-lowering-its-academic-goals/



                                                                                                 30
       Dorn, E., Hancock, B., Sarakatsannis, J., & Viruleg, E. (2020). COVID-19 and student
learning in the United States: The hurt could last a lifetime. McKinsey & Company.

        Dub, T., Erra, E., Hagberg, L., Sarvikivi, E., Virta, C., Jarvinen, A., Osterlund, P.,
Ikonen, N., Haveri, A., Melin, M., Lukkarinen, T. J., & Nohynek, H. (2020). Transmission of
SARS-CoV-2 following exposure in school settings: Experience from two Helsinki area
exposure incidents. MedRxiv, 2020.07.20.20156018.
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.20.20156018

       Ebell, M. H., & Bagwell-Adams, G. (2020). Mandatory Social Distancing Associated
With Increased Doubling Time: An Example Using Hyperlocal Data. American Journal of
Preventive Medicine, 59(1), 140­142. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2020.04.006

        Education Policy Innovation Collaborative. (2020). Instructional Delivery Under
Michigan Districts' Extended COVID-19 Learning Plans ­ December Update.
https://epicedpolicy.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/12/EPIC_ECOL-report_Dec2020.pdf

         EmpowerK12. (2020). COVID-19's Impact on Student Achievement Growth in DC.
EmpowerK12.
https://static1.squarespace.com/static/5f9857f027d55d2170cd92ac/t/5fdb6d5dc70d2641e55ff244
/1608215913800/COVID-19%27s+Impact+on+DC+Student+Achievement+-
+EmpowerK12+Initial+Findings+Dec+2020.pdf

       Engzell, P., Frey, A., & Verhagen, M. D. (2020). Learning inequality during the COVID-
19 pandemic.

       Fontanet, A., Grant, R., Tondeur, L., Madec, Y., Grzelak, L., Cailleau, I., Ungeheuer, M.-
N., Renaudat, C., Pellerin, S. F., Kuhmel, L., & others. (2020). SARS-CoV-2 infection in
primary schools in northern France: A retrospective cohort study in an area of high transmission.
MedRxiv.

       Frick, M. (2020, November 13). CDC removes guidelines encouraging in-person learning
amid COVID-19 pandemic. MLive. https://www.mlive.com/news/2020/11/cdc-removes-
guidelines-encouraging-in-person-learning-amid-covid-19-pandemic.html

        Furfaro, H., & Bazzaz, D. (2020, December 1). Washington state shares little data about
public schools and whether coronavirus is spreading, or not. The Seattle Times.
https://www.seattletimes.com/education-lab/washington-state-shares-little-data-about-public-
schools-and-whether-coronavirus-is-spreading-or-not/

        Gilliam, W. S., Malik, A. A., Shafiq, M., Klotz, M., Reyes, C., Humphries, J. E., Murray,
T., Elharake, J. A., Wilkinson, D., & Omer, S. B. (2020). COVID-19 Transmission in US Child
Care Programs. Pediatrics, e2020031971. https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2020-031971

        Gilman, A. (2020, June 27). When both parents are on the front lines, who's taking care
of the kids? The Hechinger Report. https://hechingerreport.org/when-both-parents-are-on-the-
front-lines-whos-taking-care-of-the-kids/



                                                                                                 31
        Goldstein, E., Lipsitch, M., & Cevik, M. (2020). On the effect of age on the transmission
of SARS-CoV-2 in households, schools and the community. The Journal of Infectious Diseases.
https://doi.org/10.1093/infdis/jiaa691

        Gollwitzer, A., Martel, C., Brady, W. J., Pärnamets, P., Freedman, I. G., Knowles, E. D.,
& Van Bavel, J. J. (2020). Partisan differences in physical distancing are linked to health
outcomes during the COVID-19 pandemic. Nature Human Behaviour, 4(11), 1186­1197.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-020-00977-7

        Gould, E., & Shierholz, H. (2020, March 19). Not everybody can work from home: Black
and Hispanic workers are much less likely to be able to telework. Economic Policy Institute.
https://www.epi.org/blog/black-and-hispanic-workers-are-much-less-likely-to-be-able-to-work-
from-home/

       Green, D. A., Karimirad, A., Simard-Duplain, G., & Siu, H. E. (2020). COVID and the
Economic Importance of In-Person K-12 Schooling (No. w28200). National Bureau of Economic
Research. https://doi.org/10.3386/w28200

       Gross, B., Opalka, A., & Gundapaneni, P. (2020). Getting Back to School: An Update on
Plans from Across the Country. Center on Reinventing Public Education.

       Grossman, G., Kim, S., Rexer, J., & Thirumurthy, H. (2020). Political partisanship
influences behavioral responses to governors' recommendations for COVID-19 prevention in the
United States. Available at SSRN 3578695.

        Guthrie, B. L., Seiler, J., Tolentino, L., Jiang, W., Fischer, M., Issema, R., Fuller, S.,
Green, D., Tordoff, D. M., Meisner, J., Tseng, A., Louden, D., Ross, J. M., & Drake, A. L.
(2020). Summary of Evidence Related to Schools During the COVID-19 Pandemic. Washington
State Department of Health, Alliance for Pandemic Preparedness, Start Center.
https://depts.washington.edu/pandemicalliance/wordpress/wp-content/uploads/2020/10/COVID-
19-Schools-Summary_2020_10_19.pdf

       Hanna, J., & Wolfe, D. (2020, November 13). These charts show how serious the fall
Covid-19 surge is in the US. CNN. https://www.cnn.com/2020/11/12/health/coronavirus-fall-
surge-statistics/index.html

        Hanushek, E. A., & Woessmann, L. (2020). The economic impacts of learning losses.
https://doi.org/10.1787/21908d74-en

        Harris, C., & Carpenter, J. (2020, December 5). COVID spread remains minimal in Texas
schools despite state surge--HoustonChronicle.com. Houston Chronicle.
https://www.houstonchronicle.com/coronavirus/article/COVID-spread-remains-minimal-in-
Texas-schools-15777418.php

      Harris, D. N., Ziedan, E., & Hassig, S. (2021). The Effects of School Reopenings on
COVID-19 Hospitalizations. National Center for Research on Education Access and Choice
(REACH). https://www.reachcentered.org/uploads/technicalreport/The-Effects-of-School-
Reopenings-on-COVID-19-Hospitalizations-REACH-January-2021.pdf


                                                                                                32
        Hart, C. M. D., Berger, D., Jacob, B., Loeb, S., & Hill, M. (2019). Online Learning,
Offline Outcomes: Online Course Taking and High School Student Performance. AERA Open,
5(1), 2332858419832852. https://doi.org/10.1177/2332858419832852

       Haug, N., Geyrhofer, L., Londei, A., Dervic, E., Desvars-Larrive, A., Loreto, V., Pinior,
B., Thurner, S., & Klimek, P. (2020). Ranking the effectiveness of worldwide COVID-19
government interventions. Nature Human Behaviour, 1­10. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-020-
01009-0

        Heppen, J. B., Sorensen, N., Allensworth, E., Walters, K., Rickles, J., Taylor, S. S., &
Michelman, V. (2017). The Struggle to Pass Algebra: Online vs. Face-to-Face Credit Recovery
for At-Risk Urban Students. Journal of Research on Educational Effectiveness, 10(2), 272­296.
https://doi.org/10.1080/19345747.2016.1168500

        Hobbs, C. V., Martin, L. M., Kim, S. S., Kirmse, B. M., Haynie, L., McGraw, S., Byers,
P., Taylor, K. G., Patel, M. M., & Flannery, B. (2020). Factors Associated with Positive SARS-
CoV-2 Test Results in Outpatient Health Facilities and Emergency Departments Among
Children and Adolescents Aged 18 Years--Mississippi, September­November 2020. MMWR.
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 69(50), 1925­1929.
https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6950e3

        Hoffman, J. A., & Miller, E. A. (2020). Addressing the Consequences of School Closure
Due to COVID-19 on Children's Physical and Mental Well-Being. World Medical & Health
Policy, 12(3), 300­310. https://doi.org/10.1002/wmh3.365

        Hu, S., Wang, W., Wang, Y., Litvinova, M., Luo, K., Ren, L., Sun, Q., Chen, X., Zeng,
G., Li, J., Liang, L., Deng, Z., Zheng, W., Li, M., Yang, H., Guo, J., Wang, K., Chen, X., Liu, Z.,
... Yu, H. (2020). Infectivity, susceptibility, and risk factors associated with SARS-CoV-2
transmission under intensive contact tracing in Hunan, China. MedRxiv, 2020.07.23.20160317.
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.23.20160317

        Ismail, S. A., Saliba, V., Bernal, J. L., Ramsay, M. E., & Ladhani, S. N. (2020). SARS-
CoV-2 infection and transmission in educational settings: A prospective, cross-sectional analysis
of infection clusters and outbreaks in England. The Lancet Infectious Diseases, 0(0).
https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30882-3

       Isphording, I. E., Lipfert, M., & Pestel, N. (2020). School Re-Openings after Summer
Breaks in Germany Did Not Increase SARS-CoV-2 Cases. 41.

        Issa, N. (2020, December 3). Illinois schools are not COVID-19 superspreaders, data
shows. Chicago Sun-Times.
https://chicago.suntimes.com/education/2020/12/3/22151522/illinois-schools-public-covid-19-
superspreaders-cps-coronavirus-reopen

        Ivory, D., Gebeloff, R., & Mervosh, S. (2020, December 12). Young People Have Less
Covid-19 Risk, but in College Towns, Deaths Rose Fast. The New York Times.
https://www.nytimes.com/2020/12/12/us/covid-colleges-nursing-homes.html



                                                                                                33
        Iwata, K., Doi, A., & Miyakoshi, C. (2020). Was school closure effective in mitigating
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)? Time series analysis using Bayesian inference.
International Journal of Infectious Diseases, 99, 57­61.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijid.2020.07.052

       Jackson, C., Mangtani, P., Hawker, J., Olowokure, B., & Vynnycky, E. (2014). Impact of
school closures on an influenza pandemic: Scientific evidence base review.

       Jackson, C., Vynnycky, E., & Mangtani, P. (2016). The Relationship Between School
Holidays and Transmission of Influenza in England and Wales. American Journal of
Epidemiology, 184(9), 644­651. https://doi.org/10.1093/aje/kww083

        Jones, B., & Kiley, J. (2020, December 8). The Changing Geography of COVID-19 in
the U.S. Pew Research Center - U.S. Politics & Policy.
https://www.pewresearch.org/politics/?p=20076611

        Jones, T. C., Mühlemann, B., Veith, T., Biele, G., Zuchowski, M., Hoffmann, J., Stein,
A., Edelmann, A., Corman, V. M., & Drosten, C. (2020). An analysis of SARS-CoV-2 viral load
by patient age. MedRxiv, 2020.06.08.20125484. https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.08.20125484

       Kamenetz, A. (2020, December 4). 5 Things We've Learned About Virtual School In
2020. In Morning Edition. National Public Radio. https://www.npr.org/2020/12/04/938050723/5-
things-weve-learned-about-virtual-school-in-2020

        Katz, J., Sanger-Katz, M., & Quealy, K. (2020, July 17). A Detailed Map of Who Is
Wearing Masks in the U.S. The New York Times.
https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/07/17/upshot/coronavirus-face-mask-map.html

        Korman, H. T. N., O'Keefe, B., & Repka, M. (2020, October 21). Missing in the
Margins: Estimating the Scale of the COVID-19 Attendance Crisis. Bellwether Education.
https://bellwethereducation.org/publication/missing-margins-estimating-scale-covid-19-
attendance-crisis

       Kuhfeld, M., Soland, J., Tarasawa, B., Johnson, A., Ruzek, E., & Lewis, K. (2020,
December 3). How is COVID-19 affecting student learning? Brookings Brown Center
Chalkboard. https://www.brookings.edu/blog/brown-center-chalkboard/2020/12/03/how-is-
covid-19-affecting-student-learning/

        Kuhfeld, M., Soland, J., Tarasawa, B., Johnson, A., Ruzek, E., & Liu, J. (2020a).
Projecting the potential impacts of COVID-19 school closures on academic achievement. In
EdWorkingPapers.com. Annenberg Institute at Brown University.
https://www.edworkingpapers.com/ai20-226

        Kuhfeld, M., Soland, J., Tarasawa, B., Johnson, A., Ruzek, E., & Liu, J. (2020b).
Projecting the Potential Impact of COVID-19 School Closures on Academic Achievement.
Educational Researcher, 49(8), 549­565. https://doi.org/10.3102/0013189X20965918




                                                                                                 34
        Lee, P.-I., Hu, Y.-L., Chen, P.-Y., Huang, Y.-C., & Hsueh, P.-R. (2020). Are children
less susceptible to COVID-19? Journal of Microbiology, Immunology, and Infection, 53(3), 371­
372. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmii.2020.02.011

       Lewis, D. (2020). Why schools probably aren't COVID hotspots. Nature, 587(7832), 17.

        Liu, Y., Morgenstern, C., Kelly, J., Lowe, R., CMMID COVID-19 Working Group, &
Jit, M. (2020). The impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions on SARS-CoV-2 transmission
across 130 countries and territories [Preprint]. Health Policy.
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.11.20172643

       Loeb, S. (2020, March 21). How Effective Is Online Learning? What the Research Does
and Doesn't Tell Us (Opinion). Education Week. https://www.edweek.org/technology/opinion-
how-effective-is-online-learning-what-the-research-does-and-doesnt-tell-us/2020/03

       Lopez, A. S., Hill, M., Antezano, J., Vilven, D., Rutner, T., Bogdanow, L., Claflin, C.,
Kracalik, I. T., Fields, V. L., Dunn, A., & others. (2020). Transmission dynamics of COVID-19
outbreaks associated with child care facilities--Salt Lake City, Utah, April­July 2020. Morbidity
and Mortality Weekly Report, 69(37), 1319.

        Ludvigsson, J. F. (2020). Children are unlikely to be the main drivers of the COVID-19
pandemic ­ A systematic review. Acta Paediatrica, 109(8), 1525­1530.
https://doi.org/10.1111/apa.15371

        Lurie, M. N., Silva, J., Yorlets, R. R., Tao, J., & Chan, P. A. (2020). Coronavirus Disease
2019 Epidemic Doubling Time in the United States Before and During Stay-at-Home
Restrictions. The Journal of Infectious Diseases, 222(10), 1601­1606.
https://doi.org/10.1093/infdis/jiaa491

        Macartney, K., Quinn, H. E., Pillsbury, A. J., Koirala, A., Deng, L., Winkler, N.,
Katelaris, A. L., O'Sullivan, M. V. N., Dalton, C., Wood, N., Brogan, D., Glover, C., Dinsmore,
N., Dunn, A., Jadhav, A., Joyce, R., Kandasamy, R., Meredith, K., Pelayo, L., ... Chant, K.
(2020). Transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in Australian educational settings: A prospective cohort
study. The Lancet Child & Adolescent Health, 4(11), 807­816. https://doi.org/10.1016/S2352-
4642(20)30251-0

       Malkus, N. (2020, June 16). School Districts' Remote-Learning Plans May Widen
Student Achievement Gap. Education Next. https://www.educationnext.org/school-districts-
remote-learning-plans-may-widen-student-achievement-gap-only-20-percent-meet-standards/

        Martin, N., & Ebbert, S. (2020, December 8). How often is COVID-19 spreading in
Massachusetts schools? The Boston Globe.
https://www.bostonglobe.com/2020/12/08/metro/how-much-covid-transmission-is-mass-schools/

         Meckler, L., & Strauss, V. (2020, October 19). Back to school: Many large districts are
opening their doors again. Washington Post. https://www.washingtonpost.com/education/school-
districts-reopening-coronavirus/2020/10/19/3791c952-0ffb-11eb-8074-0e943a91bf08_story.html



                                                                                                 35
        Miller, C. C. (2020, November 17). When Schools Closed, Americans Turned to Their
Usual Backup Plan: Mothers. The New York Times.
https://www.nytimes.com/2020/11/17/upshot/schools-closing-mothers-leaving-jobs.html

        Muniz-Rodriguez, K., Chowell, G., Cheung, C.-H., Jia, D., Lai, P.-Y., Lee, Y., Liu, M.,
Ofori, S. K., Roosa, K. M., Simonsen, L., & Fung, I. C.-H. (2020). Epidemic doubling time of
the 2019 novel coronavirus outbreak by province in mainland China. MedRxiv,
2020.02.05.20020750. https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02.05.20020750

        Natanson, H. (2020, September 2). Love or hate them, pandemic learning pods are here
to stay--And could disrupt American education. Washington Post.
https://www.washingtonpost.com/local/education/love-or-hate-them-pandemic-learning-pods-
are-here-to-stay--and-could-disrupt-american-education/2020/09/02/3d359f8c-dd6f-11ea-8051-
d5f887d73381_story.html

       Nikolai, L. A., Meyer, C. G., Kremsner, P. G., & Velavan, T. P. (2020). Asymptomatic
SARS Coronavirus 2 infection: Invisible yet invincible. International Journal of Infectious
Diseases, 100, 112­116. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijid.2020.08.076

        Oosting, J., Erb, R., & French, R. (2020, November 15). Michigan to close high schools,
colleges, bars for 3 weeks as COVID spikes. Bridge Michigan.
https://www.bridgemi.com/michigan-government/michigan-close-high-schools-colleges-bars-3-
weeks-covid-spikes

        Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. (2020). Strengthening online
learning when schools are closed: The role of families and teachers in supporting students
during the COVID-19 crisis (OECD Policy Responses to Coronavirus (COVID-19)).
http://www.oecd.org/coronavirus/policy-responses/strengthening-online-learning-when-schools-
are-closed-the-role-of-families-and-teachers-in-supporting-students-during-the-covid-19-crisis-
c4ecba6c/

        Oster, E. (2019). Unobservable Selection and Coefficient Stability: Theory and Evidence.
Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 37(2), 187­204.
https://doi.org/10.1080/07350015.2016.1227711

        Oster, E. (2020, October 9). Schools Aren't Super-Spreaders. The Atlantic.
https://www.theatlantic.com/ideas/archive/2020/10/schools-arent-superspreaders/616669/

        Pang, X. (2003). Evaluation of Control Measures Implemented in the Severe Acute
Respiratory Syndrome Outbreak in Beijing, 2003. JAMA, 290(24), 3215.
https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.290.24.3215

       Perez Jr, J. (2020, July 28). Teachers union threatens "safety strikes" before Biden
speech. POLITICO. https://www.politico.com/news/2020/07/28/aft-strikes-school-reopening-
384133

       Pillow, T. (2020, October 19). A Puget Sound-area charter school couldn't open as
planned--But it still found a way to support students | Center on Reinventing Public Education.


                                                                                                  36
The Lens. https://www.crpe.org/thelens/puget-sound-area-charter-school-couldnt-open-planned-
it-still-found-way-support-students

        Porter, C. (2020, November 24). In Canada, a Push to Keep Schools Open in Second
Lockdown. The New York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/2020/11/23/world/americas/Canada-
virus-schools-open.html

       Psacharopoulos, G., Collis, V., Patrinos, H. A., & Vegas, E. (2020). Lost Wages: The
COVID-19 Cost of School Closures (SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 3601422). Social Science
Research Network. https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=3601422

        Razzaq, Z. (2020, December 3). Framingham superintendent says there is evidence of in-
school COVID-19 spread. MetroWest Daily News.
https://www.metrowestdailynews.com/story/news/education/2020/12/03/framingham-
superintendent-tremblay-says-theres-school-covid-19-spread/3806168001/

        Richards, E. (2020, November 14). Schools want to end online classes for struggling
kids, but COVID-19 cases may send everyone home. USA TODAY.
https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/education/2020/11/14/covid-cases-school-closing-online-
class/6260149002/

        Sawchuk, S. (2020, October 7). As More Schools Resume In-Person Learning, Some
Lessons From Districts That Did It First. Education Week.
https://www.edweek.org/leadership/as-more-schools-resume-in-person-learning-some-lessons-
from-districts-that-did-it-first/2020/10

        Sawchuk, S., & Gewertz, C. (2020, November 17). Schools Are Retreating to Remote
Learning as COVID-19 Surges. Do They Have To? Education Week.
https://www.edweek.org/leadership/schools-are-retreating-to-remote-learning-as-covid-19-
surges-do-they-have-to/2020/11

        Schaner, S., & Theys, N. (2020, April 1). Individuals with Low Incomes, Less Education
Report Higher Perceived Financial, Health Threats from COVID-19. USC Schaeffer.
https://healthpolicy.usc.edu/evidence-base/individuals-with-low-incomes-less-education-report-
higher-perceived-financial-health-threats-from-covid-19/

       Schneider, E. (2020, September 20). The face mask "is almost as much of a symbol as a
MAGA hat." POLITICO. https://www.politico.com/news/2020/09/30/face-masks-political-ads-
coronavirus-424149

       Selden, T. M., Berdahl, T. A., & Fang, Z. (2020). The Risk Of Severe COVID-19 Within
Households Of School Employees And School-Age Children. Health Affairs, 39(11), 2002­
2009. https://doi.org/10.1377/hlthaff.2020.01536

        Simchuk, K. (2020, December 3). COVID-19 transmission remains low among Spokane-
area schools. In KXLY. https://www.kxly.com/covid-19-transmission-remains-low-among-
spokane-area-schools/



                                                                                              37
       Stage, H. B., Shingleton, J., Ghosh, S., Scarabel, F., Pellis, L., & Finnie, T. (2020). Shut
and re-open: The role of schools in the spread of COVID-19 in Europe. ArXiv:2006.14158
[Physics, q-Bio]. http://arxiv.org/abs/2006.14158

       Stein-Zamir, C., Abramson, N., Shoob, H., Libal, E., Bitan, M., Cardash, T., Cayam, R.,
& Miskin, I. (2020). A large COVID-19 outbreak in a high school 10 days after schools'
reopening, Israel, May 2020. Eurosurveillance, 25(29). https://doi.org/10.2807/1560-
7917.ES.2020.25.29.2001352

       Trump, D. (2020, July 7). Remarks by President Trump on Safely Reopening America's
Schools. www.whitehouse.gov/briefings-statements/remarks-president-trump-safely-reopening-
americas-schools/

        Valant, J. (2020, July 29). School reopening plans linked to politics rather than public
health. Brookings. https://www.brookings.edu/blog/brown-center-chalkboard/2020/07/29/school-
reopening-plans-linked-to-politics-rather-than-public-health/

        Van Kessel, P., & Quinn, D. (2020, October 29). Both Republicans and Democrats cite
masks as a negative effect of COVID-19, but for very different reasons. Pew Research Center.
https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2020/10/29/both-republicans-and-democrats-cite-masks-
as-a-negative-effect-of-covid-19-but-for-very-different-reasons/

       Viner, R. M., Russell, S. J., Croker, H., Packer, J., Ward, J., Stansfield, C., Mytton, O.,
Bonell, C., & Booy, R. (2020). School closure and management practices during coronavirus
outbreaks including COVID-19: A rapid systematic review. The Lancet Child & Adolescent
Health, 4(5), 397­404. https://doi.org/10.1016/S2352-4642(20)30095-X

        Vlachos, J., Hertegård, E., & Svaleryd, H. (2020). School closures and SARS-CoV-2.
Evidence from Sweden's partial school closure. MedRxiv, 2020.10.13.20211359.
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211359

       von Bismarck-Osten, C., Borusyak, K., & SchÃ¶nberg, U. (2020). The Role of Schools
in Transmission of the SARS-CoV-2 Virus: Quasi-Experimental Evidence from Germany. In
CReAM Discussion Paper Series (No. 2022; CReAM Discussion Paper Series). Centre for
Research and Analysis of Migration (CReAM), Department of Economics, University College
London. https://ideas.repec.org/p/crm/wpaper/2022.html

        von Bredow, R. (2020, November 12). New on the COVID-19 Front Lines: Reevaluating
Children's Role in the Pandemic--DER SPIEGEL - International. SPIEGEL International.
https://www.spiegel.de/international/world/new-on-the-covid-19-front-lines-children-may-be-
driving-the-pandemic-after-all-a-95e4c0e7-2ea0-479b-ac27-d17f07d147a5

        von Hippel, P. T. (2020, April 9). How Will the Coronavirus Crisis Affect Children's
Learning? Unequally. Education Next. https://www.educationnext.org/how-will-coronavirus-
crisis-affect-childrens-learning-unequally-covid-19/




                                                                                                     38
       Wallinga, J., Teunis, P., & Kretzschmar, M. (2006). Using Data on Social Contacts to
Estimate Age-specific Transmission Parameters for Respiratory-spread Infectious Agents.
American Journal of Epidemiology, 164(10), 936­944. https://doi.org/10.1093/aje/kwj317

      Weir, K. (2020, September 1). What did distance learning accomplish? Monitor on
Psychology, 51(6), 54­59.

       Weisberg, S. P., Connors, T. J., Zhu, Y., Baldwin, M. R., Lin, W.-H., Wontakal, S.,
Szabo, P. A., Wells, S. B., Dogra, P., Gray, J., & others. (2020). Distinct antibody responses to
SARS-CoV-2 in children and adults across the COVID-19 clinical spectrum. Nature
Immunology, 1­7.

       Will, M. (2020, July 28). Strikes Are an Option to Force Schools to Reopen Safely, AFT
President Says. Education Week. https://www.edweek.org/teaching-learning/strikes-are-an-
option-to-force-schools-to-reopen-safely-aft-president-says/2020/07

       Winslow, C.-E. A., & Rogers, J. F. (1920). Statistics of the 1918 Epidemic of Influenza
in Connecticut: With a Consideration of the Factors Which Influenced the Prevalence of This
Disease in Various Communities. The Journal of Infectious Diseases, 26(3), 185­216.

       Wisely, J. (2020, November 6). More schools going remote as COVID-19 virus spreads.
Detroit Free Press. https://www.freep.com/story/news/local/michigan/2020/11/06/more-schools-
going-remote-covid-19/6189913002/

       Yehya, N., Venkataramani, A., & Harhay, M. O. (2020). Statewide Interventions and
Covid-19 Mortality in the United States: An Observational Study. Clinical Infectious Diseases,
ciaa923. https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciaa923

       Yoon, Y., Kim, K.-R., Park, H., Kim, S., & Kim, Y.-J. (2020). Stepwise School Opening
Online and Off-line and an Impact on the Epidemiology of COVID-19 in the Pediatric
Population. MedRxiv, 2020.08.03.20165589. https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.03.20165589

        Zhou, R., Li, F., Chen, F., Liu, H., Zheng, J., Lei, C., & Wu, X. (2020). Viral dynamics in
asymptomatic patients with COVID-19. International Journal of Infectious Diseases, 96, 288­
290. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijid.2020.05.030




                                                                                                    39
Table 1: Summary Statistics by State, Instructional Modality, and Month
Panel A: September
                                                            Michigan
                                         All         In-person     Hybrid       Remote

 N districts                            810             472            144       194
 % districts                           100.00          58.27          17.78     23.95
 % districts, weighted                 100.00          47.69          17.21     35.10
 County
 School/county population ratio          0.15           0.15          0.15        0.15
 Nursing home residents per 100K       320.11         344.59        303.42      296.19
 65+ population per 100k              17,565.96      18,300.53     16,974.40   16,800.81
 Percent always wears a mask            63.37          60.02         64.71       67.23
 Share to stay at home                  22.82          21.79         23.31       24;97
 Trump vote share 2016                  47.08          51.98         45.35       41.34
 Religious congregations per 100k       95.44         114.32         84.86       74.36
 Religious adherents per 1k            424.07         418.84        414.11      436.68
 Unemployment rate, 2019                 4.15           4.22          4.01        4.10
 Individual poverty rate                15.08          14.94         14.71       15.40
 Correctional facility                  39.75          30.72         47.22       56.19
 College/University                     79.01          70.13         83.33       97.42
 Lagged cases per 100k                   6.94           5.92          7.27        8.18
 District
 Black students                          0.18          0.13           0.13       0.26
 Hispanic students                       0.08          0.09           0.07       0.08
 Econ disadvantaged students             0.50          0.50           0.46       0.52
 Special education students              0.13          0.13           0.12       0.13
 Urban                                   0.24          0.18           0.20       0.34
 Suburban/Town                           0.58          0.53           0.62       0.63
 Rural                                   0.18          0.29           0.18       0.03
 Outcomes
 Cases per 100K                          8.64           9.75            7.84      7.52
                                        (6.43)         (8.63)         (3.33)     (2.84)
 Exponential growth                      0.05           0.02           -0.04      0.02
                                        (0.26)         (0.19)         (0.19)     (0.23)
 Doubling time                         108.07         138.15         153.93     129.40
                                       (72.15)        (73.62)        (67.00)    (73.61)




                                                                                           40
Panel B: October
                                                        Michigan                                               Washington
                                       All      In-person        Hybrid     Remote        All      In-person    Hybrid      In-Person or    Remote
                                                                                                                               Hybrid


 N districts                          810         511             162        137         286          27          77            104          182
 % districts                         100.00      63.09           20.00      16.91       100.00       9.44        26.92         36.36        63.64
 % districts, weighted               100.00      56.27           25.06      18.67       100.00       1.77        8.18          9.95         90.05
 County
 School/county population ratio       0.15        0.15           0.15        0.15        0.15        0.15        0.15          0.15          0.15
 Nursing home residents per 100K     320.11      340.16         299.28      289.80      174.38      182.72      186.66        185.96        172.79
 65+ population per 100k            17,565.96   18,177.20      17,061.76   16,292.35   15,800.05   17,974.89   19,938.96     19,589.75     15,342.13
 Percent always wears a mask          63.37       61.07          65.76       67.01       69.81       66.49       67.25         67.11         70.11
 Share to stay at home                25.42       24.58          26.02       27.82       26.90       27.05       26.59         26.67         26.93
 Trump vote share 2016                47.08       51.10          44.28       38.85       40.16       52.51       50.35         50.73         38.89
 Religious congregations per 100k     95.44      108.26          78.39       78.51       91.94      127.48      121.14        122.27         88.42
 Religious adherents per 1k          424.07      423.05         420.20      433.50      349.75      344.18      332.79        334.81        351.26
 Unemployment rate, 2019              4.15        4.20           4.05        4.08        4.50        5.69        5.53          5.56          4.36
 Individual poverty rate              15.08       14.83          14.46       16.55       11.74       15.99       13.58         13.99         11.46
 Correctional facility                39.75       29.94          51.23       62.77       72.63       66.68       41.06         45.53         75.63
 College/University                   79.01       71.82          85.80       97.81       93.99       76.24       80.26         79.56         95.58
 Lagged cases per 100k                6.26        6.04           5.56        7.86        3.27        8.15        3.96          4.70          3.11
 District
 Black students                       0.18        0.12           0.13        0.40        0.04        0.01         0.01         0.01          0.05
 Hispanic students                    0.08        0.09           0.06        0.09        0.24        0.15         0.18         0.17          0.24
 Econ disadvantaged students          0.50        0.49           0.42        0.64        0.47        0.44         0.49         0.48          0.46
 Special education students           0.13        0.13           0.12        0.13        0.15        0.16         0.16         0.16          0.15
 Urban                                0.24        0.16           0.21        0.53        0.39        0.00         0.05         0.04          0.42
 Suburban/Town                        0.58        0.59           0.66        0.45        0.54        0.69         0.66         0.67          0.52
 Rural                                0.18        0.25           0.13        0.02        0.08        0.31         0.29         0.29          0.05
 Outcomes
 Cases per 100K                       37.76       31.37          29.67       34.65        9.20       17.41        9.19         10.63          9.05
                                     (15.98)      (9.77)        (10.65)     (14.18)      (4.62)     (11.13)      (7.76)        (8.97)        (3.83)
 Exponential growth                    0.42        0.43           0.41        0.42        0.11        0.11        0.07          0.07          0.12
                                      (0.18)      (0.17)         (0.16)      (0.18)      (0.22)      (0.32)      (0.26)        (0.27)        (0.21)
 Doubling time                        38.49       46.93          52.71       43.26      100.28       96.52      112.92        110.06         99.20
                                     (18.42)     (17.73)        (18.22)     (19.07)     (73.00)     (90.10)     (84.23)       (85.17)       (71.55)




                                                                                                                                                      41
Panel C: November
                                                                Michigan                                                     Washington
                                             All         In-person       Hybrid       Remote         All        In-person     Hybrid        In-person      Remote
                                                                                                                                            or Hybrid

 N districts                                 809           516           161           132           266            34          143           177            89
 % districts                               100.000        63.782        19.901        16.316       100.000        12.782       53.759        66.541        33.459
 % districts, weighted                     100.00         55.67         25.73         18.61        100.00          2.62        30.55         33.17         66.83
 County
 School/county population ratio             0.15           0.15          0.15          0.15         0.15          0.16          0.17          0.17          0.15
 Nursing home residents per 100k           320.11         338.70        301.98        291.79       174.38        214.79        189.73        191.71        168.57
 65+ population per 100k                  17,565.96      18,192.72     17,051.11     16,293.82    15,800.05     18,146.59     18,279.35     18,268.86     15,037.62
 Percent always wears a mask                63.37          61.14         65.81         66.60        69.81         67.46         68.17         68.12         70.57
 Share to stay at home                      25.32          24.58         25.82         27.60        30.35         29.22         29.84         29.79         30.63
 Trump vote share 2016                      47.08          50.95         44.44         39.30        40.16         53.23         51.68         51.80         35.60
 Religious congregations per 100k           95.44         108.57         77.08         80.33        91.94        127.14        114.63        115.62         81.47
 Religious adherents per 1k                424.07         424.57        420.04        429.37       349.75        364.03        362.02        362.18        340.02
 Unemployment rate, 2019                    4.15           4.19          4.07          4.10         4.50          5.89          5.47          5.51          4.05
 Individual poverty rate                    15.08          14.81         14.44         16.68        11.74         16.27         14.14         14.31         10.52
 Correctional facility                      39.80          30.23         49.69         65.15        69.71         43.08         38.85         39.18         84.74
 College/University                         78.99          72.29         85.71         96.97        93.02         77.95         82.73         82.35         98.27
 Lagged cases per 100k                      12.36          13.35         11.00         11.25        5.66          10.05         6.66          6.92          5.04
 District
 Black students                              0.18          0.13          0.12          0.39          0.04          0.01         0.02          0.02          0.05
 Hispanic students                           0.08          0.08          0.07          0.10          0.24          0.14         0.24          0.23          0.22
 Econ disadvantaged students                 0.50          0.49          0.42          0.65          0.47          0.44         0.53          0.52          0.42
 Special education students                  0.13          0.13          0.12          0.14          0.15          0.16         0.16          0.16          0.15
 Urban                                       0.24          0.17          0.19          0.53          0.39          0.22         0.35          0.34          0.42
 Suburban/Town                               0.58          0.59          0.69          0.42          0.54          0.49         0.49          0.49          0.54
 Rural                                       0.18          0.25          0.13          0.05          0.08          0.29         0.16          0.17          0.04
 Outcomes
 Cases per 100K                             46.78          48.02         46.29        43.78          24.89        32.73         28.20         28.55         23.08
                                            (9.65)        (10.10)        (8.97)       (8.41)         (8.83)      (11.38)       (12.87)       (12.80)        (5.10)
 Exponential growth                         -0.28          -0.28         -0.29        -0.28          -0.22        -0.24         -0.21         -0.21         -0.23
                                            (0.13)         (0.15)        (0.11)       (0.11)         (0.20)       (0.26)        (0.28)        (0.28)        (0.15)
 Doubling time                              52.59          51.94         52.45        54.70          44.96        54.42         53.66         53.72         40.65
                                           (13.52)        (17.04)        (7.35)       (5.89)        (26.34)      (34.85)       (39.36)       (38.97)       (15.30)
NOTE: Modality N's are for number of districts. County variables are county-level characteristics assigned to districts. District variables are means of schools
within districts. All means weighted by district size. In-person+hybrid column combines in-person and hybrid columns for Washington. Mutually exclusive
categories are either (a) in-person, hybrid, and remote, or (b) in-person+hybrid and remote. A table that includes districts with missing data is included in the
appendix. Outcomes include standard deviations in parentheses.




                                                                                                                                                                     42
Table 2. Estimated COVID case rates per 100,000 population
                                                                                   A. Michigan                                                          B. Washington
                                                              (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)            (5)            (6)               (7)            (8)
  In-Person                                                5.271***            0.246            -1.993            -1.642
                                                           (1.019)            (0.563)          (3.220)           (1.938)

  In-Person and Hybrid                                                                                                           2.715           2.873*            -1.946         4.397
                                                                                                                                (1.759)         (1.297)            (1.777)       (4.065)

  Hybrid                                                   1.709+              0.294             -3.953           -1.856
                                                           (0.912)            (0.639)           (2.823)          (2.649)

  Prior month cases                                        1.035**            0.732*             0.625                          1.866*           0.697              0.017
                                                           (0.375)            (0.344)           (0.566)                         (0.735)         (0.425)            (0.342)

  Prior month cases squared                                -0.022*            -0.024*           -0.029+                         -0.037*          -0.013             0.000
                                                           (0.011)            (0.010)           (0.017)                         (0.015)         (0.008)            (0.007)

  In-Person*Prior month cases                                                                    0.198
                                                                                                (0.570)

  Hybrid*Prior month cases                                                                       0.645
                                                                                                (0.531)

  In-Person*Prior month cases squared                                                            0.005
                                                                                                (0.017)

  Hybrid*Prior month cases squared                                                               -0.013
                                                                                                (0.016)

  (In-Person/Hybrid)*Prior month cases                                                                                                                             1.082**
                                                                                                                                                                   (0.384)

  (In-Person/Hybrid)*Prior month cases squared                                                                                                                     -0.021*
                                                                                                                                                                   (0.008)

  Percent always wears a mask                                                -0.528***         -0.517***                                        0.350**            0.357**
                                                                              (0.108)           (0.108)                                         (0.116)            (0.115)

  Share to stay at home                                                       -0.331             -0.375                                          0.063              0.173
                                                                              (0.466)           (0.457)                                         (0.396)            (0.391)

  Trump vote share 2016                                                       0.270*             0.274*                                         0.492***           0.479***
                                                                              (0.119)           (0.117)                                         (0.076)            (0.081)

  Religious congregations per 100k                                            -0.018             -0.017                                          -0.019            -0.007
                                                                              (0.022)           (0.022)                                         (0.031)            (0.031)

  Religious adherents per 1k                                                  0.051**           0.050**                                         0.075***           0.075***
                                                                              (0.016)           (0.016)                                         (0.012)            (0.012)

  School to county population ratio                                           -21.268          -22.470                                          -1.247**          -1.260***
                                                                             (34.299)          (33.260)                                          (0.363)           (0.349)

  Nursing home residents per 100k                                             0.013+            0.012+                                          0.013+              0.011
                                                                              (0.007)           (0.007)                                         (0.008)            (0.008)

  65+ population per 100k                                                     -0.000             -0.000                                         -0.001*            -0.001*
                                                                              (0.000)           (0.000)                                         (0.000)            (0.000)

  Unemployment rate, 2019                                                     -2.526*           -2.457*                                          -0.058             0.313
                                                                              (1.250)           (1.232)                                         (1.135)            (1.140)

  Individual poverty rate                                                      0.247             0.263                                           0.212              0.150
                                                                              (0.228)           (0.227)                                         (0.268)            (0.270)

  Underrepresented minority share                                              0.011             0.010                                           -0.030            -0.024
                                                                              (0.007)           (0.007)                                         (0.019)            (0.018)

  Urban                                                                       -0.038             0.156                                           0.464              0.185
                                                                              (0.418)           (0.447)                                         (0.464)            (0.457)

  Town                                                                        -0.483             -0.549                                         -2.388*            -1.930+
                                                                              (1.459)           (1.457)                                         (0.921)            (0.956)

  Rural                                                                       -1.223             -1.227                                         -1.791*            -1.759*
                                                                              (0.897)           (0.896)                                         (0.839)            (0.849)

  Correctional facility                                                       2.833+             2.640                                          7.723***           7.829***
                                                                              (1.642)           (1.629)                                         (1.750)            (1.700)

  College/University                                                          -1.429             -1.334                                         -6.081+            -5.776+
                                                                              (2.190)           (2.103)                                         (3.089)            (3.086)

  District FE                                                 N                  N                N                Y               N               N                  N            Y
  Month FE                                                    Y                  Y                Y                Y               Y               Y                  Y            Y

  Observations                                                   2420           2420              2420              2420             552            552              552          552
  R2                                                             0.720          0.814            0.816              0.865           0.700          0.861            0.870        0.929
Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the county level in parentheses. Regressions weighted by district size. All models include month fixed effects with November as the
reference category. + p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001




                                                                                                                                                                                           43
Table 3. Estimated COVID case rates per 100,000 age group population, by age group
                                  Age 0-19            Age 20-39          Age 40-59          Age 60+
                                     (1)                  (2)                (3)               (4)
 Panel A: Michigan


 25th Percentile

 In-Person                          -0.211               -1.527             -1.233            -1.973
                                   (0.756)              (1.723)            (1.364)           (1.230)
 Hybrid                             -0.391               -1.898             -1.499            -1.154
                                   (0.640)              (1.297)            (1.018)           (0.942)

 50th Percentile

 In-Person                          0.080                -0.398             -0.722            -0.976
                                   (0.377)              (0.959)            (0.715)           (0.671)
 Hybrid                             0.134                -0.393             -0.329            -0.812
                                   (0.365)              (0.784)            (0.639)           (0.563)

 75th Percentile

 In-Person                          0.458                0.893              0.083              0.239
                                   (0.611)              (1.319)            (0.877)           (0.825)
 Hybrid                             0.710                1.185              0.929             -0.298
                                   (0.626)              (1.075)            (1.135)           (1.045)

 Panel B: Washington

 25th Percentile

 In-Person and Hybrid               0.348                0.313              -1.304            0.932
                                   (0.865)              (2.110)            (1.538)           (1.098)

 50th Percentile

 In-Person and Hybrid               1.189                1.831              0.244             1.640
                                   (0.817)              (1.936)            (1.527)           (0.999)

 75th Percentile

 In-Person and Hybrid              2.316*                3.877              2.327            2.592*
                                   (0.946)              (2.254)            (1.933)           (1.084)

NOTE: Robust standard errors clustered at the county level in parentheses. Regressions weighted by
district size. All models include month fixed effects with November as the reference category. Separate
estimates are for the 25th, 50th, and 75th percentile of pre-existing COVID cases per 100,000 population.
*
  p < 0.05




                                                                                                            44
Figures

Figure 1: Statewide Trends in New COVID Cases, Michigan and Washington




NOTE: Marker heights represent seven-day average daily case rate per 100,000 residents by week.




                                                                                                  45
Figure 2a, b: Marginal predictions of COVID-19 cases per 100,000 by prior cases from modality changes,
Michigan




    a) All districts in county switch from remote to in-person.




    a) All districts in county switch from remote to hybrid.

NOTE: Estimates based on model 3 (without district fixed effects) in Table 2, where school modality is interacted
with a quadratic function of COVID case rates in the prior month.



                                                                                                                    46
Figure 3: Marginal predictions of COVID-19 cases per 100,000 by prior case from modality changes,
Washington




a) All districts in county switch from remote to in-person or hybrid.
NOTE: Estimates based on model 7 (without district fixed effects) in Table 2, where school modality is interacted
with a quadratic function of COVID case rates in the prior month.




                                                                                                                47
Figure 4a-c: COVID-19 case rates per 100,00 by share of students in modality and prior case rates,
Michigan




Panel A. 25th percentile of pre-period COVID-19 rates




Panel B. 50th percentile of pre-period COVID-19 rates




                                                                                                     48
Panel C. 75th percentile of pre-period COVID-19 rates


NOTE: Estimates from models interacting district modality measures with a vector of categorical
indicators for the percent of students who are attending schools in a particular modality (represented by x-
axis labels). Markers represent point estimates for in-person and hybrid, respectively, and spikes represent
95 percent confidence intervals. Panels are for the 25th, 50th, and 75th percentile, respectively, of lagged
case rates.




                                                                                                         49
Figure 5a-c: COVID-19 case rates per 100,00 by share of students in modality and prior case rates,,
Washington




Panel A. 25th percentile of pre-period COVID-19 rates




Panel B. 50th percentile of pre-period COVID-19 rates




                                                                                                      50
Panel C. 75th percentile of pre-period COVID-19 rates

NOTE: Estimates from models interacting district modality measures with a vector of categorical
indicators for the percent of students who are attending schools in a particular modality (represented by x-
axis labels). Markers represent point estimates for in-person or hybrid, and spikes represent 95 percent
confidence intervals. Panels are for the 25th, 50th, and 75th percentile, respectively, of lagged case rates.




                                                                                                          51
Appendix
Table A1. Summary Statistics by State, Instructional Modality, and Month, Including Districts
Missing Modality Data

Panel A: September
                                      Michigan
                                        All        In-person     Hybrid       Remote       No data

 N districts                            833           472          144          194              23
 % districts                           100.00        56.66        17.29        23.29            2.76
 % districts, weighted                 100.00        46.99        16.96        34.59            1.46
 County
 School/county population ratio         0.15         0.15          0.15         0.15         0.17
 Nursing home residents per 100K      320.11       344.59        303.42       296.19       292.98
 65+ population per 100k             17,565.96    18,300.53     16,974.40    16,800.81    18,928.25
 Percent always wears a mask           63.37        60.02         64.71        67.23        64.42
 Share to stay at home                 22.78        24.58         25.82        27.60        23.24
 Trump vote share 2016                 47.08        51.98         45.35        41.34        45.37
 Religious congregations per 100k      95.44       114.32         84.86        74.36       109.93
 Religious adherents per 1k           424.07       418.84        414.11       436.68       409.59
 Unemployment rate, 2019                4.15         4.22          4.01         4.10         4.49
 Individual poverty rate               15.08        14.94         14.71        15.40        16.42
 Correctional facility                 39.86        30.72         47.22        56.19        39.39
 College/University                    78.99        70.13         83.33        97.42        81.82
 Lagged cases per 100k                  6.92         5.92         7.27          8.18            4.49
 District
 Black students                         0.18         0.13         0.13         0.26             0.25
 Hispanic students                      0.08         0.09         0.07         0.08             0.09
 Econ disadvantaged students            0.50         0.50         0.46         0.52             0.70
 Special education students             0.13         0.13         0.12         0.13             0.15
 Urban                                  0.24         0.18         0.20         0.34             0.17
 Suburban/Town                          0.58         0.53         0.62         0.63             0.62
 Rural                                  0.18         0.29         0.18         0.03             0.21
 Outcomes
 Cases per 100k                          8.62         9.75         7.84         7.52         7.10
                                        (6.41)       (8.63)       (3.33)       (2.84)       (4.52)
 Exponential growth                      0.05         0.02        -0.04         0.02         0.02
                                        (0.26)       (0.19)       (0.19)       (0.34)       (0.23)
 Doubling time                         108.07       138.15       153.93        99.78       129.11
                                       (72.15)      (73.62)      (67.00)      (48.21)      (73.45)




                                                                                                52
Panel B: October
                                                            Michigan                                                        Washington
                                       All      In-person    Hybrid     Remote      No data        All      In-person    Hybrid   In-person     Remote       No data
                                                                                                                                   +hybrid

 N districts                          833         511         162         137          23         295          27         77          104         182              9
 % districts                         100.00      61.35       19.45       16.45        2.76       100.00       9.15       26.10       35.25       61.695          3.051
 % districts, weighted               100.00      55.45       24.69       18.40        1.46       100.00       1.74       8.03        9.76        88.37           1.87
 County
 School/county population ratio       0.15        0.15        0.15        0.15        0.17        0.15        0.15        0.15        0.15        0.15        0.17
 Nursing home residents per 100K     320.11      340.16      299.28      289.80      292.98      174.38      182.72      186.66      185.96      172.79      189.21
 65+ population per 100k            17,565.96   18,177.20   17,061.76   16,292.35   18,928.25   15,800.05   17,974.89   19,938.96   19,589.75   15,342.13   17,659.18
 Percent always wears a mask          63.37       61.07       65.76       67.01       64.42       69.81       66.49       67.25       67.11       70.11       69.77
 Share to stay at home                25.38       24.58       26.02       27.82       26.18       26.88       27.05       26.59       26.67       26.93       25.83
 Trump vote share 2016                47.08       51.10       44.28       38.85       45.37       40.16       52.51       50.35       50.73       38.89       45.03
 Religious congregations per 100k     95.44      108.26       78.39       78.51      109.93       91.94      127.48      121.14      122.27       88.42       99.93
 Religious adherents per 1k          424.07      423.05      420.20      433.50      409.59      349.75      344.18      332.79      334.81      351.26      356.19
 Unemployment rate, 2019              4.15        4.20        4.05        4.08        4.49        4.50        5.69        5.53        5.56        4.36        5.38
 Individual poverty rate              15.08       14.83       14.46       16.55       16.42       11.74       15.99       13.58       13.99       11.46       12.98
 Correctional facility                39.86       29.94       51.23       62.77       35.90       72.26       66.68       41.06       45.53       75.63       52.82
 College/University                   78.99       71.82       85.80       97.81       79.49       94.00       76.24       80.26       79.56       95.58       94.75
 Lagged cases per 100k                6.04        5.56        7.87        9.33        6.29        3.251       8.146       3.965       4.695       3.111       2.304
 District
 Black students                       0.18        0.12        0.13        0.40        0.25        0.04        0.01        0.01        0.01        0.05           0.02
 Hispanic students                    0.08        0.09        0.06        0.09        0.09        0.24        0.15        0.18        0.17        0.24           0.35
 Econ disadvantaged students          0.50        0.49        0.42        0.64        0.70        0.47        0.44        0.49        0.48        0.46           0.50
 Special education students           0.13        0.13        0.12        0.13        0.15        0.15        0.16        0.16        0.16        0.15           0.16
 Urban                                0.24        0.16        0.21        0.53        0.17        0.39        0.00        0.05        0.04        0.42           0.49
 Suburban/Town                        0.58        0.59        0.66        0.45        0.62        0.54        0.69        0.66        0.67        0.52           0.46
 Rural                                0.18        0.25        0.13        0.02        0.21        0.08        0.31        0.29        0.29        0.05           0.05
 Outcomes
 Cases per 100k                       34.58       37.76       31.37       29.67       27.67        9.16       17.42        9.19       10.63        9.05        6.90
                                     (14.16)     (15.98)      (9.77)     (10.65)     (10.17)      (4.60)     (11.13)      (7.76)      (8.97)      (3.83)      (2.49)
 Exponential growth                    0.42        0.42        0.43        0.41        0.33        0.11        0.11        0.66       0.072        0.12        -0.04
                                      (0.18)      (0.18)      (0.17)      (0.16)      (0.23)      (0.22)      (0.32)      (0.26)      (0.27)      (0.21)      (0.21)
 Doubling time                        43.20       38.49       46.93       52.71       37.19      101.01       96.52      112.92      110.06       99.20       139.74
                                     (19.01)     (18.42)     (17.73)     (18.22)      (9.37)     (74.21)     (90.10)     (84.23)     (85.17)     (71.55)     (122.88)




                                                                                                                                                            53
Panel C: November
                                                                                       Michigan                                                                                        Washington
                                                       All           In-person          Hybrid             Remote            No data              All           In-person           Hybrid   In-person                 Remote              No data
                                                                                                                                                                                              +hybrid

 N districts                                          833                516               161               132                24               295               34                143                177               89                 29
 % districts                                         100.00             61.95             19.33             15.85              2.88             100.00            11.53             48.48              60.00             30.17              9.83
 % districts, weighted                               100.00             54.84             25.34             18.33              1.48             100.00            2.23              26.05              28.29             56.99              14.72
 County
 School/county population ratio                      0.15              0.15              0.15              0.15              0.17               0.15              0.16              0.17              0.17              0.15                 0.16
 Nursing home residents per 100K                    320.11            338.70            301.98            291.79            292.82             174.38            214.79            189.73            191.71            168.57               163.59
 65+ population per 100k                           17,565.96         18,192.72         17,051.11         16,293.82         18,913.26          15,800.05         18,146.59         18,279.35         18,268.86         15,037.62            14,007.09
 Percent always wears a mask                         63.37             61.14             65.81             66.60             64.25              69.81             67.46             68.17             68.12             70.57                70.14
 Share to stay at home                               25.28             24.58             25.82             27.60             25.60              30.48             29.22             29.84             29.79             30.63                31.25
 Trump vote share 2016                               47.08             50.95             44.44             39.30             45.33              40.16             53.23             51.68             51.80             35.60                35.46
 Religious congregations per 100k                    95.44            108.57             77.08             80.33            109.88              91.94            127.14            114.63            115.62             81.47                86.97
 Religious adherents per 1k                         424.07            424.57            420.04            429.37            409.34             349.75            364.03            362.02            362.18            340.02               363.53
 Unemployment rate, 2019                             4.15              4.19              4.07              4.10              4.49               4.50              5.89              5.47              5.51              4.05                 4.29
 Individual poverty rate                             15.08             14.81             14.44             16.68             16.48              11.74             16.27             14.14             14.31             10.52                11.53
 Correctional facility                               39.86             30.23             49.69             65.15             35.19              72.26             43.08             38.85             39.18             84.74                87.15
 College/University                                  78.99             72.29             85.71             96.97             75.93              94.00             77.95             82.73             82.35             98.27                99.72
 Lagged cases per 100k                               12.34             13.35             11.00             11.25             10.70              5.79              10.05             6.66              6.92              5.039                6.51
 District
 Black students                                        0.18              0.13              0.12              0.39              0.25              0.04              0.01              0.02              0.02              0.05                0.08
 Hispanic students                                     0.08              0.08              0.07              0.10              0.09              0.24              0.14              0.24              0.23              0.22                0.29
 Econ disadvantaged students                           0.50              0.49              0.42              0.65              0.70              0.47              0.44              0.53              0.52              0.42                0.53
 Special education students                            0.13              0.13              0.12              0.14              0.15              0.15              0.16              0.16              0.16              0.15                0.14
 Urban                                                 0.24              0.17              0.19              0.53              0.16              0.39              0.22              0.35              0.34              0.42                0.35
 Suburban/Town                                         0.58              0.59              0.69              0.42              0.62              0.54              0.49              0.49              0.49              0.54                0.61
 Rural                                                 0.18              0.25              0.13              0.05              0.21              0.08              0.29              0.16              0.17              0.04                0.04
 Outcomes
 Cases per 100k                                       46.72             48.02             46.29             43.78             40.65             25.65             32.73             28.20             28.55              23.08               30.07
                                                      (9.67)           (10.10)            (8.97)            (8.41)           (10.51)           (10.15)           (11.38)           (12.87)           (12.80)             (5.10)             (15.26)
 Exponential growth                                    -0.28             -0.28             -0.29             -0.28             -0.27             -0.22             -0.24             -0.21             -0.21              -0.23               -0.19
                                                      (0.13)            (0.15)            (0.11)            (0.11)            (0.13)            (0.19)            (0.26)            (0.28)            (0.28)             (0.15)              (0.12)
 Doubling time                                        52.51             51.94             52.45             54.70             44.49             44.59             54.42             53.66             53.72              40.65               42.42
                                                     (13.52)           (17.04)            (7.35)            (5.89)           (11.09)           (24.88)           (34.85)           (39.36)           (38.97)            (15.30)             (13.62)
NOTE: Modality N's are for number of districts. County variables are county-level characteristics assigned to districts. District variables are means of schools within districts. All means weighted by district size. In-person+hybrid
column combines in-person and hybrid columns for Washington. Outcomes include standard deviations in parentheses.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      54
Table A2: Transition Matrices Showing Changes in District Instructional Modality by Month and State

Panel A. September to October
                                                   Michigan
 October                 In-person      Hybrid      Remote        No data        Total
 September                 option                    only
 In-person option           468             4         0               0           472
 Hybrid                      16           128         0               0           144
 Remote only                 27            30        137              0           194
 No data                      0             0         0              23            23
 Total                      511           162        137             23           833

Panel B. October to November
                                                       Michigan                                                    Washington
 November                   In-person      Hybrid       Remote      No data        Total      In-person   Hybrid    Remote      No data   Total
 October                      option                      only                                  option                only
 In-person option              499            2            10           0           511           20        3          0          4        27
 Hybrid                         10           147           5            0           162            4        70         1          2        77
 Remote only                     7            12          117           1           137            9        69         84         20      182
 No data                         0            0            0           23            23            1        1          4          3         9
 Total                         516           161          132          24           833           34       143         89         29      295
NOTE: Rows represent the first month in the table and columns represent the second month in the table.




                                                                                                                                                  55
Table A3. Estimated COVID exponential growth
                                                           A. Michigan                               B. Washington
                                                 (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)            (6)
 In-Person                                      0.039         -0.001        -0.000
                                               (0.024)       (0.013)       (0.061)

 In-Person and Hybrid                                                                      -0.007        0.014          0.031
                                                                                          (0.046)       (0.064)        (0.187)

 Hybrid                                         0.031         0.016         0.028
                                               (0.020)       (0.013)       (0.030)

 Percent always wears a mask                                  -0.000                                     0.006
                                                             (0.002)                                    (0.004)

 Share to stay at home                                        -0.007                                     -0.006
                                                             (0.008)                                    (0.011)

 Trump vote share 2016                                       0.004+                                      0.000
                                                             (0.002)                                    (0.003)

 Religious congregations per 100k                            -0.001+                                     -0.002
                                                             (0.000)                                    (0.001)

 Religious adherents per 1k                                   0.000                                     0.002**
                                                             (0.000)                                    (0.001)

 School to county population ratio                            1.180*                                    -0.038**
                                                             (0.536)                                    (0.013)

 Nursing home residents per 100k                              0.000                                      0.001*
                                                             (0.000)                                    (0.000)

 65+ population per 100k                                      -0.000                                    -0.000*
                                                             (0.000)                                    (0.000)

 Unemployment rate, 2019                                      0.027                                     0.071+
                                                             (0.024)                                    (0.037)

 Individual poverty rate                                      0.003                                     -0.027+
                                                             (0.005)                                    (0.014)

 Underrepresented minority share                              0.000                                      0.000
                                                             (0.000)                                    (0.001)

 Urban                                                        0.010                                      -0.027
                                                             (0.008)                                    (0.017)

 Town                                                        0.060**                                     -0.044
                                                             (0.022)                                    (0.036)

 Rural                                                        0.015                                      -0.024
                                                             (0.015)                                    (0.025)

 Correctional facility                                        0.020                                      -0.102
                                                             (0.028)                                    (0.074)

 College/University                                           0.008                                     -0.496***
                                                             (0.045)                                     (0.126)

 District FE                                     N             N              Y             N              N             Y
 Month FE                                        Y             Y              Y             Y              Y             Y

 Observations                                  2420           2420          2420           552            552           552
 R2                                            0.715          0.740         0.791         0.389          0.444         0.689
NOTE: Robust standard errors clustered at the county level in parentheses. Regressions weighted by district size. All models
include month fixed effects with November as the reference category.
+ p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001




                                                                                                                                 56
Table A4. Estimated COVID doubling time
                                                          A. Michigan                                B. Washington
                                               (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)            (5)           (6)
 In-Person                                  -23.645***      -5.145+       -14.021
                                             (4.717)        (3.012)       (8.586)

 In-Person and Hybrid                                                                    12.363        -15.523         -37.546
                                                                                         (9.871)       (11.467)       (32.534)

 Hybrid                                     -12.027**       -7.412**      -19.447+
                                             (4.022)        (2.691)       (10.715)

 Percent always wears a mask                                 0.678                                       -0.907
                                                            (0.576)                                     (1.234)

 Share to stay at home                                      6.012**                                      4.304
                                                            (2.005)                                     (4.707)

 Trump vote share 2016                                       -0.128                                      -0.904
                                                            (0.484)                                     (0.822)

 Religious congregations per 100k                           -0.134+                                      -0.241
                                                            (0.077)                                     (0.305)

 Religious adherents per 1k                                  0.030                                       -0.029
                                                            (0.035)                                     (0.125)

 School to county population ratio                           57.606                                    11.527***
                                                           (113.421)                                    (2.663)

 Nursing home residents per 100k                             -0.021                                      -0.080
                                                            (0.017)                                     (0.061)

 65+ population per 100k                                     0.000                                       0.003
                                                            (0.001)                                     (0.002)

 Unemployment rate, 2019                                     7.331                                      -3.427
                                                            (5.634)                                    (12.844)

 Individual poverty rate                                     0.383                                       3.760
                                                            (1.029)                                     (2.312)

 Underrepresented minority share                             -0.016                                      0.463*
                                                            (0.022)                                     (0.186)

 Urban                                                       0.698                                      -9.174*
                                                            (1.991)                                     (4.382)

 Town                                                        6.468                                       6.561
                                                            (4.438)                                     (7.428)

 Rural                                                       4.166                                       7.706
                                                            (2.767)                                     (6.816)

 Correctional facility                                       6.634                                     -50.921**
                                                            (6.024)                                    (17.508)

 College/University                                        -27.926***                                    4.095
                                                            (7.297)                                    (25.821)

 District FE                                    N              N             Y             N              N              Y
 Month FE                                       Y              Y             Y             Y              Y              Y

 Observations                                 2418           2418          2418            552            552           552
 R2                                           0.457          0.636         0.703          0.200          0.614         0.803
NOTE: Robust standard errors clustered at the county level in parentheses. Regressions weighted by district size. All models
include month fixed effects with November as the reference category.
+ p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001




                                                                                                                                 57
Table A5. Estimated COVID case rates (unadjusted) using a negative binomial specification
                                                                                      Michigan                                                   Washington
                                                                   (1)           (2)             (3)              (4)           (5)            (6)          (7)            (8)
  In-Person                                                      -0.119         0.056          -0.156+           0.060
                                                                (0.102)        (0.040)         (0.085)          (0.040)

  In-Person and Hybrid                                                                                                        -0.321*         0.087*        -0.054        0.026
                                                                                                                              (0.155)        (0.038)       (0.099)       (0.065)

  Hybrid                                                         0.031         0.065+            -0.056          0.024
                                                                (0.075)        (0.036)          (0.094)         (0.051)

  Prior month cases                                            0.066***         0.010            0.005                       0.113***        0.024**       0.023**
                                                               (0.007)         (0.007)          (0.007)                      (0.015)         (0.009)       (0.008)

  Prior month cases squared                                    -0.000***       -0.000+           -0.000                      -0.001***       -0.000+       -0.000*
                                                                (0.000)        (0.000)          (0.000)                       (0.000)        (0.000)       (0.000)

  In-Person*Prior month cases                                                                   0.008**
                                                                                                (0.003)

  Hybrid*Prior month cases                                                                       0.004
                                                                                                (0.003)

  In-Person*Prior month cases squared                                                           -0.000*
                                                                                                (0.000)

  Hybrid*Prior month cases squared                                                               -0.000
                                                                                                (0.000)

  (In-Person and Hybrid)*Prior month cases                                                                                                                  0.016
                                                                                                                                                           (0.012)

  (In-Person and Hybrid)*Prior month cases squared                                                                                                          -0.000
                                                                                                                                                           (0.000)

  Percent always wears a mask                                                  -0.020*          -0.019*                                       0.016         0.015
                                                                               (0.009)          (0.009)                                      (0.018)       (0.018)

  Share to stay at home                                                        0.052+           0.051+                                        -0.058        -0.056
                                                                               (0.030)          (0.029)                                      (0.042)       (0.043)

  Trump vote share 2016                                                         0.002            0.003                                      0.048***       0.050**
                                                                               (0.009)          (0.009)                                     (0.015)        (0.015)

  Religious congregations per 100k                                            -0.011***        -0.011***                                     -0.015+       -0.015+
                                                                               (0.002)          (0.002)                                      (0.008)       (0.009)

  Religious adherents per 1k                                                   0.003***        0.003***                                       0.003         0.003
                                                                               (0.001)         (0.001)                                       (0.002)       (0.002)

  School to county population ratio                                            6.003**          5.985**                                       -0.035        -0.032
                                                                               (2.313)          (2.277)                                      (0.045)       (0.044)

  Nursing home residents per 100,000                                            -0.000           -0.000                                      0.002**        0.002*
                                                                               (0.000)          (0.000)                                      (0.001)       (0.001)

  65+ population per 100k                                                      -0.000*          -0.000*                                      -0.000*       -0.000*
                                                                               (0.000)          (0.000)                                      (0.000)       (0.000)

  Unemployment rate, 2019                                                       -0.109           -0.109                                       -0.029        -0.036
                                                                               (0.083)          (0.081)                                      (0.117)       (0.127)

  Individual poverty rate                                                       0.010            0.009                                        0.002         0.003
                                                                               (0.017)          (0.017)                                      (0.050)       (0.056)

  Underrepresented minority share                                              0.002**          0.002**                                       -0.003        -0.003
                                                                               (0.001)          (0.001)                                      (0.002)       (0.002)

  Urban                                                                        -0.071*          -0.064*                                       0.022         0.019
                                                                               (0.031)          (0.029)                                      (0.026)       (0.032)

  Town                                                                         -0.204**        -0.193**                                       -0.059        -0.071
                                                                               (0.063)         (0.062)                                       (0.063)       (0.081)

  Rural                                                                        -0.158**        -0.148**                                      -0.118+        -0.128
                                                                               (0.049)         (0.049)                                       (0.065)       (0.085)

  Correctional facility                                                         -0.004           -0.001                                      0.502**       0.492**
                                                                               (0.101)          (0.099)                                      (0.189)       (0.188)

  College/University                                                            0.083            0.088                                        0.125         0.108
                                                                               (0.123)          (0.121)                                      (0.301)       (0.300)

  County population                                                            0.000***        0.000***                                      0.000**       0.000***
                                                                               (0.000)         (0.000)                                       (0.000)       (0.000)

  District FE                                                     N               N               N               Y             N              N              N             Y
  Month FE                                                        Y               Y               Y               Y             Y              Y              Y             Y

  Observations                                                   2420           2420             2420            2420          552            552            552           552
NOTE: Robust standard errors clustered at the county level in parentheses. Regressions weighted by district size. All models include month fixed effects with November as the reference
category. + p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001




                                                                                                                                                                                          58
Table A6-1. Estimated COVID case rates per 100,000 for 0-19-year-olds
                                                                             A. Michigan                                         B. Washington
                                                              (1)           (2)            (3)        (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)            (8)
  In-Person                                                 1.515**        0.465         -0.793      0.392
                                                            (0.497)       (0.434)       (2.305)     (1.249)

  In-Person and Hybrid                                                                                           1.212      2.152*       -2.253         3.827
                                                                                                                (1.348)     (1.028)      (1.518)       (3.429)

  Hybrid                                                     0.730         0.465         -1.707     -0.197
                                                            (0.510)       (0.455)       (2.013)     (1.505)

  Prior month cases                                          0.529*        0.296         0.221                  1.550*      1.053*        0.423
                                                            (0.232)       (0.226)       (0.423)                 (0.614)     (0.405)      (0.299)

  Prior month cases squared                                 -0.013+       -0.012+        -0.014                 -0.029*     -0.019**     -0.007
                                                            (0.007)       (0.007)       (0.012)                 (0.012)     (0.007)      (0.005)

  In-Person*Prior month cases                                                            0.123
                                                                                        (0.419)

  Hybrid*Prior month cases                                                               0.322
                                                                                        (0.376)

  In-Person*Prior month cases squared                                                    0.002
                                                                                        (0.013)

  Hybrid*Prior month cases squared                                                       -0.006
                                                                                        (0.011)

  (In-Person and Hybrid)*Prior month cases                                                                                               1.008*
                                                                                                                                         (0.383)

  (In-Person and Hybrid)*Prior month cases squared                                                                                      -0.020**
                                                                                                                                         (0.007)

  Percent always wears a mask                                            -0.336***     -0.331***                            0.199+       0.205+
                                                                          (0.079)       (0.079)                             (0.109)      (0.107)

  Share to stay at home                                                   -0.731*       -0.753*                             0.463+       0.565*
                                                                          (0.305)       (0.300)                             (0.271)      (0.268)

  Trump vote share 2016                                                    -0.113        -0.111                             0.203**      0.189**
                                                                          (0.080)       (0.078)                             (0.068)      (0.068)

  Religious congregations per 100k                                        -0.023+       -0.022+                             -0.024       -0.013
                                                                          (0.013)       (0.013)                             (0.043)      (0.045)

  Religious adherents per 1k                                              0.035**       0.034**                             0.030+       0.030+
                                                                          (0.010)       (0.010)                             (0.015)      (0.015)

  School to county population ratio                                      -40.941+      -41.562+                             -0.744       -0.759
                                                                         (22.346)      (22.072)                             (0.471)      (0.458)

  Nursing home residents per 100k                                          0.009*        0.009*                              0.006        0.004
                                                                          (0.004)       (0.004)                             (0.006)      (0.006)

  65+ population per 100k                                                  -0.000        -0.000                             -0.000       -0.000
                                                                          (0.000)       (0.000)                             (0.000)      (0.000)

  Unemployment rate, 2019                                                  -0.927        -0.891                              0.355        0.709
                                                                          (0.849)       (0.840)                             (1.176)      (1.145)

  Individual poverty rate                                                  -0.087        -0.079                              0.200        0.141
                                                                          (0.153)       (0.153)                             (0.379)      (0.375)

  Underrepresented minority share                                          0.005         0.005                              -0.032+      -0.027+
                                                                          (0.004)       (0.004)                             (0.016)      (0.015)

  Urban                                                                    0.254         0.358                              0.637+        0.386
                                                                          (0.289)       (0.316)                             (0.357)      (0.338)

  Town                                                                     0.140         0.103                              -2.428*      -2.026+
                                                                          (1.085)       (1.085)                             (0.987)      (1.005)

  Rural                                                                    -0.833        -0.839                             -2.072**    -2.022**
                                                                          (0.533)       (0.533)                             (0.718)      (0.671)

  Correctional facility                                                   2.021+        1.936+                              2.893+       2.992+
                                                                          (1.022)       (1.038)                             (1.691)      (1.627)

  College/University                                                       -1.973        -1.937                             -2.644       -2.352
                                                                          (1.510)       (1.468)                             (3.048)      (2.904)

  District FE                                                 N             N             N           Y           N            N           N              Y
  Month FE                                                    Y             Y             Y           Y           Y            Y           Y              Y

  Observations                                               2420          2420         2420        2420         551          551          551           551
  R2                                                         0.631         0.707        0.708       0.786       0.583        0.735        0.753         0.854
NOTE: Robust standard errors clustered at the county level in parentheses. Regressions weighted by district size. All models include month fixed effects with
November as the reference category. + p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001




                                                                                                                                                                 59
Table A6-2. Estimated COVID case rates per 100,000 for 20-39-year-olds
                                                                            A. Michigan                                         B. Washington
                                                              (1)          (2)           (3)        (4)         (5)          (6)          (7)           (8)
  In-Person                                                6.283***       0.552        -4.214     -1.064
                                                           (1.479)       (0.932)      (4.912)     (2.705)

  In-Person and Hybrid                                                                                         4.282        3.707        -4.353        6.599
                                                                                                              (2.841)      (2.379)      (3.964)       (8.082)

  Hybrid                                                   2.057+         0.385         -5.839    -2.326
                                                           (1.149)       (0.851)       (3.647)    (3.711)

  Prior month cases                                         0.891         0.395         -0.094                3.637**      1.681*        0.549
                                                           (0.603)       (0.503)       (0.919)                (1.278)      (0.808)      (0.627)

  Prior month cases squared                                 -0.018        -0.018        -0.011                -0.073**     -0.031*       -0.010
                                                           (0.017)       (0.015)       (0.027)                (0.025)      (0.014)      (0.012)

  In-Person*Prior month cases                                                           0.639
                                                                                       (0.875)

  Hybrid*Prior month cases                                                              0.987
                                                                                       (0.655)

  In-Person*Prior month cases squared                                                   -0.008
                                                                                       (0.027)

  Hybrid*Prior month cases squared                                                      -0.023
                                                                                       (0.020)

  (In-Person and Hybrid)*Prior month cases                                                                                              1.800+
                                                                                                                                        (1.013)

  (In-Person and Hybrid)*Prior month cases squared                                                                                      -0.034+
                                                                                                                                        (0.019)

  Percent always wears a mask                                            -0.594**     -0.579**                             0.413+       0.423+
                                                                          (0.190)      (0.191)                             (0.232)      (0.239)

  Share to stay at home                                                   -0.599        -0.641                              0.504        0.688
                                                                         (0.675)       (0.666)                             (0.842)      (0.835)

  Trump vote share 2016                                                  0.342+         0.353*                            0.939***     0.916***
                                                                         (0.174)       (0.172)                            (0.190)      (0.195)

  Religious congregations per 100k                                        -0.053        -0.053                             -0.090        -0.069
                                                                         (0.033)       (0.033)                             (0.089)      (0.094)

  Religious adherents per 1k                                             0.086***     0.086***                            0.107***     0.107***
                                                                         (0.025)      (0.025)                             (0.027)      (0.027)

  School to county population ratio                                       -2.992       -4.769                              -1.168        -1.190
                                                                         (59.570)     (58.649)                             (0.786)      (0.791)

  Nursing home residents per 100k                                         0.014         0.013                               0.015        0.012
                                                                         (0.009)       (0.009)                             (0.015)      (0.016)

  65+ population per 100k                                                 -0.000        -0.000                             -0.000        -0.001
                                                                         (0.001)       (0.001)                             (0.001)      (0.001)

  Unemployment rate, 2019                                                -3.167+       -3.086+                             -2.197        -1.583
                                                                         (1.806)       (1.801)                             (2.397)      (2.520)

  Individual poverty rate                                                 0.413         0.432                               0.611        0.509
                                                                         (0.358)       (0.360)                             (0.624)      (0.637)

  Underrepresented minority share                                        0.022+         0.021                              -0.046        -0.036
                                                                         (0.013)       (0.013)                             (0.039)      (0.040)

  Urban                                                                   -0.566        -0.323                              0.890        0.421
                                                                         (0.600)       (0.602)                             (0.928)      (0.976)

  Town                                                                    -0.069        -0.121                             -4.737*      -3.964+
                                                                         (2.095)       (2.108)                             (1.828)      (1.964)

  Rural                                                                   -0.723        -0.701                             -3.985*      -3.945*
                                                                         (1.452)       (1.458)                             (1.691)      (1.696)

  Correctional facility                                                   1.442         1.367                             12.811***    12.988***
                                                                         (2.360)       (2.402)                             (3.475)      (3.457)

  College/University                                                      -4.322        -4.300                            -11.499+     -10.993+
                                                                         (3.249)       (3.149)                             (5.890)      (5.890)

  District FE                                                 N             N            N           Y           N           N            N              Y
  Month FE                                                    Y             Y            Y           Y           Y           Y            Y              Y

  Observations                                              2420          2420         2420        2420         551         551           551           551
  R2                                                        0.724         0.806        0.808       0.864       0.542       0.761         0.773         0.885
NOTE: Robust standard errors clustered at the county level in parentheses. Regressions weighted by district size. All models include month fixed effects with November as the
reference category. + p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001




                                                                                                                                                                                60
Table A6-3. Estimated COVID case rates per 100,000 for 40-59-year-olds
                                                                            A. Michigan                                         B. Washington
                                                              (1)          (2)           (3)        (4)         (5)          (6)          (7)           (8)
  In-Person                                                7.655***       0.411        -1.897     -3.080
                                                           (1.650)       (0.686)      (3.742)     (2.265)

  In-Person and Hybrid                                                                                        4.547+        2.109       -6.072*        4.494
                                                                                                              (2.657)      (2.094)      (2.874)       (7.054)

  Hybrid                                                   2.344+         0.392         -4.484    -3.380
                                                           (1.358)       (0.814)       (3.356)    (3.519)

  Prior month cases                                        1.563**       1.244**       1.309+                  2.657*       1.062        -0.094
                                                           (0.510)       (0.416)       (0.684)                (1.150)      (0.748)      (0.572)

  Prior month cases squared                                -0.031*       -0.035**      -0.050*                -0.049*      -0.012        0.011
                                                           (0.013)        (0.011)      (0.020)                (0.023)      (0.013)      (0.011)

  In-Person*Prior month cases                                                           0.081
                                                                                       (0.644)

  Hybrid*Prior month cases                                                              0.738
                                                                                       (0.651)

  In-Person*Prior month cases squared                                                   0.015
                                                                                       (0.019)

  Hybrid*Prior month cases squared                                                      -0.015
                                                                                       (0.020)

  (In-Person and Hybrid)*Prior month cases                                                                                               1.843*
                                                                                                                                        (0.809)

  (In-Person and Hybrid)*Prior month cases squared                                                                                      -0.035*
                                                                                                                                        (0.016)

  Percent always wears a mask                                           -0.656***     -0.640***                            0.578**      0.589**
                                                                         (0.120)       (0.119)                             (0.172)      (0.171)

  Share to stay at home                                                   -0.140        -0.219                              0.153        0.340
                                                                         (0.612)       (0.595)                             (0.729)      (0.730)

  Trump vote share 2016                                                  0.475**       0.479**                            0.738***     0.714***
                                                                         (0.152)       (0.150)                            (0.152)      (0.153)

  Religious congregations per 100k                                        -0.016        -0.014                             -0.085+       -0.063
                                                                         (0.028)       (0.028)                             (0.045)      (0.044)

  Religious adherents per 1k                                             0.061***      0.059**                            0.118***     0.118***
                                                                         (0.018)       (0.017)                            (0.019)      (0.019)

  School to county population ratio                                      12.002        9.979                              -1.729**     -1.753**
                                                                        (35.127)      (34.341)                            (0.524)       (0.503)

  Nursing home residents per 100k                                        0.017+        0.017+                               0.014        0.011
                                                                         (0.009)       (0.009)                             (0.011)      (0.011)

  65+ population per 100k                                                 -0.000        -0.000                             -0.001        -0.001
                                                                         (0.000)       (0.000)                             (0.000)      (0.000)

  Unemployment rate, 2019                                                -3.017+       -2.901+                              1.488        2.122
                                                                         (1.591)       (1.547)                             (1.703)      (1.736)

  Individual poverty rate                                                 0.434         0.461                               0.126        0.021
                                                                         (0.308)       (0.306)                             (0.373)      (0.374)

  Underrepresented minority share                                         0.016         0.016                              -0.075*      -0.066+
                                                                         (0.010)       (0.010)                             (0.036)      (0.035)

  Urban                                                                   -0.329        -0.072                              1.149        0.677
                                                                         (0.625)       (0.646)                             (0.822)      (0.844)

  Town                                                                    -0.988        -1.082                            -3.974**      -3.202*
                                                                         (1.560)       (1.543)                            (1.428)       (1.442)

  Rural                                                                  -2.096*       -2.075*                             -2.893*      -2.834*
                                                                         (0.998)       (0.987)                             (1.275)      (1.255)

  Correctional facility                                                   2.804         2.419                             10.717***    10.898***
                                                                         (2.228)       (2.184)                             (2.831)      (2.733)

  College/University                                                      -1.252        -1.034                            -12.971**    -12.448**
                                                                         (2.625)       (2.548)                             (4.338)      (4.193)

  District FE                                                 N             N            N           Y           N           N            N              Y
  Month FE                                                    Y             Y            Y           Y           Y           Y            Y              Y

  Observations                                              2420          2420         2420        2420         551         551           551           551
  R2                                                        0.750         0.844        0.846       0.888       0.527       0.767         0.785         0.871
NOTE: Robust standard errors clustered at the county level in parentheses. Regressions weighted by district size. All models include month fixed effects with November as the
reference category. + p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001




                                                                                                                                                                                61
Table A6-4. Estimated COVID case rates per 100,000 for 60+ year-olds
                                                                            A. Michigan                                         B. Washington
                                                              (1)          (2)            (3)        (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)            (8)
  In-Person                                                7.646***       0.063         -4.161     -2.505
                                                           (1.363)       (0.603)       (3.394)     (1.992)

  In-Person and Hybrid                                                                                          2.273      2.479*       -1.252         3.909
                                                                                                               (1.732)     (1.186)      (1.919)       (3.740)

  Hybrid                                                   1.878+         -0.130        -1.662     -2.469
                                                           (1.027)       (0.674)       (3.184)     (2.654)

  Prior month cases                                        1.315**        1.092*        0.822                  1.839*       0.548        0.018
                                                           (0.460)       (0.430)       (0.695)                 (0.811)     (0.528)      (0.492)

  Prior month cases squared                                -0.028*       -0.032**      -0.034+                 -0.029+     -0.000        0.010
                                                           (0.011)        (0.011)      (0.020)                 (0.017)     (0.010)      (0.010)

  In-Person*Prior month cases                                                           0.494
                                                                                       (0.597)

  Hybrid*Prior month cases                                                              0.078
                                                                                       (0.623)

  In-Person*Prior month cases squared                                                   -0.001
                                                                                       (0.019)

  Hybrid*Prior month cases squared                                                      0.008
                                                                                       (0.021)

  (In-Person and Hybrid)*Prior month cases                                                                                              0.845+
                                                                                                                                        (0.456)

  (In-Person and Hybrid)*Prior month cases squared                                                                                      -0.017+
                                                                                                                                        (0.009)

  Percent always wears a mask                                            -0.469***    -0.453***                            0.187+       0.192+
                                                                          (0.115)      (0.116)                             (0.110)      (0.112)

  Share to stay at home                                                   -0.216        -0.288                              0.516        0.602
                                                                         (0.502)       (0.483)                             (0.423)      (0.419)

  Trump vote share 2016                                                  0.534***      0.539***                           0.543***     0.532***
                                                                         (0.130)       (0.127)                            (0.078)      (0.080)

  Religious congregations per 100k                                        0.005         0.006                              -0.039       -0.029
                                                                         (0.023)       (0.023)                             (0.034)      (0.034)

  Religious adherents per 1k                                             0.044**       0.044**                            0.059***     0.059***
                                                                         (0.016)       (0.016)                            (0.013)      (0.014)

  School to county population ratio                                      -17.671      -20.297                             -0.934**     -0.946**
                                                                         (31.420)     (30.633)                            (0.334)       (0.326)

  Nursing home residents per 100k                                         0.013         0.012                              0.022*       0.021*
                                                                         (0.008)       (0.008)                             (0.008)      (0.009)

  65+ population per 100k                                                 -0.000        -0.000                             -0.001*      -0.001*
                                                                         (0.000)       (0.000)                             (0.000)      (0.000)

  Unemployment rate, 2019                                                -3.479*       -3.354*                              0.482        0.775
                                                                         (1.497)       (1.472)                             (0.838)      (0.840)

  Individual poverty rate                                                0.512+         0.527*                             -0.198       -0.247
                                                                         (0.266)       (0.263)                             (0.247)      (0.256)

  Underrepresented minority share                                         0.008         0.007                              -0.011       -0.006
                                                                         (0.007)       (0.006)                             (0.022)      (0.022)

  Urban                                                                   0.140         0.369                               0.059       -0.155
                                                                         (0.435)       (0.476)                             (0.649)      (0.639)

  Town                                                                    -0.495        -0.590                             -2.426*      -2.078+
                                                                         (1.347)       (1.341)                             (1.058)      (1.159)

  Rural                                                                   -0.517        -0.511                             -0.938       -0.906
                                                                         (0.869)       (0.873)                             (0.894)      (0.903)

  Correctional facility                                                   3.651*        3.621*                            7.353***     7.436***
                                                                         (1.729)       (1.696)                            (1.864)      (1.831)

  College/University                                                      2.830         2.805                              -4.233       -3.991
                                                                         (2.538)       (2.437)                             (3.030)      (3.074)

  District FE                                                 N             N             N          Y           N           N            N              Y
  Month FE                                                    Y             Y             Y          Y           Y           Y            Y              Y

  Observations                                              2420          2420          2420        2420        551          551         551            551
  R2                                                        0.700         0.820         0.823       0.865      0.534        0.792       0.800          0.873
NOTE: Robust standard errors clustered at the county level in parentheses. Regressions weighted by district size. All models include month fixed effects with November as the
reference category. + p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001



                                                                                              62
Figure A1a, b: Marginal predictions of COVID-19 cases per 100,000 by prior case rates excluding
September modality, Michigan




   a) All districts in county shift from remote to in-person.




   b) All districts in county shift from remote to hybrid.



                                                       63
Figure A2: Marginal predictions of COVID-19 cases per 100,000 by prior case rates when combining in-
person and hybrid, Michigan




                                                    64
Figure A3a, b: Marginal predictions of COVID-19 cases per 100,000 by prior case rates under complete
modality shifts and local linear specification, Michigan




   a) All districts in county shift from remote to in-person, 10-case bandwidth




   b) All districts in county shift from remote to hybrid, 10-case bandwidth



                                                      65
Figure A4: Marginal predictions of COVID-19 cases per 100,000 by prior case rates local linear
specification with a 10-case bandwidth, Washington




       All districts in county shift from remote to in-person or hybrid.




                                                        66
