                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES


   GANG RULE: UNDERSTANDING AND COUNTERING CRIMINAL GOVERNANCE

                                        Christopher Blattman
                                          Gustavo Duncan
                                         Benjamin Lessing
                                          Santiago Tobón

                                         Working Paper 28458
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w28458

                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2021


For comments and feedback we thank Ana Arjona, Oriana Bandiera, Abhijit Banerjee, Eli Berman,
Esther Duflo, Leopoldo Fergusson, Danilo Friere, Soeren Henn, Macartan Humphreys, Stephen
Machin, Martin McGuire, Mushfiq Mobarak, Eduardo Montero, Daniel Ortega, Gerard Padró i
Miquel, Pieter Serneels, Jacob Shapiro, Stergios Skaperdas, Tara Lyn Slough, Carlos Schmidt-Padilla,
Maria Micaela Sviatschi, Lucia Tiscornia, Juan Vargas, Maarten Voors, Jeremy Weinstein, Austin
Wright, participants at several seminars and conferences, and Raul Sánchez de la Sierra who was
instrumental in conceptualizing the model. Innovations for Poverty Action coordinated all research
activities. For research assistance we thank David Cerero, Peter Deffebach, Sebastián Hernández,
Sofía Jaramillo, Juan F. Martínez, Juan Pablo Mesa-Mejía, Angie Mondragón, Helena Montoya, José Miguel
Pascual, M. Aránzazu Rodríguez-Uribe, Zachary Tausanovitch, Nelson Matta-Colorado and Martín Vanegas.
We thank the Secretariat of Security of Medellín for their cooperation, especially the former Secretary
of Security Andrés Tobón, as well as Lina Calle and Ana María Corpas. For financial support, we
thank the Centro de Estudios sobre Seguridad y Drogas (CESED) of Universidad de los Andes; the
Peace and Recovery Program (P&R) at Innovations for Poverty Action (IPA); the
PROANTIOQUIA foundation; The National Science Foundation (NSF); the UK Foreign,
Commonwealth & Development Office trough the Crime and Violence Initiative at J-PAL; and the
Economic Development and Institutions Programme (EDI) funded with UK aid from the UK
Government, working in partnership with Oxford Policy Management Limited, University of Namur,
Paris School of Economics and Aide á la Décision Économique. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2021 by Christopher Blattman, Gustavo Duncan, Benjamin Lessing, and Santiago Tobón. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Gang rule: Understanding and Countering Criminal Governance
Christopher Blattman, Gustavo Duncan, Benjamin Lessing, and Santiago Tobón
NBER Working Paper No. 28458
February 2021
JEL No. C93,E26,H11,K42,O17

                                          ABSTRACT

Gangs govern millions worldwide. Why rule? And how do they respond to states? Many argue
that criminal rule provides protection when states do not, and that increasing state services could
crowd gangs out. We began by interviewing leaders from 30 criminal groups in Medellín. The
conventional view overlooks gangs' indirect incentives to rule: governing keeps police out and
fosters civilian loyalty, protecting other business lines. We present a model of duopolistic
competition with returns to loyalty and show under what conditions exogenous changes to state
protection causes gangs to change governance levels. We run the first gang-level field
experiment, intensifying city governance in select neighborhoods for two years. We see no
decrease in gang rule. We also examine a quasi-experiment. New borders in Medellín created
discontinuities in access to government services for 30 years. Gangs responded to greater state
rule by governing more. We propose alternatives for countering criminal governance.

Christopher Blattman                             Benjamin Lessing
Harris School of Public Policy                   Department of Political Science
The University of Chicago                        University of Chicago
1307 E 60th St                                   5828 S. University Ave
Chicago, IL 60637                                Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER                                         blessing@uchicago.edu
blattman@uchicago.edu
                                                 Santiago Tobón
Gustavo Duncan                                   Department of Economics
Department of Political Science                  Universidad EAFIT
Universidad EAFIT                                Carrera 49 N 7 Sur 50
Carrera 49 N 7 Sur 50                            Medellin, Colombia
Medellin, Colombia                               stobonz@eafit.edu.co
gduncan@eafit.edu.co
1       Introduction
Economic and social interactions require security, enforcement of rules, and dispute resolu-
tion. Throughout history, groups specialized in coercion have provided these services, often
extracting taxes, fees, and other rents as well. Some liken the origin of states to organized
crime and the market for protection (Tilly, 1985; Olson, 1993; Grossman, 1996; Acemoglu
and Robinson, 2006; North et al., 2009; Sánchez De La Sierra, 2020).
    Despite the rise of nation-states, people continue to turn to criminal organizations for
protection today. In cities worldwide, street gangs, mafias, and drug cartels commonly
govern civilians and collect taxes. Such criminal governance is prominent in Latin America,
especially Brazil, Central America, Jamaica, Mexico, and Colombia. But we can also find
it in Italy, the United Kingdom, India, South Africa, 19th-century American cities, and
contemporary American prison systems. Hundreds of millions of people currently live under
some form of criminal rule (Arias, 2006; Lessing et al., 2019; Lessing, 2020; Melnikov et al.,
2020).
    What this means is that, in many places, including the most developed countries, states
lack a monopoly on coercion and protection within certain areas. Instead, residents of these
areas live under a duopoly of violence (Skaperdas and Syropoulos, 1997). This papers asks
three questions: How does this duopoly function? What motivates gangs to rule? And what
(if anything) can a government do to diminish it?
    To answer these questions, we study hundreds of gangs in a city. We developed rela-
tionships with dozens of criminal group members and interviewed them about their motives,
operation, and groups. We surveyed city residents to measure state and criminal gover-
nance systematically. These data reveal some unexpected drivers of criminal rule, as well
as possibly unintended consequences of state actions. To test their influence, we identified
quasi-experimental variation in exposure to long-run state services. We also conducted the
first gang-level randomized trial to assess how criminal groups respond to increased projec-
tion of state power.1
    A common view is that criminal governance flourishes in vacuums of state power (Gam-
betta, 1996; Skaperdas, 2001; Skarbek, 2011). A possible policy implication is that states
can crowd out gang rule by improving the quality and reach of their services, eventually
restoring a monopoly on protection and coercion. Our findings challenge this view.
    We do find that protection is a good that gangs provide and charge for in competition
with the state, and that residents view gang and state services as substitutes. The logic
    1
    A Campbell systematic review of anti-gang interventions outside the OECD found that the entirety of
the literature was just four small case studies (Higginson et al., 2015).



                                                  1
of duopolistic competition suggests that gangs thus have market incentives to reduce the
quantity of protection they supply in response to a state increase in governance services.
But gang leaders described powerful countervailing motives. State presence threatens other
illegal activities, like drug selling. Providing order reduces calls for state presence, and fosters
civilian loyalty. This protects the criminal group's other rents.
    As a consequence, state efforts to expand services, crowd out gangs, and establish a
monopoly on protection could have the opposite effect, driving gangs to increase rule. Thus,
criminal governance may be as much a product of state strength as of weakness; in the
presence of lucrative illegal markets (themselves created by state prohibition of drugs and
other activities) criminal groups need to govern more when state presence threatens their
broader rents.
    Our study takes place in Colombia. Medellín, the second-largest city in the country,
is prosperous, collects extensive tax revenues, and provides a considerable range of public
goods and social services to its citizens. Nonetheless, virtually every low- and middle-income
neighborhood in the city is occupied by one of more than 350 small gangs called combos,
and practically every combo engages in at least some governance activities. These include:
prohibiting and punishing property crime, settling disputes between neighbors, enforcing
community rules, and--in exchange--taxing businesses and residents.
    Criminal groups are clandestine and poorly understood, and so we began this study with
large-scale, systematic interviews with criminal organizations. Whereas previous economist-
ethnographer collaborations, such as Levitt and Venkatesh (2000) and Sánchez De la Sierra
and Titeca (2020), gained extraordinary access to a single group, we develop sources in
many groups at a more moderate depth. Over four years we interviewed dozens of leaders,
managers, and foot soldiers in 30 criminal groups on their organization, operations, and rule.
We also interviewed dozens of experts, police, prosecutors, and community leaders.
    We then set out to develop systematic data on gang rule. We used our qualitative
investigations to design a representative, city-wide survey of roughly 7,000 residents and
businesses on their experience of gang and state governance, especially the provision of
protection and the collection of taxes and extortion.
    Together, these data show that, on average, the state is the predominant provider of
protection, but the combo is seldom far behind. In dozens of neighborhoods, the combo is
the leading provider. Indeed, combos choose whether or not to sell protection, and we find
wide variation in the degree to which combos rule within Medellín. Those that do organize
service provision and the collection of modest weekly "security fees" as a business line with
dedicated staff.
    Crucially, we also learned that gang leaders are concerned with maintaining citizen loyalty


                                                 2
and avoiding denunciation to the police. Several explained that they rule less for the direct
profits and more because it protects their retail drug profits. Providing order reduces the
need for routine patrols and special agents to enter the neighborhood. Also, fostering civilian
loyalty reduces the chances citizens inform on them, and increases the chance they help the
combo evade the authorities. In line with this, we find that the degree of combo and state
rule are positively correlated--combos rule more when the state does so.
    Drawing on these stylized facts, we develop a simple model of the relationship between
criminal and state governance. In our lead example, we model the market for protection
as a classic duopoly--two firms selling differentiated but substitutable services. We explore
other approaches, including a model of competing stationary bandits. All these models share
a prediction: if one actor's optimal supply of governance rises, the other's will fall--what
we call "crowding out." This means that exogenous increases in the state's provision of
protection will lead, in equilibrium, to decreases in gang provision, and vice versa. This
logic is consistent with the conventional wisdom--that gang governance flourishes where
states are weak--and the idea that state projections of power can reduce criminal rule.
    To capture the others benefits that gang leaders described, we introduce to the model a
term capturing returns to loyalty, one that depends on relative state­gang rule. The result is
that increases in state protection can drive a strategic response by combos, thus "crowding
in" gang protection. The relative influence of these countervailing forces determines the size
and sign of a crucial comparative static: the optimal response by the gang to increases in
state governance. Whether building state capacity crowds gangs in or out is an empirical
matter.
    To investigate, we assess two efforts to increase state services in Medellín. First, we
evaluate the effects of a decades-long effort to increase state services within a set of newly-
introduced internal city districts. Second, we study a large-scale experiment where the
government heavily intensified state services in a random selection of small neighborhoods.
We see the same striking result in both cases: increased protection and other services from
the state did not crowd out criminal protection. On the contrary, in the longer run quasi-
experiment, we see strong evidence that it crowded in gang rule. The elasticity is the opposite
of what the conventional wisdom, the city government, and we initially expected.
    The quasi-experiment takes advantage of a city bill that in 1987 reorganized the city into
16 large neighborhoods called comunas. Following this, the city expanded policing and some
municipal services (such as local justice and family services) and organized their provision
within these new comunas. Thus, street blocks on either side of the new internal borders
were generally similar in demographic and economic terms, but for the next three decades
were at different distances from their assigned police and municipal headquarters--almost


                                              3
half a kilometer different at the median. We use this border discontinuity to estimate a
causal effect of state proximity.
     We find that being near the state raised services, and that combo rule increased in
reaction. On blocks half a kilometer closer to the state, citizens reported about a fifth more
state services, plus greater state legitimacy. These citizens also reported about a fifth greater
combo rule.
     For the experiment, we found a city-government outreach unit that had been intensely
delivering city services to one neighborhood for several years, with anecdotal success. We
worked with the city to scale it up to 40 out of 80 eligible neighborhoods with strong gang
presence. These neighborhoods were small, usually just a few blocks. For 20 months, the
city intensified attention to these areas roughly five-fold, including: (i) a full-time liaison to
organize and communicate state services, refer people to state agencies, and coordinate city
services to neighborhood needs; and (ii) regular meetings with city officials and agencies.
There was no change in criminal-justice attention or policing strategies. Control neighbor-
hoods received the normal level of city services.
     We see no evidence the intervention reduced gang rule. If anything, the program slightly
reduced perceptions of relative state-combo governance. Partly, the results could reflect the
difficulties of expanding state capacity. Also, it may be hard to change general perceptions
of state responsiveness in the span of just 20 months. But the results are also consistent
with strategic response by combos, moderated perhaps by the fact that the intervention
did not involve police. Either way, the fact remains: even in the neighborhoods where the
intervention worked best, we find that a massive increase in street-level governance services
failed to reduce criminal supply of protection. Our interviews with combo members and
leaders corroborate these two evaluations, further suggesting that state presence provokes a
strategic response by gangs to rule more.
     Thus our results suggest that profits from governance as a business line are not most
gangs' primary motive for rule. Rather, gangs rule in large part to protect themselves from
state repression. This reflects a defining characteristic of criminal governance: it is almost
always embedded within and subject to state power (Lessing, 2020). The conventional wis-
dom, that crime flourishes where the state is weak, overlooks this point, predicting crowding
out. Instead, we see unintended, paradoxical, and frankly vexing policy effects. For example,
while we find that state projection of power did not curtail organized crime, our interviews,
model, and results suggest that it does give gangs strong incentives to win citizen loyalty
through responsive governance and non-extortionary taxation. We discuss some of these
challenges, trade-offs, and policy implications in the paper's conclusion.
     These results fit into a few different literatures. First, economists have begun studying


                                                4
the consequences of criminal rule. Melnikov et al. (2020) show how repressive gangs in San
Salvador restrict local development. In eastern Congo, Sánchez De La Sierra (2020) shows
how criminal warlords can bring a degree of order and prosperity. In this paper we try to
understand why they rule and when they choose to be extractive. Extractive gangs may be
a sign that the government is not competing for control or loyalty.
    Second, the externalities from gang rule parallel a counter-insurgency literature arguing
that rebel groups offer justice and welfare services to capture civilian "hearts and minds."2
This literature argues that military action plus state services can raise state legitimacy and
crowd out insurgents (Berman and Matanock, 2015). Conceivably, however, these armed
groups reacted differently because they have wider areas of operation. Combos have small,
well-defined, traditional territories, which abut those of their rivals. Thus, we might expect
urban gangs to resist localized state presence more strongly than rebels or drug cartels,
since gangs have nowhere else to go. Indeed, Magaloni et al. (2020) find that police crack-
downs in Rio's favelas produced more violence in those favelas where gangs' baseline rule
was strongest. In contrast, organized criminals with a wider base of operations responded
differently. Studying Mexican suppression of drug traffickers, for instance, Dell (2015) finds
that trafficking and violence get displaced to less aggressive municipalities.
    Third, our study complements the broader literature on organized crime in economics.
This literature began with studies of the origins, internal organization, and incentives of these
illegal firms and primitive states (Schelling, 1971; Fiorentini and Peltzman, 1997; Konrad
and Skaperdas, 1998). More recently, there has been a surge of interest in international orga-
nized crime, including the personnel economics and career paths of gang members (Khanna
et al., 2019; Sviatschi, 2018; Carvalho and Soares, 2016); studies of market structure and the
production of violence (Castillo and Kronick, 2020; Brown et al., 2020; Bueno de Mesquita,
2020); the effects of exogenous supply and demand shocks on competition and violence levels
(Castillo et al., 2020; Dube et al., 2016; Sobrino, 2019; Limodio, 2018); and the historical
origins of drug cartels (Murphy and Rossi, 2020). There are also parallels between gangs
strategically increasing rule in response to state presence, and a political economy literature
on how organized criminals influence elections (De Feo and De Luca, 2017; Alesina et al.,
2019; Dal Bó et al., 2006; Acemoglu et al., 2020).
    Finally, methodologically, we demonstrate the usefulness of large-sample qualitative data
in economics, especially in informal and clandestine settings. The field's beliefs about orga-
nized crime are based on possibly unrepresentative groups, especially the Sicilian mafia and
   2
    Berman et al. (2011, 2013); Crost et al. (2016); Beath et al. (2012); Albertus and Kaplan (2013). This is
part of a more widely-studied phenomenon of insurgent governance, when rebels try to foster civilian support
not in a contest for illicit rents but for control of the state itself (Arjona, 2016; Kasfir, 2015).



                                                     5
                Table 1: Interviews and focus groups by type of respondent

                                                                  Total # of    # of interviews   Total
                               Respondent type
                                                                 participants   & focus groups    hours
                                 Incarcerated subjects:
                                    Active or former combo           24               32           45
                                    Active or former razón           12               19           27
                                    Other illegal organization        3                3            2
             Criminal actors     Subjects outside prison:
                                    Active combo member              12              20           22
                                    Former combo member              11              16           16
                                    Active razón member               3               7            9
                                    Active faction member             1               1            2
                                    Other illegal organization        4               4            6
                                 Member                              133             136           71
               Community
                                 Leader                               14             18            14
                                 Criminal group experts                9             12            14
                Experts
                                 Other                                 1              1            1
                                 City officials                      14               15           12
                 Public
                                 Police (active or former)            13              15           18
                servants
                                 Prosecutor (active or former)        3               7           12
                 Total                                               257             306          271




one Chicago gang. Many economists already do informal qualitative work. We illustrate
the importance of rigorous qualitative methods and ethnographer-economist collaborations.
Many of our most important insights, our theory, the intervention design, and the interpre-
tation of results all come directly from thorough, large-sample, systematically chosen and
documented interviews and observation. Multi-method investigations such as this one are
essential to understanding, regulating, and reducing complex problems like organized crime.
    Section 2 describes the data and our qualitative methodology in more detail, Section 3
the context and our descriptive analysis of gang rule, Section 4 our illustrative model, Section
5 the quasi-experiment, Section 6 the field experiment, and Section 7 concludes.


2     Data and methods
2.1    Qualitative interviews
We interviewed 70 criminal leaders and members across 30 groups. This includes 17 combos
as well as 13 higher-level, mafia-like organizations called razones, discussed below. Table
1 lists respondents by type and total interview length. Our highest-ranking sources are
deputies to the most powerful crime bosses in the city. Most are lower in the hierarchy.
Our interviews collected information on group history; territory; business lines; civilian
governance; internal organization and performance incentives; career paths and exit options;
inter-group relations; and violent conflicts.
    This is a convenience sample of criminal actors who were willing to speak. We conducted

                                                          6
roughly half the interviews in prisons, typically in a wing reserved for high- and middle-
ranking criminals. Most continue to run their group's activities while imprisoned. In the
beginning, prison wardens announced that anyone who would like to meet with university
professors could meet us at a particular room and time. Following this, our sources might or
might not continue to make appointments. Some referred us to additional sources. Because
the prison affords little privacy, most interviews took place in public areas, out of earshot
from most inmates or prison guards, but in public view, usually for 1­3 hours.
    Eventually, we developed criminal contacts outside of prison. In contrast to the self-
assured, accessible, and surprisingly candid leaders in prison, we found it difficult to speak
to outside members, especially lower-ranking ones. Besides being more vulnerable (some
are fugitives), they also often seemed to lack the experience, power, and confidence to feel
safe speaking with academics. To improve access, we hired the city's main organized-crime
journalist as a consultant, to provide introductions as well as conduct his own interviews and
analysis. We also hired a government gang outreach worker (himself a former razón member
and former prison gang leader), who became a full-time research associate. He conducted
structured interviews with criminal subjects in his personal network.
    We believe our subjects spoke to us for several reasons. In prison, our interviews offered
subjects a respite from routine and a chance to exhibit their expertise and insights. Interviews
also posed little risk, since most subjects had already been prosecuted for the criminal
activities they described. They were generally flattered by academic attention, and many
harbored hopes of being the subject of books. Finally, some explained that with the end of
Colombia's civil conflict, they expected the government to turn to organized criminal groups
with renewed intensity. They hope for a "peace process" that involves sometimiento--
submission to justice and a surrender of some of their gains in exchange for a path to exit.
They may have believed our research could facilitate this. Few policymakers understand what
the gangs actually do, how they govern, and how influential they are. Thus, some criminal
leaders viewed our study as reducing asymmetric information and facilitating negotiation.
We accepted the possibility of playing this role only because we felt it was small, and because
on balance it should reduce the possibility of state-gang violence.
    Finally, we also interviewed local crime experts, members of the Metropolitan Police and
the Attorney General's office, and also obtained confidential internal law-enforcement re-
ports. Our research assistants conducted more than 153 interviews with community leaders
and members in around 108 neighborhoods, mainly on the subject of citizen interactions with
organized criminals and use of their services and governing activities. We also returned dur-
ing the coronavirus pandemic (and city-wide lockdown) to interview criminal group members
and community leaders about gang governance during the crisis.


                                               7
Ethics and human subjects protections We had several strategies for maintaining
trust, safety, and confidentiality of criminal group members. Above all, we were transparent
about our research aims, that we were speaking to other groups and the government, and
that we advise the civilian government (but not the criminal justice system). With prison
populations, of course, special care to obtain meaningful consent is essential. We took great
efforts to ensure that our interviewees faced no pressure to speak to us. In prison, however,
it is worth noting that our subjects are shrewd and powerful businessmen who in many
respects are in control of their decisions and lives in the prison, if not the prison itself. With
all our subjects, we also made every effort to preserve anonymity and confidentiality, while
advising subjects in consent scripts of the potential limits to our ability to do so.
    We consulted extensively with the University of Chicago and Universidad EAFIT human
subjects committees, and we obtained written support and assurances of noninterference
from the Mayor, the national head of the prison system, and the Colombian Minister of
Justice. We also consulted with multiple journalists who specialize in organized crime, who
related that they had never been asked by the criminal justice system to betray sources or
materials. For this reason, in practice, we believed that speaking to us carried minimal risks
to the leaders. Nonetheless, our consent scripts explicitly highlighted those risks.

Qualitative methods Amidst the large and growing amount of fieldwork and primary
data collection in economics, informal qualitative research is now widespread. Though they
seldom discuss it explicitly, today economists probably do more interviews and observation
than ever before. A challenge with unstructured and unsystematic data, however, is that it
is often confined to small samples, is not systematically documented or analyzed, and hence
is subject to common biases of selection, recall, and salience. Just as there have been high
returns to rigorous quantitative methods, there are surely advantages to better qualitative
work, especially in informal economies, corrupt politics, armed groups, and crime.
    There is, of course, an extensive anthropology and sociology literature that does pre-
cisely this, but much of this work rejects conventional economic theory.3 We show how to
combine systematic primary qualitative data with formal methods. Other examples, mainly
using secondary sources, include case studies of the Sicilian mafia (Gambetta, 1996), New
York mafia (Reuter, 1983), pirates (Leeson, 2007), and prison gangs (Skarbek, 2014; Less-
ing, 2017). Examples using primary materials include studies of a defunct Chicago gang
(Levitt and Venkatesh, 2000), corrupt Congolese traffic police (Sánchez De la Sierra and
Titeca, 2020), participant observations of US gangs (Sanchez-Jankowski, 1991), and records
   3
   Notable exceptions include a number of qualitative investigations of informal (not illicit) markets and
communities (e.g., Bliss and Stern, 1982; Ensminger, 1996; Venkatesh, 2006).



                                                    8
of Brazil's Primeiro Comando da Capital (Lessing and Denyer Willis, 2019).
    We formed a collaboration between two economists and two ethnographers of crime, also
employing a journalist and former razón member. We developed semi-structured interview
guides, and adjusted them over time to investigate and informally test hypotheses and claims
as we developed them. We recorded and transcribed these interviews when possible. When
not possible, especially in prison, we took detailed notes and immediately wrote up the notes
after the interview. We also sought to verify our observations with multiple sources. For
most topics we discuss we have 2­3 sources between gang members and experts.
    To organize the vast number of interviews, we created a private encrypted wiki we call
WikiCombo. A collaborative wiki was a good fit for the networked, non-linear nature of
the data, especially when collected by several contributors. We uploaded and encrypted
all primary and secondary sources. We created inter-linked pages on key research themes,
individual combos and people, neighborhoods, events such as conflicts, and so forth. Factual
claims are linked directly to original transcripts. Every text change and its contributor is
tracked and is reversible. Finally, the wiki is an ongoing collaborative tool and sources
consented to have their anonymous comments shared with other researchers.


2.2    Survey data and measurement strategies
In 2019 we surveyed nearly 7,000 residents and businesses on the degree of state and combo
rule, the perceived legitimacy of both, and levels of taxation and payments to combos. The
survey was representative of all 223 low- and middle-income neighborhoods in Medellín, plus
nine neighborhoods bordering Medellín in other municipalities (see Figure 1). We randomly
sampled 2,347 of the city's 14,600 blocks, stratified by neighborhood, then randomly sampled
approximately four households and one business on each block.

Addressing measurement error Naturally, we are concerned that citizens may misre-
port gang activities. They may feel uncomfortable talking to outsiders or embarrassed to
admit the role of the combo. If so, then the descriptive statistics below would underestimate
the role and legitimacy of the combo.
    Combos are a routine part of everyday life, however. We also refined survey questions
after dozens of qualitative interviews, fine-tuning language, questions, and approach to elicit
truthful answers. We conducted all interviews anonymously and in private, typically indoors.
In the context of a secret interview, we believe most respondents answered questions freely
and truthfully. Three analyses are consistent with this conclusion.
    First, we can compare some of our measures against prior surveys to judge the efficacy
of our approach. The city has run surveys in the past on "security fees" paid to the combo.

                                              9
          Figure 1: Combo census: Estimated locations, with barrio income level

                                               Bello
                  N                                                   Economic strata
                                                                        1
                                                                        2
                                                                        3
                                                                        4
                                                                        5
                                                                        Missing

                                                                        Non-residential or high-income

                                                                       Estimated combo location




                                Itagüí
                                         0.0           2.5   5.0 km




City-wide, 19% of our business respondents and 7% of residents report making payments,
with negligible non-response. A city survey conducted earlier in the same year found a 13%
payment rate for households, with massive incompleteness.
    Second, we used a survey experiment to assess under-reporting in security fee payment.
We asked some respondents directly whether they paid; others we used a randomized-
response technique, where they privately flipped a coin and responded to the question
honestly or not depending on the flip. In other contexts, this method has detected under-
reporting of sensitive behaviors. We see no differences in payment rates between the tech-
niques, however (see Appendix A), suggesting people did not misreport it.
    Third, we found that people who appeared not to want to talk about gang rule or security
fees often said "I don't know" or pass on answering that question. Just 7% of the sample
answered in that fashion. If this were driven by worries about the combo, we might expect
a correlation between combo governance and the proportion of questions unanswered. We
see no such relationship (see Appendix A).


3    Descriptive analysis and context
Gangs are generally clandestine organizations with obscure operations and motives. In order
to develop theories of gang organization and rule, to understand their relationship to the
state, and to evaluate programs, we must first establish some basic facts. While case studies


                                                  10
of gangs and gang rule abound, we know of no prior systematic data collection on a large
sample of comparable gangs. This descriptive analysis shapes the theory and the empirical
results to follow, and is an equally important part of the analysis.


3.1    The state
Medellín has 2.4 million people, with 3.7 million in the metro area. Per capita annual
income is roughly $11,500, adjusted for purchasing power parity. The city is divided into 16
urban comunas plus 5 peri-urban corregimientos. The comunas are formally divided into 269
neighborhoods or barrios. Each barrio has an elected community council to manage various
aspects of community affairs.
    Medellín has a well-organized, professional bureaucracy with high fiscal capacity and
broad-based public services. With a huge commercial sector, the city has ample revenues.
Two organizations are responsible for order: the police and the Secretariat of Security.
    The Secretariat is a large civilian organization with thousands of staff. It sits directly
beneath the Mayor and is the city's primary organization for setting security policy and
investing in security infrastructure. It provides numerous services to residents, including
responding to various emergencies and street disorder, directly resolving community disputes
and domestic violence, and regulating the use of public space across the city.
    The Metropolitan Police are independent from the city government; they are part of
the National Police, a branch of the Defense Ministry. While there are common charges of
corruption and poor responsiveness, the National Police is fairly professionalized, particularly
in comparison with other Latin American countries. There are 280 officers per 100,000 people
in Medellín, similar to cities like Los Angeles. That said, street cops are greatly outnumbered:
there are roughly a dozen combo members for every poorly-paid officer.


3.2    Combo organization and operations
Virtually every low- and middle-income residential neighborhood has a local combo, and
nearly every combo governs to some extent the civilians within its territory. Our 2019 combo
census identified 380 active combos, 354 in Medellín and the rest in the wider metropolitan
area (see Appendix B). Figure 1 displays estimated main locations.
    We have detailed organizational data on seven combos. Almost all of these have a core
of 15 to 40 permanent, salaried members (one has nearly 100, but this is unusual). The
combo territories we observe are sometimes no more than a few square blocks, but borders
are usually long-standing, well-defined, and known to most locals. Combos also tend to be
long-lived. Many have been present for decades in some form, as younger generations take

                                              11
over from older ones. While there are of course changes in the size, territory, names, and
even existence of some combos, most in our sample have been relatively stable over the last
decade at least, and our broader interviews suggest this is true of most combos.
    Combo revenues come from four main sources. Practically every combo has a local
monopoly on retail drug sales in their neighborhood, which occur at defined locales known
as plazas de vicio. This is typically their most profitable activity. A large number also
charge a security fee known as a vacuna ("vaccine") to at least some residents and businesses,
typically in return for protection services (discussed at length below). About a third also
engage in a local loan-sharking practice known as gota a gota ("drop by drop"), according
to the survey. Finally, many combos collect debts for a fee, and also manage, regulate, or
participate in local consumer goods markets, such as cooking gas, arepas, and eggs.
    A companion paper describes the personnel economics and market structure of the com-
bos (Blattman et al., 2020). Members tend to be poor, uneducated young men aged 15 to 35.
Almost all were born and grew up in the neighborhood they control, and most still live there.
Even low-ranking combo members tend to be well-paid, earning a salary equal to the median
salary in the city. They are headed by a leader called a coordinador. In general, combos are
organized internally by product or service line. Combo members are paid a salary for their
role. Other business lines, such as consumer goods sales and loan-sharking, are often given
to individual combo members as a personal, local monopoly to operate and exploit. These
are key sources of entrepreneurial side income for combo members (Giraldo et al., 2014).
    Most combos are small and autonomous; horizontal integration across neighborhoods is
rare. In our companion paper, we argue that while such integration increases monopoly
rents and mitigates inter-combo conflict, it also exposes combos to prosecution and requires
managerial capacities that many combos lack.
    Finally, Medellín's combos form the base of a pyramid of criminal organization. Above
them are roughly 17 mafia-like groups sometimes called razones. Razones are typically the
wholesale suppliers of drugs to the combos' street retail operations. Most combos have
a longstanding business and military alliance with a razón. A small number of combos
are vertically integrated into their razón. For the most part, however, combos are small
autonomous firms with a long-term relational contract with the razón as their supplier.


3.3    Combo governance
A central component of governance is protection: order, security, and property rights enforce-
ment. Many of Medellín's combos provide these services, often on a private, fee-for-service
basis. Examples include dispute resolution, informal contract enforcement, recovering stolen


                                             12
items, and private security for stores, vehicles, and other property. The gangs also provide
less excludable, public forms of protection, often in exchange for taxes, including regulating
fights, disorderly conduct, and drug consumption on their blocks. At least one combo even
installed security cameras for a time. Even these more public goods, however, are partially
excludable. For instance, combos often focus their public protection on blocks where they
already have many private customers. Some provide hotlines to those paying security fees.
    Of course, governance also includes material public goods such as infrastructure, as well as
collective decision-making and coordination. Our interviews and surveys found that combos
rarely offer such services. Infrastructure is provided almost solely by the state, while informal
leaders and elected neighborhood councils manage most local collective decisions. Instead,
combos tend to specialize in services that are at least partially excludable, and those that
benefit from coercive power. In the remainder of the paper, we use "governance" as shorthand
for this set of protection services in which both gang and state participate.

Levels and variation of governance To measure governance, we asked residents how
frequently each actor responded to 17 common disputes and forms of disorder (12 from
residents and 5 from business-owners). We identified these through our qualitative work.
Table 2 reports scaled responses, where 0 = Never, 0.33 = Occasionally, 0.66 = Frequent,
1 = Always. We create average indexes of State and Combo governance (0 to 1), as well as
the difference between them, Relative state governance, which can vary from ­1 to 1.
    The average response for any service by either provider was seldom greater than 0.5,
suggesting that for residents, neither the state nor the combo are reliably responsive to dis-
putes and disturbances. In absolute terms, combo response levels were highest for addressing
unpaid debts, property crimes (car thefts, home robberies, muggings, etc.), and public dis-
turbances (threats and fights on the street). Combo involvement was somewhat lower for
inter-neighbor disputes such as noise complaints and property infringements. In relative
terms, combo response was generally lower than the state's, but higher in five situations:
muggings and theft prevention, business and household debt collection, and kids fighting.
    These averages conceal much variation across neighborhoods. In some, the combo is the
dominant provider of protection. Figure 2 maps relative state governance by barrio. Note,
however, that high levels of state governance do not imply combos are absent. Nearly every
neighborhood has a strong combo presence, running drug corners and other operations. It
may be that they have simply chosen not to sell private protection in those neighborhoods.4
   4
    We examine correlates of state and combo governance in Appendix Table D.1. Not surprisingly, larger
youth populations are associated with greater relative combo rule. Also, as expected, we see lower combo
rule in middle income neighborhoods compared to lower-income ones. We also see less combo rule in areas
close to the city center, which leaders told us was too dense and valuable for any one group to control. Also,


                                                     13
     Table 2: State and combo governance and legitimacy, barrio survey averages, 2019

                                                                   Frequency/Rate (0-1 Scale)        Relative State
                                                                      State          Combo            Governance
                                                                 Estimate SD Estimate SD              Difference
                                                                    (1)     (2)     (3)      (4)          (5)
        Governance Index                                           0.41     0.27     0.33     0.29        0.08
         How often they intervene when:
            HH: Someone is making noise                            0.42     0.38     0.19     0.30        0.23
            HH: Home improvements affect neighbors                 0.41     0.37     0.24     0.33        0.16
            HH: There is domestic violence                         0.50     0.37     0.33     0.37       0.16
            Biz: Someone disturbs a business                       0.50     0.38     0.36     0.38        0.14
            HH: Two drunks fight on the street                     0.52     0.36     0.39     0.37        0.13
            Biz: You have to react to a robbery                    0.53     0.37     0.39     0.39        0.13
            Biz: It is necessary to prevent a theft                0.46     0.36     0.37     0.39        0.09
            Biz: Businesses in this sector are robbed              0.43     0.39     0.35     0.38        0.07
            HH: A car or motorbike is stolen                       0.47     0.37     0.41     0.38        0.05
            HH: People smoking marijuana near children             0.30     0.36     0.25     0.36        0.05
            HH: You have to react to a robbery                     0.46     0.36     0.44     0.38        0.02
            HH: Someone is threatening someone else                0.41     0.36     0.40     0.37        0.01
            HH: Someone is mugged on the street                    0.39     0.36     0.40     0.38       -0.01
            HH: It is necessary to prevent a theft                 0.39     0.36     0.41     0.38       -0.02
            HH: Kids fight on the street                           0.28     0.35     0.31     0.36       -0.03
            Biz: Someone does not want to pay a debt               0.18     0.31     0.24     0.35       -0.06
            HH: Someone refuses to pay a big debt                  0.21     0.31     0.36     0.37       -0.16

        Legitimacy Index                                           0.57     0.21     0.43     0.28        0.14
          When solving problems in the neighborhood:
            How much do you trust the...                           0.57     0.30     0.36     0.36        0.21
            How fair is the...                                     0.55     0.27     0.41     0.35        0.14
            How much do your neighbors trust the...                0.57     0.28     0.47     0.36        0.10
            How would your neighbors trust the...                  0.59     0.23     0.50     0.29        0.09
            How do you rate the...                                 0.60     0.22     0.51     0.28        0.09
       Notes: The survey is representative of Medellín 's 224 low- and middle-income barrios, with 20­25 respondents
       per barrio. Governance scales correspond to: 0 = Never, 0.33 = Occasionally, 0.66 = Frequently, 1 = Always.
       Legitimacy scales correspond to: 0 = Nothing, 0.33 = A little, 0.66 = Somewhat, 1 = Very.



Legitimacy We also asked residents (but not business owners) about combo and state
legitimacy: how much residents trust each actor; whether actors were fair; whether residents
were satisfied with each actor; and whether residents thought their neighbors trust and are
satisfied with each actor. We averaged these responses into unit indexes for state and combo
legitimacy. Table 2 reports barrio averages. On average, residents rate their trust and
satisfaction of the combo lower than the state, although the difference is not always large.
Not surprisingly, there is a tight correspondence between combo governance and legitimacy.
Figure 3 illustrates this, plotting combo legitimacy against combo governance.
contrary to conventional wisdom, steep settlements high on the slopes of the mountainsides do not have
more gang rule, nor do newer neighborhoods or high-immigration places (often places that were informal
slums for a long stretch of the late 20th century). We have to take these correlations with caution, however,
as they may be biased. For example, we do not see a strong correlation between proximity to state services
and relative state governance. Yet, in the quasi-experiment below, we will see evidence of causal effects.



                                                            14
                      Figure 2: Relative state governance by barrio, 2019
                                                                                -0.40 to -0.30
                              N                                                 -0.30 to -0.20
                                                   Bello                        -0.20 to -0.10
                                                                                -0.10 to 0.00
                                                                                0.00 to 0.10
                                                                                0.10 to 0.20
                                                                                0.20 to 0.30
                                                                                0.30 to 0.40
                                                                                0.40 to 0.50
                                                                                0.50 to 0.60

                                                                           20

                                                                           15

                                                                           10

                                                                           5

                                                                           0
                                                                                  -0.2     0      0.2      0.4

                                                                                Estimated combo location

                                                                                Non-residential or high-income

                                                                                Comuna borders

                                   Itagüí


                                             0.0            2.5   5.0 km


      Notes: Each barrio's value is the average relative state governance (state­combo governance index)
  for all 17 items from Table 2. We did not survey high-income barrios.


Efficacy Combos also outperform state agents in some respects: 67% of survey respondents
said the combo was easy to contact compared to 63% for the police and 32% for the Mayor's
office. They also said the combo responded rapidly 58% of the time compared to 41% for
the police and 27% for the Mayor's office.
    This is not entirely surprising. With the exception of the police, the city's street-level
bureaucrats are rarely available outside of business hours; offices are closed on Colombia's
frequent holidays; and due to peculiarities in municipal budgeting and labor agreements,
every December to January a large proportion of city staff on contracts are not working.
The combo, by contrast, is always present.
    Combos also have several other advantages. They have more local knowledge and deeper
networks than state bureaucrats, and even local police. Community leaders have similar
information advantages, but combos have organized means of coercion (acquired, perhaps,
to protect other business lines like the drug trade). Finally, like these other actors, combos
possess decades of governing experience.
    Combos also differentiate their services from competitors in other ways. Combos can
carry out swift and sometimes violent sanctions that some residents demand, such as ex-
pelling an abusive husband from the neighborhood. Also, whereas the state and community
leaders are expected to be impartial and consistent, combos sometimes resolve disputes and


                                                           15
          Figure 3: Relationship between combo governance and combo legitimacy, 2019

                                                           1




                                                           .8




                                  Combo legitimacy index
                                                           .6




                                                           .4




                                                           .2




                                                           0
                                                                0   .2        .4        .6        .8   1
                                                                         Combo governance index


       Notes: Each dot is a barrio average, and the dotted line indicates fitted values. We did not survey
                                              high-income barrios.


enforce contracts in favor of those who hire them or who are most closely connected.
    These comparative advantages and differentiated products help explain why many resi-
dents report they are happy to have access to both the combo and the state for protection.
Just 46% of survey respondents agreed to the question that the neighborhood would be bet-
ter off without the combo. Elaborating, some said they feared the vacuum of authority that
might open up without this local actor. Others were simply satisfied with the work of the
muchachos ("local boys"), a common term for combo members.


3.4        Why do combos govern?
Our interviews point to three important motives: (i) direct revenues from protection as a
business line; (ii) indirect benefits of governance on other business lines, especially drug
retailing; and (iii) intrinsic rewards from ruling.

Motive 1: Protection as a business line First, for some combos, protection services
are an important business line that yields significant revenue. For services such as debt
collection or dispute resolution, combos commonly charge on a fee-for-service basis.5
   5
   As one community leader told us: "If a couple starts fighting, they [the gang] come to a kind of trial
and fine them. It is the same with the problems between neighbors; they set fines of 100,000 [pesos]" --
Community Leader 14/14, interview 1/1 [08/06/2020]. Another leader explained how "if you fight with
someone, regardless of whether you provoked it or not, you must pay between 100,000 and 500,000 [pesos],
depending on how serious the fight is. They decide what price to impose. There are also fines for theft. For


                                                                               16
        Figure 4: Relationship between gang governance and vacuna payments, 2019

                                                                              1




                               Proportion reporting security fees in barrio
                                                                              .8




                                                                              .6




                                                                              .4




                                                                              .2




                                                                              0
                                                                                   0   .2        .4        .6        .8   1
                                                                                            Combo governance index


    Notes: Each dot is a barrio average, and the dotted line indicates fitted values. We did not survey
                                           high-income barrios.


    Revenues from other services, such as security and protection for homes and shops, are
akin to semi-voluntary taxes or a subscription. Residents and businesses typically call this
tax a pago por la vigilancia ("security" or "surveillance fee") or, more colloquially, a va-
cuna --literally, a vaccine. Among the combos where we have internal organization data,
most organize vacuna collection and protection services as a specialized unit with dedicated
staff. The manager of this business line generally reports directly to the coordinador, and is
sometimes referred to as a relacionista, or relationship manager.6
    Most combos tax only a fraction of local businesses and residents. In our survey, 85%
reported that the combo charges vacunas in their neighborhood, typically weekly. But within
these communities, only a quarter of businesses and a tenth of residents reported being
charged this tax themselves. Figure 4 shows that the share of people who report that they
or others in the neighborhood pay regular security fees is strongly positively correlated with
combo governance levels--close to the 45 degree line. (Our survey experiment, discussed in
Section 2.2 above, suggests these reporting rates are roughly accurate.)
    Vacunas are also modest. Among those who pay, median weekly amounts were about
US$1 for residents and US$2 for businesses--roughly 3% of business profits and 1% of sales
example, something that happens a lot: a neighbor steals some plants from me, so she must buy or return
those plants and also pay the fine to them. The price of the fine depends on what was stolen." --Community
Leader 4/14, interview 1/2 [02/22/2020].
   6
     As a typical example, one combo member told us how in his group, "Three people are in charge of business
collection. Two of them collect in one zone and one of them in another. What they collect is delivered to
the coordinator who they work for." -- Criminal Group Leader 1/29, interview 2/6 [09/20/2019].


                                                                                                  17
at the median. By comparison, municipal taxes on these enterprises are about 6% of profits.
Identifying a tax rate seemed to be relatively straightforward. Typically, a junior member of
the relacionista staff observes a business for a few days, using the store characteristics and
counting the number of customers per day to select an appropriate tax rate.
    It's important not to exaggerate the voluntary nature of the vacuna. While in some places
they are voluntarily paid, and in others they are an obligatory but generally-accepted tax, in
some neighborhoods they resemble outright extortion. About half of respondents reported
that refusing to pay the vacuna would result in threats or assaults. At the same time, that
implies half did not expect coercion. 45% said that the combo would simply stop providing
them security. Also, just 27% of businesses said that vacunas were too high, compared to
the 54% who said that city taxes were too high. It is commonplace for residents to express
support for the boys, and acknowledge the important role they play. As mentioned above,
about half think the neighborhood would be worse off without them.

Motive 2: Indirect impacts on other business lines A second and potentially even
more important motive for governing is that it helps protect the gang's physical security and
illicit income from competitors and, perhaps more importantly, police.
     First, providing order wins the loyalty of residents. Loyal residents rarely inform on
combos to police, and may even actively protect them from police repression. Numerous
combo leaders made this point: "The community shields you according to your behavior...
If you do not have the community in your hands and your back, you have nothing. That is
who takes care of you."7 As another explained, "Caring for the neighbors gives a criminal
more security. When the community feels comfortable and grateful, they open their houses,
so that if you have to hide from the police, the community is going to welcome you. The
community goes out to defend you."8 In another case, asked about the benefits of governing,
one member responded, "[T]hat the neighbors love us, do not rat us out to the tombos
[cops], watch us doing our stuff and do not interfere, and let us know when the police are
coming."9 Finally, as one public prosecutor told us, "They're very interested in winning over
the community. That's why it's so hard to get witnesses against them."10
     Moreover, providing local order may directly reduce police presence. As one combo leader
put it, "There is a good relationship with the people," and therefore, "it is easier to bring
order in the sector and so the police do not have to come around."11 When police patrol
  7
    Criminal Group Leader 13/29, interview 1/2 [05/02/2019].
  8
    Criminal Group Member 6/31, interview 2/3 [02/11/2020].
  9
    Criminal Group Member 8/31, interview 1/1 [12/30/2020].
 10
    Official 12/13, interview 1/5 [10/16/2019].
 11
    Criminal Group Member 6/31, interview 2/3 [02/11/2020].



                                                 18
or respond to service calls, it can scare off drug buyers, require a bribe to the officers, or
increase the risk of a seizure. If crime and disorder are high, moreover, local police feel
pressure from superiors to crack down. One active combo member offered a vivid example:
"The police station is across from our headquarters and they never bother us. They know
where our drug corners are and who works there. That's why it's important to keep the
neighborhood calm: if nothing bad happens, the police don't squeeze us and let us work."12
    Combos are especially worried about new or specialized police units in their territory.
As one expert and former prison-gang leader explained, "there is always a police presence,
but combos strike non-interference deals with the regular beat cops. When public order gets
disrupted, the police must act and officers not part of the deal arrive. The area becomes
visible and combos' activities become more vulnerable."13 This suggests that even where
bribery is part of how combos avoid police repression, governance can play a key supporting
role, by avoiding the attention of less-corrupt police as well.
    While our interviews suggest that combos mainly defend against the state, they also
face rival criminal-market entrants, and the benefits of establishing loyalty extend to inter-
gang conflict as well. Even where combos enjoy firm local monopolies on crime and extortion,
they must defend these against local coups, neighboring combos, and their respective razones
(which could invade or sponsor a coup from combo or non-combo youth from the neighbor-
hood). Residents' loyalty can mitigate these threats, while dissatisfaction with local combo
rule could lead to collaboration with rivals. These events appear rare in equilibrium, but
combo leaders' wariness suggests that their rarity may well be due to vigilant deterrence.
    These motives--fostering civilian loyalty and preventing police and rival entry--may
explain some of the patterns we observe in the protection market:

      · Even though combos have the coercive power to extract higher sums, the tax itself
        is modest. Only a quarter of our survey respondents said it is "too high." It may
        also explain low rates of tax incidence in some neighborhoods, including the fact that
        combo rule and vacunas decrease as distance to the gang grows (Appendix Table D.1).

      · Few of the combo leaders we spoke to saw protection as a highly profitable business line,
        and some said they provided the service at a discount because of the indirect benefits.
        One former gang member described fees and fines for dispute-resolution services as a
        way to limit demand and deter disputes, rather than as money-making strategy.14

      · Combos avoid charging businesses whose ability to pay is low or whose loyalty is more
 12
    Criminal Group Member 5/31, interview 1/2 [10/09/2019].
 13
    Criminal Group Leader 24/29, interview 5/5 [12/14/2020].
 14
    Criminal Group Leader 24/29, interview 5/5 [12/14/2020].


                                                 19
         fragile. For instance, when asked why some grocers were targeted and others were not,
         one combo member explained that some were more likely to denounce the combo to
         the police if pressed to pay, and it is better to keep the population loyal.15 Another
         explained that "There is no fixed fee; it is voluntary." He described how, when a new
         business opens, the combo talks to the owner and agrees on the weekly vacuna based
         on the size and type of business. If the business is doing badly, however, the combo
         does not demand payment. "We are here to help," he explained.16

       · Finally, this indirect motive also help explain the relatively extreme extortion of bus
         lines. Almost every combo with a passenger bus route in their territory charges drivers
         steep fees in return for little to no services. Bus lines are small, cash-heavy businesses
         with many small owners. Most importantly, both drivers and owners come from outside
         the combo's territory, and residents do not pay much attention to bus extortion.17

In short, all aspects of the protection business, from extortion to semi-voluntary vacuna
taxation to fee-for-service provision, are disciplined by a need for the loyalty of local residents.

Motive 3: Intrinsic rewards Finally, power, authority, and the loyalty of subjects can
be their own reward. Some combo leaders reported taking pride in ruling, or simply enjoying
the status and moral legitimacy it offers. As one said, "Personally, doing good work feels
good. You can be the worst bandit, but you can also have a good heart of your own."18
    Some also describe governance as a moral obligation or social duty to their community.
Many combos emerged in the 1980s as local defense forces fighting left-wing militias affiliated
with rural guerrilla movements. Today, most gangs in Medellín retain a socially conservative
and anti-communist ideology. Many of the leaders we met saw themselves as responsible for
upholding moral codes, protecting women and girls, and preserving conservative social mores.
Others described themselves as critical "anti-subversivos "--bulwarks against socialism. They
resent the lack of recognition of their contribution to Colombia's civil war.
    Finally, combos may derive utility from the status that their authority confers. In ad-
dition to pride and any appreciation of community respect, some of our interviews suggest
respected combos may enjoy easier access to women.
  15
     Criminal Group Leader 23/29, interview 2/2 [12/28/2020].
  16
     Criminal Group Leader 1/29, interview 1/6 [06/20/2019].
  17
     As an aside, buses pass through many territories, and combos have solved the common pool resource
problem by developing a collective norm whereby the combo at the bus' point of origin holds extortion rights.
  18
     Criminal Group Member 6/31, interview 2/3 [02/11/2020].




                                                     20
4      Conceptual framework
To guide our analysis and interpretation of results, we develop a simple model to understand
how gangs will respond to an increase in state capacity and services. We first model them as
competing to provide private goods, choosing a fixed qi to produce and letting prices clear
the market--Cournot competition. We then consider other forms of competition, including
models of stationary bandits competing to provide public goods.19


4.1     Example of Cournot competition
Consider a gang g and a state s offering distinct but substitutable protection services to
residents in quantities qg and qs at a constant marginal cost of production ci . We can write
each organization i's utility function as:

                                            Vi = p i q i - c i q i                                    (1)

Price is determined by a linear inverse demand curve, pi = ai - qi - qj , where   (0, 1]
implies the two services are substitutes, and  > 0 implies downward-sloping demand.
    We are interested in whether gang rule is crowded in or out when there is an exogenous
                               q
increase in state governance: qg . We derive each organization's best response function, their
                                s
                               
equilibrium values of qg and qs , and this comparative static in Appendix C, showing that:

                                               
                                              qg     
                                                 =-                                                   (2)
                                              qs    2

So long as the two services are not complements, this comparative static implies that increases
in one duopolist's supply of protection will reduce the other's--i.e. "crowding out."
    Initially, we supposed this standard view was correct, and we set out to evaluate two
interventions to assess whether the cross-elasticity was small or large. The experimental and
quasi-experimental results that follow, however, show an absence of crowding out, and even
evidence of crowding in. Thus, here we focus on potential reasons why.
  19
    Note that Cournot fits some of our stylized facts well--especially that governing requires investments
and advanced commitments, and that it is hard to adjust output capacity quickly. In modeling duopolistic
competition, however, note that we abstract away from competition between combos. We do this in part
because gangs are insulated from territorial competition by the razones, who protect gang property rights.




                                                     21
4.2     Additional benefits to governing
Gang leaders described additional benefits to governing--and especially to winning civilians'
loyalty--beyond the money it brings in as a business line. We summarize these diverse
motives by adding a single, stylized term, (qi , qj )i , to the players' objective functions:

                                      Vi = pi qi - ci qi + (qi , qj )i                            (3)

Set up this way, i is the return to full control of the neighborhood. For example, g includes
the illicit rents from unimpeded retail drug sales, but it also includes non-material benefits,
such as status, access to women, and other intrinsic rewards from loyalty and rule. The
state has its own distinct s in the form of electoral rewards, achievement of policy aims, or
preferences for dominance and citizen loyalty.
    Meanwhile, (·) scales each organization's ability to capture, retain, or enjoy these ben-
efits. We can think of it as the share of i each player enjoys, one that is increasing in own
governance and decreasing in the other's, such that:  (q     qi ,qj )
                                                                      > 0 >  (
                                                                             qj
                                                                               qi ,qj )
                                                                                        . Importantly,
                                                               i
however, we remain agnostic here about whether (·) exhibits increasing or decreasing re-
turns to own and other's governance provision.
    The elasticity of gang governance to state governance now becomes:
                                               
                                              qg   g - 
                                                 =                                                (4)
                                              qs   2 - g

             2 (qg ,qs )
where  =     qg qs
                         represents the   cross-partial derivative between gang and state governance,
          2 (qg ,qs )
and  =    qg qg
                      reflects the rate
                                 of increasing or decreasing returns to governing.
   This helps distinguish channels by which more state governance could crowd gangs in.

Case 1: Strategic response to state rule by the combo (g >  ) This case cor-
responds the closest to gang leader interviews. When the state increases protection, they
threaten the gangs' share of rents (·) and non-material benefits g . The cross-partial deriva-
tive, , will be positive when the gang has more than proportional returns to increasing its
own rule in response to the state's efforts. This could arise, for example, from a gang leader
who values dominance and sole allegiance, or who is averse to losing status. Alternatively, we
could think of (·) as a contest success function for control of illicit markets, with governing
akin to arming. For many such functions and ranges of relative "armament" (loyalty-inducing
qg and qs in our setting), the optimal response to an increase in opponent's arming is to in-
crease one's own arming, especially when one is strong to begin with (e.g., Hirshleifer, 1989;
Skaperdas and Syropoulos, 1996; Konrad and Skaperdas, 1998, 2012).

                                                     22
   Any  > 0 will attenuate the state's attempts to crowd the gang out. The larger are 
and g , and the more differentiated are gang and state governance services (lowering  ), the
more likely that we observe crowding in, where g >  . Of course, this assumes that the
denominator is negative, which is the case when gangs have diminishing returns to their own
governance. The alternative brings us to the next case.

Case 2: Increasing returns to a gang's own level of governance (g > 2 ) Given
downward-sloping demand ( > 0), the denominator in Equation 4 will be negative only if
gangs enjoy large increasing returns to their own governance. This could arise, for instance, if
residents reward protection with loyalty at increasing rates. While not impossible, increasing
returns should not be assumed, and we saw no evidence of them. Generally, therefore, we
expect diminishing returns to governance, making combo strategic response (Case 1) the
more plausible of this pair of mechanisms.

    Finally, outside of (·)i , there is a third way the elasticity between state and gang
governance could turn positive: endogenous demand for protection. A state increase in
protection could raise the number and value of transactions in the local economy, thereby
increasing demand for governance in general and gang governance in particular. This is
a common feature of the political economy literature on stationary bandits, where a state
monopolist has incentives to provide public goods to grow the very market they will later
tax (Olson, 1993; McGuire and Olson, 1996; Grossman, 1996; Bates et al., 2002).

Case 3: State rule increases general demand for governance. In our Cournot
example, we could model such endogenous growth through the demand curve, writing ai as
                                                                    q
an increasing function of qs . This can produce crowding in ( qg > 0) even if we assume
                                                                     s
no additional benefits from dominance or loyalty (see Appendix C). That said, there are
two major caveats. First, the demand effect would have to be quite large to overcome the
crowding out that arises from normal duopolistic competition. Second, not all models make
this prediction about endogenous demand. The prediction reverts to crowding out if we move
away from a traditional model of duopoly to a model of stationary bandits competing to
provide public goods for taxes (see Appendix C.2). Nonetheless, endogenous demand could
contribute to a positive elasticity of gang rule to state rule, and we will look for evidence of
this economic development in the empirical analysis below.




                                              23
4.3        General formulation
Finally, as the foregoing suggests, our framework was designed to accommodate a variety of
modeling approaches. In its general form, gang responsiveness to state rule is given by:
                                                          2
                                                     D(qg ,qs )          2 F (qg ,qs )
                                                                   +
                                             qg       qg qs               qg qs
                                                = -  2 D( qg ,qs )       2 F (qg ,qs )
                                                                                       .                   (5)
                                             qs                    +
                                                      qg qg               qg qg


Here, D(·) represents the direct returns to governing, whether we model it through Cournot
competition in private goods, Bertrand competition, or stationary bandits providing public
goods. Meanwhile, F (·) represents the additional benefits to establishing rule, dominance,
and loyalty--previously (·)i . Appendix C presents these alternative models. In general,
                                                                                         2 D (q ,q )
whether we treat governance services as public or private goods, the cross-partial  q          i j
                                                                                             i qj
                                                                                                     <
0 is negative, making the overall elasticity negative in the absence of additional benefits.
Introducing F (·) generally makes the sign of the elasticity indeterminate, for two reasons:
                         2 F (q ,q )
first, the cross-partial  q    i j
                             i qj
                                     itself is often indeterminate and sensitive to specific values
                                                   2 D(qi ,qj )
of qi and qj ;20 and second, even if                qi qj
                                                                  > 0, it must be large enough to outweigh the
                                                                                     
                              2 D(qi ,qj )                                          qg
crowding-out effect of         qi qj
                                             in order to flip the sign of           qs
                                                                                       .


5        Quasi-experimental analysis
Figure 5 correlates state and gang rule by barrio in 2019, partialing out income, demographic,
and geographic traits.21 We see a strong positive relationship, consistent with both strategic
gang responses and state rule increasing the general demand for governance. Naturally,
however, this correlation could be confounded by any number of unobserved factors that
increase the supply or demand of governance, from social capital to state public goods that
drive high levels of economic or social transactions.
    As a result, we first turn to a natural experiment that harnesses discontinuous jumps
in the distance to local state services, and thus attempts to hold these other confounders
constant. These discontinuities arose with the introduction of new internal borders and
the subsequent expansion of local state services within them. This comparison helps us
understand how long, sustained state presence affects gang rule.
  20
       This is the case with virtually all contest success functions, for example.
  21
       See Appendix Table D.1 for these correlates. We did not partial out distance to state services.




                                                                  24
Figure 5: Correlation between combo and state governance in 2019, adjusted for covariates

                                                       .4




                              Combo governance index
                                                       .2




                                                        0




                                                       -.2

                                                             -.2   -.1         0            .1   .2
                                                                   State governance index


             Notes: Each dot is a barrio average after partialing out block characteristics. The dotted
        line indicates fitted values. We did not survey high-income barrios.


5.1     Medellín's expansion of state rule within new borders
In 1987, Medellín reorganized the city into 16 neighborhoods called comunas.22 Follow-
ing this date, the city also began spending and personnel in policing and other protective
services. The new comuna borders set the jurisdiction for many of these functions. While
residents can access schools or clinics irrespective of their comuna of residence, the police and
several protection agencies (including dispute resolution and family services, for example)
were organized along comuna lines.23 Thus, within Medellín, on either side of a comuna bor-
der, people on one side might be close to their local police station or comuna headquarters,
while on the other side the block could be distant. These more distant blocks may receive
fewer services, or are less aware of the agencies available, despite being otherwise similar,
and equally distant from other urban amenities.
    We examine how state and combo services and legitimacy change along with this shift
in proximity across borders.24 Our proxy for distance and access to the state is the average
distance of that city block from two key headquarters in their comuna: the comuna police
station, and the comuna's Casa de Justicia or "Justice House"--the main comuna-level
  22
     These comunas were created in the Bill 54 by the city council. The previous organization of the city
dated back from more than 20 years before (city Bill 52 from 1963).
  23
     It is permitted to report a crime or seek assistance from any state office, police patrols are organized by
comuna, and case loads in city agencies would be dominated by people within the comuna.
  24
     This emulates a strategy by Henn (2020), who looks at the proximity of chiefdoms to the state.


                                                                         25
  Figure 6: Surveyed blocks and comuna-based state services relative to comuna borders

                         N                                     Comuna Boundaries

                                                               River

                                                              Sample Blocks >200

                                                              Sample Blocks <200

                                                              Police Stations

                                                              Dispute Resolution Providers




                   0.0       2.5   5.0 km




building, which houses dispute resolution services among other agencies, most commonly
family services (but others as well).
    This is a lengthy and multifaceted "treatment," representing a significant intensification
of several kinds of state presence over three decades. Note that the discontinuity does not
simply estimate exposure to the two agencies whose headquarters we observe. Other city
agencies (past and present) operate at the comuna level and their penetration into distant
blocks will be correlated with police and Casa de Justicia locations. Thus we should think
of the average distance measure we use as a proxy for general exposure to the local state.
This is mainly an increase in the intensive margin of state services, since the city was present
in most border blocks at the time the comunas were created (although to varying degrees).
This treatment, however, could have affected gang rule on both the intensive and extensive
margins depending on the neighborhood, because combo presence and rule extend back to
the 1980s and 1990s in many barrios, but not all.


5.2    Empirical strategy
Figure 6 displays comuna boundaries, local headquarters, and city blocks from our December
2019 survey. We focus on blocks within 200 meters of an internal border (in red). We omit
borders that fall along natural river and mountainous boundaries. Later we will see that


                                              26
   Figure 7: Distribution of differences in the distance to comuna headquarters between
               paired blocks within 200 meters of the new comuna borders

                              .002    10th       50th                   90th




                             .0015
                  Density




                              .001




                            5.0e-04




                                 0
                                      0            500                1000               1500                2000
                                             Average difference in distance to police and Casa de Justicia




other bandwidths and border criteria make little difference to the results.
    Our "treatment" is the difference in the paired blocks' distance to the local state head-
quarters in hundreds of meters (that we denote StateLocDistij ).25 Figure 7 displays the
distribution of the absolute value of this difference. The 10th percentile is 67 meters, the
median is 454 meters, and the 90th percentile is 1,037 meters. We hypothesized that relative
state governance and legitimacy fall as  StateLocDistij rises.
    To estimate treatment effects from the discontinuity, we use the following OLS regression:

 Yij = 0 +1 DistLocStateij +2 DistOtherij +Xij +b +f (lati , longi )+f (latj , longj )+                             i   (6)

 The dependent variable, Yij , is the within-pair outcome difference from the block farthest
from state services to the closest.
    We control for possible confounders: DistOtherij is a vector of differences in the distance
to other amenities--schools, hospitals, and business agglomerations; Xij is a vector of
differences in demographic and geographic covariates; and b are comuna border fixed effects.
As we will see below, paired blocks are fairly well-balanced on these potential confounders,
and including or omitting them has little effect on our estimates. Finally, following Keele and
Titiunik (2015), f (lati , longi ) and f (latj , longj ) are first-degree polynomials of the coordinates
  25
    We created pairs in the following way: For a given comuna border, we take the block closest to the
border, then identify the nearest block on the other side of the border. For each block, we calculate a simple
average of the distance to the police station and Justice House. We order i and j so that we can interpret
the independent variable as moving 100 meters further from the state.


                                                                   27
of each block in our sample and its match (akin to a distance running variable). Our balance
test uses the same equation, omitting Xij , as these are the dependent variables.
    For the most part, this strategy will estimate within-combo effects on gang rule. Combo
borders do not coincide with comuna borders, and oftentimes the paired blocks will be under
the same combo. Since we do not have precise borders for most combos, we cannot say how
often this is the case. Nonetheless, the estimates should reflect how combos respond within
their territories to different levels of state penetration.
    Ideally, we would also have some measure of potential rents, , or of initial levels of
relative state governance, in order to assess how gangs respond to state rule differently based
on these initial conditions. Unfortunately, no credible historical data exists, and current
measures of rents would be endogenous and misleading. Exploring such heterogeneity is an
important are for future research.

Identification assumptions and balance The key identification assumption is that,
after the new border was introduced, the only thing that changes discontinuously at the
border is the distance from the local state service providers. Broadly this seems to be
the case. We have demographic micro-data from a 1993 census (earlier rounds were not
available), plus distance from centers of economic activity and other state organs (which
could affect volume of transactions and the demand for governance services). Although
these data were collected slightly after treatment began, we nonetheless expect them to
change negligibly at the border.
    Table 3 examines balance in these covariates. Column 1 reports means and standard
deviations for all blocks in our sample. Column 2 compares the covariates in the block
farthest from the state to the block closest, controlling for the border fixed effects and coor-
dinate polynomials in Equation (6). This tells us whether blocks farther from the state are
systematically different from one another (but does not account for the degree of distance).
Thus, this is not our principal balance test, but it is useful. Broadly speaking, blocks do not
have statistically significant differences in most characteristics. Blocks further from the state
have slightly higher elevations, slightly fewer women, and are less likely to have been present
before 1948. These first two differences are substantively insignificant, however, being less
than 1­2% of the sample mean.
    Column 3 reports the main identification test--whether baseline differences in paired
blocks correlate with relative local state distance, Yij . The column reports the results of
estimating equation (6), except the dependent variables are the covariates X . Differences in
distance to the state are expressed in units of 100 meters. We see a handful of statistically
significant correlations, but all are substantively small compared to the sample mean. Thus,


                                               28
                    Table 3: Balance test: How baseline traits vary with DistStateij

                                                                      Difference                           Correlation with
                                                                                     As % of sample mean                      As % of sample mean
                                                                     across border                           StateDist
                                                        Subsample
                                                                       Estimate           Estimate            Estimate             Estimate
                                                          Mean
                                                                         (SE)               (SE)                (SE)                 (SE)
                                                          (SD)
                                                           (1)           (2)                (3)                  (4)                 (5)
         Block average elevation                         1,599.58    13.283***             0.008               0.926**              0.001
                                                         (115.02)      (1.387)                                 (0.460)
         Block present in 1948                              0.16      -0.027**             -0.166               -0.006              -0.036
                                                           (0.37)      (0.012)                                 (0.005)
         Block present in 1970                              0.68         0.015             0.022                -0.001              -0.002
                                                           (0.47)      (0.022)                                 (0.010)
         Block present in 1985                              0.86         0.006             0.007                0.001               0.001
                                                           (0.34)      (0.017)                                 (0.007)
         Block present in 1996                              0.95        -0.008             -0.008                0.003              0.003
                                                           (0.22)      (0.012)                                 (0.006)
         Block average slope                               89.95        -0.025             -0.000               -0.013              -0.000
                                                           (0.70)      (0.057)                                 (0.026)
         Log of total population (1993)                     4.70         0.089             0.019               -0.040*              -0.009
                                                           (1.09)      (0.055)                                 (0.024)
         Share of women (1993)                              0.54       -0.007*             -0.013               -0.000              -0.001
                                                           (0.07)      (0.004)                                 (0.002)
         Share of population no education (1993)            0.04         0.001             0.028                -0.002              -0.040
                                                           (0.07)      (0.003)                                 (0.001)
         Meters to schools                                181.65        -3.668             -0.020                0.410              0.002
                                                         (118.95)      (4.630)                                 (1.829)
         Meters to health centers                         483.11       11.418              0.024              5.733**               0.012
                                                         (315.19)      (7.039)                                 (2.746)
         Meters to business centers                       328.95         2.766             0.008              6.796***              0.021
                                                          (54.89)      (2.524)                                 (1.076)
       Number of observations                                             537               537                   536                536
       Minimum N                                                          521               521                   520                520
       Notes: Column (1) reports summary statistics. Column (2) computes the difference in covariates in the block farthest from the state to
      the block closest to the state, adjusting for border fixed effects and coordinates. Column (3) tests whether differences in paired blocks is
      correlated with state proximity using Equation 6. Standard errors after bootstrapping are nearly identical to our main specification.



a neighborhood that is 100 meters more remote from the local state is about 1 meter higher,
0.04 log points lower population, and be about 6­7 meters farther from business and health
centers. A small, systematic correlation between remoteness and such factors is not surpris-
ing, but they should not materially affect our estimates. We control for these covariates,
however, and later show that their omission has no effect on estimates.


5.3       Results
Table 4 reports estimates of the coefficient on DistStateij from Equation (6). These reflect
the effects of being 100 meters more distant from the state. As expected, state governance
and legitimacy fall on blocks farther from state services. For every 100 meters more distant,
state governance falls by 0.019, significant at the 1% level. Recall that the median change
in distance is 454 meters. Compared to the control mean of 0.41, this implies the median
change is associated with a 21% decline in state governance services.

                                                                          29
Table 4: Impacts on governance and legitimacy of being 100 meters more distant from the
                        local state, comuna border discontinuity

                                                                                               Correlation with
                                                                 Y          Correlation with
                                                                                                 StateDist
                                                             sample mean      StateDist
                                                                                                (as sample sd)
                                                 Subsample
                                                                 Estimate      Estimate           Estimate
                                                   Mean
                                                                   (SE)          (SE)               (SE)
                                                   (SD)
                                                    (1)            (2)            (3)                (4)
             Relative State Governance Index        0.08           0.013         -0.002            -0.006
                                                   (0.24)        (0.304)        (0.006)
               State Governance Index               0.42          -0.033      -0.019***            -0.101
                                                   (0.19)        (0.272)        (0.005)
               Combo Governance Index               0.33          -0.033       -0.014**            -0.065
                                                   (0.22)        (0.278)        (0.005)
             Relative State Legitimacy Index        0.14           0.050         -0.009            -0.036
                                                   (0.24)        (0.328)        (0.007)
               State Legitimacy Index               0.57          -0.021      -0.014***            -0.094
                                                   (0.15)        (0.224)        (0.005)
               Combo Legitimacy Index               0.43          -0.051         -0.007            -0.036
                                                   (0.21)        (0.287)        (0.006)
             N for Governance outcomes                              532           531                531
             N for Legitimacy outcomes                              406           404                404
            Notes: Each estimate comes from a separate regression. Only residents (not business respondents)
            were asked about legitimacy, and some blocks have only residents, hence the lower sample size.



   As blocks get more distant from the state, however, they do not receive more combo rule.
On the contrary, combo rule falls along with state responsiveness, by 0.014 per 100 meters.
At the median change in distance, this represents a 19.3% decline in gang governance services.
Hence we estimate virtually no change in relative state governance in neighborhoods further
from the state. In other words, more remote neighborhoods have less protection of all kinds.
   We see similar results for police stations and Casas de Justicia when we estimate these
terms separately in the same regression (Appendix Table D.2). The point estimates for the
Casas are slightly less precise but similar in magnitude to the point estimates for police. This
suggests the combo is responding strategically to the less coercive arm of the state as well.
We have to take these estimates with caution, however, since these forms of state presence
may be correlated with other unobserved municipal services.

Robustness These results are robust to using 100- and 300-meter bandwidths, other block
matching strategies, different distance measurement and specifications (Appendix Table
D.3). All suggest qualitatively similar results. These impacts are also fairly consistent
across all 17 individual varieties of governance (Table D.4). Finally, these results are consis-




                                                            30
tent with a range of related outcomes, reported in Appendix Table D.6.26 For instance, as
blocks get more distant from the state, residents are more likely to say that both the state
and combo are more difficult to contact and slower to respond to problems. They also report
lower perceptions of vacunas; 33% of people in the sample believes others pay security fees,
and this is 1.7 percentage points lower for every 100 meters more distant from the state.


5.4     Alternative channels of impact
We see three channels of impact through which state proximity could increase gang rule.

Strategic response by the combo Sections 3 and 4 discussed the qualitative and theo-
retical case at length, and we will not repeat it here, despite this being in our view a major,
if not the main, driver of our treatment effects.

Economic development and sorting Section 4 laid out the theoretical case for economic
change contributing to the crowding in of gang rule by state rule. Over three decades,
proximity to police, dispute resolution, and other local services could increase prosperity
and transactions, and with it demand for combo governance. In addition, households and
businesses who demand governance may have moved to better-governed neighborhoods.
    We see mixed supporting evidence, though the effects on sorting and growth are not so
consistent or large that they seem to be able to plausibly account for the crowding in we
observe. Table 5 estimates the effects of state proximity to the state on a range of economic
and demographic measures from administrative data, the 2018 census, and our 2019 survey.
We see no significant change in the city's administrative classification of a block's income
stratum, in population, or in business sales and size. For every 100 meters more distant
from the state, however, we see significant changes in other proxies for development: a 0.06
standard deviations increase in a finer-grained poverty index; a 0.08 standard deviations
increase in the unemployment rate; and a 0.075 standard deviations decrease in the profits
reported by firms in our survey. We do not see any observable evidence of residential sorting,
as there is little difference in demographic composition. It is notable that we see no difference
in business size.It seems unlikely, however, that these changes in economic activity alone can
explain such large increases in combo rule--19.6% at the median.

Misattribution and misreporting Finally, we consider two kinds of measurement error
correlated with treatment, and judge that these too are unlikely to account for the large
  26
    Since the experiment pre-specified the governance index as the primary outcome and legitimacy as the
secondary outcome, we focus on these for our main results.


                                                  31
Table 5: Impacts on neighborhood prosperity and demographics of being 100 meters more
               distant from the local state, comuna border discontinuity

                                                                                                             Correlation with
                                                                                Y         Correlation with
                                                                                                               StateDist
                                                                            sample mean     StateDist
                                                                                                              (as sample sd)
                                                              Subsample
                                                                             Estimate        Estimate           Estimate
                                                                Mean
                                                                               (SE)            (SE)               (SE)
                                                                (SD)
                                                                    (1)         (2)             (3)                (4)
    Panel A: Economic transactions

       Income strata (2018)                                         2.54       -0.148          -0.018            -0.019
                                                                   (0.94)     (0.833)         (0.015)
       Multidimentional Poverty Index (2018)                       13.73       -0.093        0.863***             0.062
                                                                  (14.02)    (16.438)         (0.316)
       Log of mean profits (2019)                                  13.42        0.049         -0.084*            -0.075
                                                                   (1.12)     (1.447)         (0.049)
       Log of mean sales (2019)                                    14.84        0.053          -0.050            -0.042
                                                                   (1.17)     (1.739)         (0.050)
       Number of employees (2019)                                   2.49        0.343          -0.090            -0.010
                                                                   (2.98)     (9.480)         (0.234)
       Unemployment rate (2018)                                     0.11        0.006        0.006***             0.080
                                                                   (0.07)     (0.093)         (0.002)
       Schooling rate (2018)                                        0.91       0.034        -0.009***            -0.073
                                                                   (0.12)     (0.189)         (0.003)
       Log of total population (2018)                               5.18        0.078          -0.015            -0.015
                                                                   (0.94)     (1.261)         (0.022)
    Panel B: Demographics

       Percent of women (2018)                                     47.49       -0.478           0.119             0.007
                                                                  (15.84)    (21.783)         (0.390)
       Percent of population no education (2018)                    1.82       -0.009         0.084**             0.048
                                                                   (1.77)     (2.181)         (0.042)
       Percent of population aged 0 to 14 (2018)                   14.80        1.935           0.210             0.028
                                                                   (7.51)     (9.256)         (0.165)
       Percent of population who recently migrated (2018)           4.08       -0.501          -0.138            -0.026
                                                                   (5.12)     (6.868)         (0.134)
       Percent of houses with electricity (2018)                    0.91       0.028           -0.001            -0.008
                                                                   (0.13)     (0.190)         (0.004)
       Percent of houses with water services (2018)                 0.90       0.029           -0.002            -0.018
                                                                   (0.13)     (0.192)         (0.004)
       Percent of houses with sewage (2018)                         0.89       0.026           -0.001            -0.006
                                                                   (0.14)     (0.200)         (0.004)
       Percent of houses with gas services (2018)                   0.64       0.001         -0.013**            -0.046
                                                                   (0.29)     (0.359)         (0.006)
       Percent of houses with trash collection (2018)               0.90       0.025           -0.002            -0.013
                                                                   (0.13)     (0.191)         (0.004)
       Percent of houses with internet services (2018)              0.58       0.015            0.003             0.014
                                                                   (0.21)     (0.250)         (0.004)
    Number of observations                                                       537             536               536
    Minimum N                                                                    233             230               230
    Notes: Each estimate comes from a separate regression.




                                                             32
crowding in effects we observe. A first possibility is misattribution --citizens honestly report
their perceptions, but they systemically misjudge who provides what services in a way cor-
related with distance to the state. For instance, suppose the state improves service delivery
and residents erroneously attribute this to the combo. Combos could claim credit, or resi-
dents could see a more ordered society and credit them. We cannot rule misattribution out,
but we see little evidence for it, especially errors so large they explain our sizeable treatment
effects. First, we see no instances of credit claiming by the combo. In the field experiment,
below, we collect systematic data and find it to be quite rare. Second, respondents reported
increased ease of contact and speed of delivery of both the state and combo (Appendix Ta-
ble D.6)--questions which seem less vulnerable to misattribution. Finally, we designed the
questions specifically to minimize this concern: when problem x happens, how often does y
respond? If we were to point to the absence of problem x and which actor y was responsible,
this would be a much more speculative answer, prone to attribution problems. In contrast,
our impression is that most residents know who actually responds to governance.
    A second possibility is misreporting --residents know who delivered the services, but
misrepresent their responses in a way that is correlated with state proximity. In this case,
they would need to be less willing to report combo governance as the state became more
remote, which is an unusual direction of measurement error. Moreover, as discussed in
Section 2, we conducted the survey to minimize discomfort, and we obtained relatively
unbiased answers according to our survey experiment. More concretely, however, we see no
significant correlation between state distance and the results of our survey experiment testing
for systematic measurement error: the difference between direct and randomized response
techniques on security fee payments (Table D.5).


6     Field experiment
Finally, we collaborated with the Mayor's office to scale up and evaluate an intervention
designed to increase local, non-coercive state presence and improve access to government
services, with the aim of crowding out gang governance. Compared to the border discon-
tinuity, the experimental treatment is of shorter duration, more narrowly focused, and did
not change police presence.
    In 2017, we learned of a little-known effort in one of Medellín's under-served barrios,
La Loma, with a population of roughly 20,000. A small unit sent 7 outreach staff to the
barrio. From 2012­17, these "liaisons" set out to build and improve the organization of social
groups and civil society organizations, liaise between city services and the community, and
link citizens to existing services. Qualitatively, it appeared that citizen use of state services

                                               33
increased, that access and legitimacy of the state rose, and (more speculatively) that combos
provided less protection services. We worked with the city to test this approach at scale.


6.1    Intervention
The city identified 80 "sectors" with a combo but varying levels of relative state­combo
governance. A sector is an informal neighborhood, significantly smaller than a barrio like
La Loma, usually with about 1,000­3,000 residents. The city intensified normal municipal
services in 40 of these sectors for 20 months, beginning April 2018. Control sectors received
normal services. See Appendix Figure D.1 for a distribution of these sectors across the city.
    At the city level, the Mayor's office created an inter-agency team to respond to local
concerns, such as poor trash pickup, broken playground equipment, or a lack of attention
from the city's dispute resolution officers. Importantly, the aim of the intervention was not
to directly challenge gang rule or crowd out their services. Rather, the aim was to increase
the visibility, accessibility, and speed of state services. City officials also attended semi-
annual formal government-community meetings in the treated sectors, known as Consejos
de Convivencia, where they and community members would agree on a formal list of com-
mitments. They also organized a large one-time event called Caravana de la Convivencia --a
weekend-long street festival in the sector where, in addition to music, food and entertain-
ment, representatives from each agency are present to explain their services in detail. The
intervention did not affect police and criminal justice activities.
    The city also assigned a full-time street-level bureaucrat, a liaison, to each treated sec-
tor. Their responsibilities included: coordinating the communication of local concerns,
community-state meetings, and the other events above; helping community organizations co-
ordinate local collective action (e.g., coordinating garbage spots and dog excrement norms);
providing training to community leaders in dispute resolution and related skills; proactively
identifying individual and neighborhood problems and referring them to the relevant city
agency for assistance; communicating the city and police's recommended guidelines for deal-
ing with and correctly reporting nuisances, misdemeanors, and crimes; and referring residents
with interpersonal conflicts to the comuna's dispute resolution office.
    Liaisons were similar to the city's normal professional staff: men and women under the
age of 35, with a university education. They had weekly or monthly quotas for the above
activities and were held accountable by their supervisors. The liaisons were not so much
directly involved in dispute resolution and service delivery as they were an advocate, a
source of information, and a source of organizational capacity.
    In terms of intensity, normally the city has one liaison per comuna--about 1 per 540


                                              34
blocks. For the intervention, the Secretariat of Security assigned one liaison to each treatment
sector (about 1 per 9 blocks). In some neighborhoods, this was the first time the sector had
any direct street presence by the city government other than police. While the liaison
represents a 60-fold increase in street-level staff, the broader range of city agencies and
services did not increase their efforts to the same degree. The intervention likely resulted in
at most a 5-fold increase in state governance.

Compliance Compliance was good. The program closely monitored liaisons, and we sur-
veyed and interviewed them all after program completion. From administrative records we
know that they spent 3­6 days or evenings per week in their sector, held frequent community
events, and generally met their referral quotas, all within the few blocks they were assigned.
Thus there was a high level of street visibility of the liaisons for almost two years.
    The liaisons reported that combos rarely interfered with their work or attempted to take
credit for services delivered. Two-thirds reported no interference whatsoever. The other
third mainly said that the combo was mainly watchful, such as observing public events and
meetings from a distance.27 Another liaison described the combo helping her set up for a
major event on one occasion. There are few incidents of preventing liaisons from doing their
job. The combo prevented two liaisons from entering into the community for the first few
weeks, but once they were able to explain their job and role, the liaisons were permitted to
enter and perform their jobs without interference.
    We see some evidence that municipal agencies struggled to deliver some aspects of the
intervention, especially in the sectors where it's initial presence was weakest. On a scale of
0 to 1 (from full compliance to complete failure to deliver) liaisons rated the wider state
compliance roughly 0.34, meaning the state "sometimes" failed to deliver on the requested
support. For example, one explained how they organized a meeting between the community
and city officials, and the officials never arrived. Another said how they had publicized the
new police code­which includes official guidelines for when citizens should call the police
versus one of the civilian security and services agencies­but the residents were frustrated
because the police did not follow it reliably. These failures were more common in the neigh-
borhoods where relative state rule was weakest at baseline (Appendix Figure D.2). Many of
the liaison concerns, however, refer to police presence, which was not experimentally varied
and so is not a compliance issue (and is a problem likely shared by control communities).
Overall, liaisons reported that the vast majority of their municipal requests were met.
  27
    Appendix Figure D.2 plots incidence of liaison reports of interference on baseline levels of relative combo
rule. These incidents were relatively rare and unrelated to gang rule.




                                                      35
6.2     Experimental Design
Our primary outcome is relative state governance. Relative legitimacy is our secondary
outcome. We also consider the sub-components, but we have not adjusted for multiple
comparisons so these must be taken with some caution. We pre-registered the design and
outcomes in April 2018, then again prior to final data collection.28 With 80 sectors, the
experiment was powered to detect at least a 12% change in relative state governance.

Data Outcome data come from our December 2019 city-wide survey, where in addition to
the representative sample of barrios we surveyed approximately 30 residents and businesses
per experimental sector. For baseline sector data, we surveyed three officials per sector for
their assessment of: (i) relative governance service provided by the combo and the state;
(ii) relative street presence of the combo and the state; and (iii) their perceptions of local
security and drug use. We also have (iv) geolocated crime statistics for the sector.

Randomization and balance We grouped the 80 sectors into 40 matched pairs using the
four main baseline measures, then randomized one in the pair to treatment. This produced
the expected degree of balance along baseline covariates (Appendix Table D.7).

Estimation We estimate intent to treat (ITT) effects via the OLS regression:

                            Yisb = 0 + 1 Tsb + b + Xsb + Zisb +              sb                         (7)

where Y is the outcome from person i in sector s and matched pair b; T is an indicator
for random assignment to treatment;  is a vector of pair fixed effects (the randomization
strata); X is a vector of sector baseline controls; and Z is a vector of survey respondent
demographics. We cluster standard errors at the sector level.

Addressing spillovers To minimize the chances of interference between units, we selected
neighborhoods at least 250 meters distant from one another. A total of 40 intervention
sectors also ensured that increased service delivery would not reduce services in control
neighborhoods. Ex-post, we can use our representative city-wide survey to estimate and
control for spillover effects, by comparing blocks close to treatment sectors to those close to
control sectors. We do not see evidence of such spillovers.29
  28
    See social science registry AEARCTR-0002622 and the Journal of Development Economics protocol.
  29
    See Appendix Table D.8. As Blattman et al. (2021) note, spillovers in a dense network of blocks can lead
to fuzzy clustering, where clusters do not conform to defined areas. Hence we use randomization inference
to estimate exact p-values under the sharp null of no treatment effect for any unit.


                                                    36
                Table 6: Program impacts on primary and secondary outcomes


                                                                                     ATE
                                         Control Mean      ATE      SE     P-value   as %     N
                                                                                     of SD
                                              (1)          (2)      (3)      (4)      (5)     (6)
       Relative State Governance Index       0.066        -0.028* 0.015     0.064    -0.088 2,314
         State Governance Index              0.413        -0.017* 0.010     0.089    -0.065 2,362
         Combo Governance Index              0.345         0.009 0.011      0.414    0.032 2,316

       Relative State Legitimacy Index       0.131        0.012    0.019    0.550    0.037   1,845
         State Legitimacy Index              0.572        0.012*   0.007    0.094    0.060   1,906
         Combo Legitimacy Index              0.437         0.002   0.015    0.874    0.009   1,845


6.3     Results
We see no evidence the intervention crowded out combo governance in treated sectors. Table
6 reports program impacts. On the contrary, we estimate a 0.09 standard deviation decrease
in relative state governance, significant at the 10% level. This is striking given the intensity
and street visibility of the intervention. The sign and general magnitude is consistent across
different specifications and controls, though the decrease in relative state governance is not
always even marginally significant (Appendix Table D.9). Nonetheless, it is clear we see no
increase as originally anticipated.
    Looking at the two components of this relative measure, residents in control sectors
reported state responsiveness to neighborhood problems of 0.413 on the 0­1 scale, compared
to 0.345 for combos (where 0.33 represents "occasional" and 0.66 "frequent" responsiveness).
The decrease in the relative measure seems to be driven by a small decrease in perceived state
responsiveness and a small increase in combo responsiveness. Both estimates are imprecise,
however, and were we to adjust in any manner for the two additional comparisons, they would
not be statistically significant at conventional levels. We see similar patterns across most of
the 17 individual relative and absolute governance measures (Appendix Table D.10).30
    Turning to legitimacy, the effect is near zero but in the expected direction (0.037 standard
deviations) though not statistically significant. This appears to be associated mainly with
an increase in state legitimacy but the sub-component estimates are too imprecise to say.
  30
    Business respondents in particular seem to report larger and more statistically significant increase in
relative combo governance than residents, though both point in the similar direction, and with so many
outcomes we should be cautious about such comparisons.




                                                     37
6.4    Candidate explanations
Why do we not see evidence of gang rule getting crowded out? Arguably, these results are
consistent with the fact that changing perceptions of state capacity is difficult in the short
run, and potentially the beginnings of a modest strategic response by combos. Incidents of
non-compliance do not seem to explain the overall experimental results, nor does systematic
measurement error. Whatever the reason, however, we see no evidence that people turn to
the combo for protection less as a result of intense focus by the state on problem-solving,
dispute resolution, and community-led public order.

Combo strategic response Combos were often the first to notice an increased state
presence, and almost all liaisons described having to explain their presence to the combo.
Thus, even if the liaisons and broader state took time to respond to the problems of the
average citizen, the combo would have been aware of increased state activity from the begin-
ning. Residents report an almost 0.1 standard deviation decline in perceived relative state
governance. The coefficients on both combo governance and legitimacy are positive, albeit
not significant. Both effects, however imprecise, are still consistent with the beginnings of a
modest strategic response by combos.
    Note, however, the intervention does not directly threaten drug corners and other illicit
rents in the same manner as police. Liaisons could even reduce the need for police calls.
Therefore, perhaps we should not expect the same degree of combo strategic response com-
pared to an intervention that increases the presence of patrols. In other words, non-policing
interventions might not generate externalities large enough to generate a large and positive
cross-elasticity between state and gang governance, even in the long run. That said, recall
that the results of the quasi-experiment suggested that combos were equally responsible to
the coercive and non-coercive arms of the state (Appendix Table D.2).

Difficulty of increasing awareness of state capacity in the short run On the one
hand, 20 months of highly visible street presence in a relatively small area is a dramatic
increase in governance. On the other hand, these results could indicate that it may take
more time for a randomly selected citizen to experience an issue and personally experience
the state's responsiveness. Likewise, they may update their beliefs about the state only
after repeated interaction over longer periods of time. If so, it suggests that increasing state
legitimacy is not only limited by the normal challenges of growing state capacity, but that
these effects may take time to turn into civilian loyalty and collaboration.
    What should we make of the negative sign on absolute state governance? There are
a few reasons to treat the sign with caution, and focus on the relative state governance

                                              38
measure. First, recall that this decline is not especially robust, and that we did not adjust
standard errors on these sub-components for multiple comparisons. Moreover, the absolute
responsiveness is a subjective measure, and survey respondent answers may be influenced
by the relative responsiveness of the state versus the combo. Finally, a decrease in state
responsiveness stands in contrast to the marginally significant increase in state legitimacy.
For all these reasons, we rely more on the prespecified relative state governance measure.
   Nonetheless, there are signs that the negative sign is driven by the neighborhoods that
experienced partial non-compliance issues. We turn to this next.

Partial noncompliance At the outset, all 80 sectors had a strong combo presence and
a degree of gang rule, but levels of relative state governance varied widely. We anticipated
that the intervention could have different impacts where gangs had chosen to provide more
rule. Thus, we prespecified heterogeneity analysis by our baseline measure of relative state
governance. Table 7 reports treatment effects by these sub-groups.
     As discussed above, liaisons reported modest compliance issues in the sectors with the
lowest initial levels of relative state governance (see Appendix Figure D.2). Perhaps not sur-
prisingly, the negative treatment effect on absolute and relative state governance appears to
be concentrated in those neighborhoods with the highest initial levels of relative combo gov-
ernance (Table 7, Panel A). Granted, the difference in governance treatment effects between
the two subgroups is not statistically significant (Panel C). Nonetheless, it's consistent with
partial noncompliance undermining the state's efforts to bolster its capacity and legitimacy.
     If we focus on the subgroup with high levels of compliance (Panel B), it is striking that
we still see no evidence of crowding out of gang rule. The impact on relative state governance
still has a negative sign, and the impact on combo governance still has a positive sign. Both
are imprecise, but both point in the opposite direction of the conventional wisdom.
     What's more, we see large and statistically significant increases in relative and absolute
state legitimacy in these high-compliance neighborhoods. This is arguably consistent with
our other candidate explanations--a strategic response by the combo (elevating relative state
legitimacy but not relative service provision) and also the difficulty of affecting beliefs on
state responsiveness in the short term (but legitimacy credit for visible presence).

Misattribution and misreporting Finally, measurement error seems unlikely to account
for our results. In terms of misattribution, we saw almost no instances of combo credit-
claiming. Also, liaisons were highly visible and quite clearly not part of the combo.
    In terms of misreporting, residents in treated sectors would have needed to systematically
under-report state governance and over-report combo governance to an independent survey


                                              39
 Table 7: Program impacts in pre-specified subgroups: High versus low relative gang rule

                                                                                                           ATE
                                                               Control Mean     ATE       SE     P-value   as %    N
                                                                                                           of SD
                                                                     (1)        (2)       (3)      (4)      (5)    (6)
    Panel A: Above median baseline relative state governance
      Relative State Governance Index                               0.015     -0.043**   0.020    0.038    -0.135 1,146
        State Governance Index                                      0.393     -0.029**   0.014    0.045    -0.117 1,167
        Combo Governance Index                                      0.377       0.012    0.014    0.385     0.042 1,147
      Relative State Legitimacy Index                               0.110      -0.031    0.027    0.265    -0.096 919
        State Legitimacy Index                                      0.568      -0.010    0.009    0.277    -0.048 941
        Combo Legitimacy Index                                      0.456       0.022    0.022    0.329     0.080  919

    Panel B: Below median baseline relative state governance
      Relative State Governance Index                               0.117       -0.014   0.022    0.519    -0.046 1,168
        State Governance Index                                      0.433       -0.005   0.013    0.719    -0.018 1,195
        Combo Governance Index                                      0.313        0.007   0.017    0.700     0.024 1,169
      Relative State Legitimacy Index                               0.152      0.056**   0.026    0.039    0.185   926
        State Legitimacy Index                                      0.576     0.035***   0.011    0.002    0.174   965
        Combo Legitimacy Index                                      0.419       -0.019   0.021    0.369    -0.068 926

    Panel C: Subgroup difference
      Relative State Governance Index                               0.066       -0.030  0.029     0.306    -0.093 1,146
        State Governance Index                                      0.413       -0.026  0.019     0.170    -0.101 1,167
        Combo Governance Index                                      0.345        0.005  0.022     0.800     0.019 1,147
      Relative State Legitimacy Index                               0.131      -0.085** 0.037     0.022    -0.270 919
        State Legitimacy Index                                      0.572     -0.045*** 0.014     0.001    -0.216 941
        Combo Legitimacy Index                                      0.437        0.039  0.030     0.188     0.142  919



firm that they had no reason to associate with the intervention. And they would need to
do so especially in treated areas with high initial combo governance. Their motive for doing
so is not apparent. Appendix Table D.11 tests for correlations between treatment status
and our proxies for measurement error--non-response to combo-related questions relative
to responses about the state, and the randomized response survey experiment. We do not
see significant evidence of misreporting. It does appear that there is a slight tendency to
under-report extortion in control sectors, but this estimate is imprecise.


7      Conclusions
Organized crime and gang rule is a problem faced by many emerging strong states. In
hundreds of major cities, states operate in an uneasy duopoly of coercion, rule, and taxation
with urban gangs. Like Medellín, these governments are often relatively strong in the sense of
fiscal capacity and public goods provision. But before states can regulate or reduce criminal
systems and rule, we first have to understand them.
    Our work suggests a few important insights. First, the market for protection is not the
main reason gangs decide to rule. This direct profit motive matters, and selling protection


                                                               40
can be a profitable business line. But this direct profit motive is overshadowed by the
externalities for other business lines, especially retail drug sales. It may even be dominated
by less pecuniary payoffs, such as gang leaders' desire for status and respect in the community.
     Second, as a consequence, it may be very difficult for governments to crowd out gangs
simply by striving to govern more and better. This is especially true once gangs have al-
ready made investments in speed and access of service, and in their capacity to collect fees
and "taxes." Our quasi-experimental results suggest that the state may have inadvertently
crowded in gang rule, directly by spurring a strategic response by the combos, and indirectly
by increasing demand for their existing services. (Our model and results also suggest a pre-
diction that could be tested in future work--a combo's strategic response ought to increase
with the size and profitability of drug markets. At present, neither historical nor contem-
porary data on drugs are available. Research on these markets and their interaction with
criminal governance is an important area for future research.)
     Third, in the short run, gangs and the state both face costs and capacity constraints
in ruling, making it slow and costly to scale up. Our experimental results point to the
difficulty of making headway. Even in the neighborhoods where the city did intensify actual
governance, the average citizen was not immediately aware, suggesting it takes time to build
relationships, build awareness of and coordinate on state actors, and foster legitimacy--even
before worrying about a combo's strategic response.
     Fourth, both our results and our theoretical discussion suggest that other common policy
interventions may not reduce gang rule. For instance, popular responses to extortion include
police crackdowns, ease of anonymous denunciation, or facilitating collective action among
merchants.But our model and findings suggest these measures could fail in the presence of
gang rule. They ignore the indirect payoffs to governing, and the fact that gangs would have
an incentive to rule even if they were unable to collect extortion at all. Crackdowns and
denunciations, moreover, may even increase incentives for the gang to foster legitimacy. And
since extortion is a modest percentage of business sales (about 1%), merchants may have
weak incentives to undertake costly, risky collective action.
     Fifth, gang abuses, including purely extractive extortion, are disciplined primarily by
their need for community loyalty, collaboration, and respect. Medellín's gangs are most
extractive of outsiders, like bus lines. This suggests that civilian perceptions and attitudes
can be a powerful tool on gang regulation. Speculatively, it may be possible to undermine
norms of loyalty to the gang through social norms marketing campaigns or collective action.
This seems like a crucial area for policy experimentation.
     Finally, it suggests that besides prosecuting criminal leaders and governing better, states
need to tackle gang revenues. For instance, lower profitability of drug markets (e.g., because


                                              41
of marijuana legalization) could reduce optimal gang size as well as incentives to govern.
In defeating the American mafia, prosecutors attribute their success not simply to more
aggressive investigation and sentencing, but to the slow erosion of the mob's main sources
of revenues. In the late 20th century, loansharking, numbers games, and labor racketeering
with widespread access to consumer credit, lotteries, and the decline of unionization (Kroger,
2008). So long as there is high consumer demand for illicit drugs and loans, crackdowns and
crowding out will not undermine the gang's main motives for existence and ruling.
    The world needs more descriptive and theoretical work on gangs, and more evaluations.
Organized crime is arguably the largest threat to national security and development in the
century ahead, especially in the Western hemisphere. When gangs fight one another or
the government, they provoke armed violence exceeding most civil wars (Lessing, 2017).
Organized criminal groups are the main source of illegal guns, migrants and refugees into
the US. Unfortunately, the policy cupboard is nearly bare. Mayors and police chiefs do not
know how to combat organized crime or associated phenomenons, such as gang rule.
    What's more, the problem is set to worsen and widen in coming decades. Many orga-
nized criminal groups in Latin America emerged during and after wars, from demobilizing
paramilitaries and rebels. Likewise, in Sicily, the first mafias emerged from the ranks of
unemployed private security forces from the former feudal estates. Fighters in Iraq, Syria,
Afghanistan, Myanmar, and other states could follow the same path in the coming decades.
    We view our qualitative interviews, the descriptive analysis, and the field experiment in
particular as proof-of-concept exercises. We show how it is possible to develop systematic
qualitative and quantitative data on these organizations, and that it is possible to evaluate
gang-level interventions rigorously, ethically, and logistically.



References
Acemoglu, D., G. De Feo, and G. D. De Luca (2020). Weak States: Causes and Consequences
  of the Sicilian Mafia. The Review of Economic Studies 87 (2), 537­581.
Acemoglu, D. and J. A. Robinson (2006). Economic Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy.
  Cambridge University Press.
Albertus, M. and O. Kaplan (2013). Land Reform as a Counterinsurgency Policy: Evidence
  From Colombia. Journal of Conflict Resolution 57 (2), 198­231.
Alesina, A., S. Piccolo, and P. Pinotti (2019). Organized Crime, Violence, and Politics. The
  Review of Economic Studies 86 (2), 457­499.
Arias, E. D. (2006). The Dynamics of Criminal Governance: Networks and Social Order in
  Rio de Janeiro. Journal of Latin American Studies 38 (2), 293­325.
Arjona, A. (2016). Rebelocracy. Cambridge University Press.


                                             42
Bates, R., A. Greif, and S. Singh (2002). Organizing Violence. Journal of Conflict Resolu-
  tion 46 (5), 599­628.
Beath, A., F. Christia, and R. Enikolopov (2012). Winning Hearts and Minds Through
  Development? Evidence From A Field Experiment in Afghanistan. Working paper .
Berman, E., J. H. Felter, J. N. Shapiro, and E. Troland (2013). Modest, Secure, and In-
  formed: Successful Development in Conflict Zones. American Economic Review 103 (3),
  512­17.
Berman, E. and A. M. Matanock (2015). The Empiricists' Insurgency. Annual Review of
  Political Science 18, 443­464.
Berman, E., J. N. Shapiro, and J. H. Felter (2011). Can Hearts and Minds be Bought? The
  Economics of Counterinsurgency in Iraq. Journal of Political Economy 119 (4), 766­819.
Blattman, C., G. Duncan, B. Lessing, and S. Tobon (2020). Gangs of Medellín: How
  Organized Crime is Organized. Working paper .
Blattman, C., D. Green, D. Ortega, and S. Tobón (2021). Place-Based Interventions at
  Scale: The Direct and Spillover Effects of Policing and City Services on Crime. Journal
  of the European Economic Association , forthcoming.
Bliss, C. J. and N. Stern (1982). Palanpur: The Economy of an Indian village. Oxford
  University Press.
Brown, Z. Y., E. Montero, C. Schmidt-Padilla, and M. M. Sviatschi (2020). Market structure
  and extortion: Evidence from 50,000 extortion payments. Working Paper 28299, National
  Bureau of Economic Research.
Bueno de Mesquita, E. (2020). Territorial Conflict Over Endogenous Rents. The Journal of
  Politics 82 (1), 162­181.
Carvalho, L. S. and R. R. Soares (2016). Living on The Edge: Youth Entry, Career and Exit
  in Drug-Selling Gangs. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 121, 77­98.
Castillo, J. C. and D. Kronick (2020). The Logic of Violence in Drug War. American Political
  Science Review 114 (3), 874­887.
Castillo, J. C., D. Mejía, and P. Restrepo (2020). Scarcity Without Leviathan: The Violent
  Effects of Cocaine Supply Shortages in the Mexican Drug War. Review of Economics and
  Statistics 102 (2), 269­286.
Crost, B., J. H. Felter, and P. B. Johnston (2016). Conditional Cash Transfers, Civil Con-
  flict and Insurgent Influence: Experimental Evidence from the Philippines. Journal of
  Development Economics 118, 171­182.
Dal Bó, E., P. Dal Bó, and R. Di Tella (2006). Plata o Plomo?: Bribe and Punishment in a
  Theory of Political Influence. American Political Science Review , 41­53.
De Feo, G. and G. D. De Luca (2017). Mafia in the Ballot Box. American Economic Journal:
  Economic Policy 9 (3), 134­67.
Dell, M. (2015). Trafficking Networks and the Mexican Drug War. American Economic
  Review 105 (6), 1738­79.
Dube, O., O. García-Ponce, and K. Thom (2016). From maize to haze: Agricultural shocks
  and the growth of the mexican drug sector. Journal of the European Economic Associa-
  tion 14 (5), 1181­1224.
Ensminger, J. (1996). Making a Market: The Institutional Transformation of an African
  Society. Cambridge University Press.
Fiorentini, G. and S. Peltzman (1997). The Economics of Organised Crime. Cambridge

                                            43
  University Press.
Gambetta, D. (1996). The Sicilian Mafia: the Business of Private Protection. Harvard
  University Press.
Giraldo, J., A. J. Rendón, and G. Duncan (2014). Nuevas Modalidades de Captación de
  Rentas Ilegales en Medellín. Universidad EAFIT.
Grossman, H. I. (1996). Rival Kleptocrats: the Mafia Versus the State, pp. 143­155. Cam-
  bridge University Press.
Henn, S. J. (2020). Complements or Substitutes? How Institutional Arrangements Bind
  Chiefs and the State in Africa.
Higginson, A., K. Benier, Y. Shenderovich, L. Bedford, L. Mazerolle, and J. Murray (2015).
  Preventive interventions to reduce youth involvement in gangs and gang crime in low-and
  middle-income countries. Campbell Systematic Reviews 11 (1), 1­176.
Hirshleifer, J. (1989). Conflict and rent-seeking success functions: Ratio vs. difference models
  of relative success. Public choice 63 (2), 101­112.
Kasfir, N. (2015). Rebel Governance­Constructing a Field of Inquiry: Definitions, Scope,
  Patterns, Order, Causes, Volume 2. Cambridge University Press New York.
Keele, L. J. and R. Titiunik (2015). Geographic Boundaries as Regression Discontinuities.
  Political Analysis 23 (1), 127­155.
Khanna, G., C. Medina, A. Nyshadham, and J. A. Tamayo (2019). Formal Employment and
  Organized Crime: Regression Discontinuity Evidence from Colombia. NBER Working
  Paper .
Konrad, K. A. and S. Skaperdas (2012). The Market for Protection and the Origin of the
  State. Economic Theory 50 (2), 417­443.
Konrad, K. I. and S. Skaperdas (1998). Extortion. Economica 65 (260), 461­477.
Kroger, J. (2008). Convictions: A Prosecutor's Battles Against Mafia Killers, Drug Kingpins,
  and Enron Thieves. Macmillan.
Leeson, P. T. (2007). An-arrgh-chy: The Law and Economics of Pirate Organization. Journal
  of political economy 115 (6), 1049­1094.
Lessing, B. (2017). Counterproductive Punishment: How Prison Gangs Undermine State
  Authority. Rationality and Society 29 (3), 257­297.
Lessing, B. (2020). Conceptualizing Criminal Governance. Perspectives on Politics , 1­20.
Lessing, B., D. Block, and E. Stecher (2019). Criminal Governance in Latin America: an
  Empirical Approximation. Working paper .
Lessing, B. and G. Denyer Willis (2019). Legitimacy in criminal governance: Managing a
  drug empire from behind bars. American Political Science Review 113 (2), 584­606.
Levitt, S. D. and S. A. Venkatesh (2000). An Economic Analysis of a Drug-Selling Gang's
  Finances. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 115 (3), 755­789.
Limodio, N. (2018). Terrorism Financing, Recruitment and Attacks: Evidence From a
  Natural Experiment in Pakistan. Working Paper .
Magaloni, B., E. Franco-Vivanco, and V. Melo (2020). Killing in the Slums: Social Order,
  Criminal Governance, and Police Violence in Rio de Janeiro. American Political Science
  Review 114 (2), 552­572.
McGuire, M. C. and M. Olson (1996). The Economics of Autocracy and Majority Rule: the
  Invisible Hand and the Use of Force. Journal of Economic Literature 34 (1), 72­96.
Melnikov, N., C. Schmidt-Padilla, and M. M. Sviatschi (2020). Gangs, Labor Mobility, and

                                              44
  Development: The Role of Extortion in El Salvador.
Murphy, T. E. and M. A. Rossi (2020). Following the Poppy Trail: Origins and Consequences
  of Mexican Drug Cartels. Journal of Development Economics 143, 102433.
North, D. C., J. J. Wallis, and B. R. Weingast (2009). Violence and Social Orders: A
  Conceptual Framework for Interpreting Recorded Human History. Cambridge University
  Press.
Olson, M. (1993). Dictatorship, Democracy, and Development. American Political Science
  Review 87 (3), 567­576.
Reuter, P. (1983). Disorganized Crime: Illegal Markets and the Mafia. MIT Press.
Sánchez De La Sierra, R. (2020). On the Origins of the State: Stationary Bandits and
  Taxation in Eastern Congo. Journal of Political Economy 128 (1), 000­000.
Sánchez De la Sierra, R. and K. Titeca (2020). Corruption in hierarchies.
Sanchez-Jankowski, M. (1991). Islands in the Street: Gangs and American Urban Society.
  University of California Press.
Schelling, T. C. (1971). What is the Business of Organized Crime? The American Scholar ,
  643­652.
Skaperdas, S. (2001). The Political Economy of Organized Crime: Providing Protection
  When the State Does Not. Economics of Governance 2 (3), 173­202.
Skaperdas, S. and C. Syropoulos (1996). Gangs as Primitive States, pp. 61­81. Cambridge
  University Press.
Skaperdas, S. and C. Syropoulos (1997). The distribution of income in the presence of
  appropriative activities. Economica 64 (253), 101­1117.
Skarbek, D. (2011). Governance and Prison Gangs. American Political Science Re-
  view 105 (4), 702­716.
Skarbek, D. (2014). The Social Order of the Underworld: How Prison Gangs Govern the
  American Penal System. Oxford University Press.
Sobrino, F. (2019). Mexican Cartel Wars: Fighting for the US Opioid Market. Working
  paper .
Sviatschi, M. M. (2018). Making a Narco: Childhood Exposure to Illegal Labor Markets
  and Criminal Life Paths. Working paper .
Tilly, C. (1985). War Making and State Making as Organized Crime. Violence: A reader ,
  35­60.
Venkatesh, S. A. (2006). Off the Books: The Underground Economy of the Urban Poor.
  Harvard University Press.




                                           45
Appendix
A      Assessing measurement error in outcomes
Vacuna survey experiment Paying vacunas seemed to be one of the more sensitive
questions on the survey, according to our qualitative experiences. To test this, we randomized
how we asked the question. Some respondents were asked directly whether they paid a regular
vacuna (Direct Response, or DR); others were asked to use a Randomized Response (RR)
technique, where they privately flipped a coin and reported honestly only if it is heads.31
    We see little statistically significant differences across the two methods. Randomized
response elicited an extortion rate of 22.6% from businesses and 6% from households, com-
pared to 19.4% and 7.8% when directly asked. The differences run in opposite directions
and are not statistically significant.
    In Figure A.1 we calculate the difference between the RR and DR methods at the barrio
level, and plot this difference against combo governance levels. A simple regression line
is relatively flat at zero, indicating that misreporting is no more or less common in areas
where the combos are more involved in daily life, and hence where legitimacy or fear could
potentially have influenced under-reporting.

Patterns of non-response We also examine patterns of non-response. One concern we
had in piloting the survey was that respondents who do not want to talk about the combo
may say "I don't know" or pass on answering that question, and enumerators are permitted
to skip questions. Just 7% of the sample answered don't know or skipped at least 25%
of the combo services questions. If this were primarily driven by worries about combo,
we might expect a correlation between combo governance and the proportion of questions
unanswered. Figure A.2 plots each respondent's percentage of answered questions against
barrio-level measures of combo and mayoral governance levels. We see no substantively or
statistically significant correlations. Control group members answer 85 to 97% of sensitive
questions regarding the combo. This is 0.2 to 1.1 percentage points lower in the treatment
group, though neither coefficient is statistically significant.


B      Combo census
The authorities have never developed a systematic list of combos. To create our census, we
began by integrating five existing lists that are known to be incomplete:

    1. A public list of 246 combos from the leading local newspaper El Colombiano from 2014,
       updated in 2017;
  31
     Others were asked the same question using the List Experiment technique (where half are asked to give
the number of four nonsensitive actions they engaged in, and half see a list of 5 actions including paying
extortion). In general, these list experiment results are extremely noisy, as is commonly the nature of list
experiments. The results are consistent with what we see in the RR and DR differences. There is no evidence
of systematic measurement error.



                                                     i
Figure A.1: Survey experiment results: Difference between randomized response (RR) and
                     direct response (DR) to vacuna payment rate

                                                                                                                     1




                                                              Barrio security fee payment rate difference (RR-DR)
                                                                                                                    .5




                                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                    -.5




                                                                                                                    -1
                                                                                                                          .1        .2          .3                                 .4          .5              .6
                                                                                                                                         Combo governance index




                          Figure A.2: Correlation of respondent's answer percentage and governance levels

                          1                                                                                                                                                   1



                          .8                                                                                                                                                  .8
 Combo governance index




                                                                                                                                                     Mayor governance index




                          .6                                                                                                                                                  .6



                          .4                                                                                                                                                  .4



                          .2                                                                                                                                                  .2



                          0                                                                                                                                                   0
                               0        .2               .4                                                          .6        .8          1                                            0           .2               .4      .6           .8   1
                                   Percentage of answered question for the index                                                                                                            Percentage of answered question for the index

                                             Residents                                                 Average Residents                                                                                 Residents        Average Residents
                                             Business                                                  Average Business                                                                                  Business         Average Business



                                        Notes: Y- axis plots barrio-level measures of combo and mayoral gover-
                                     nance levels, X-axis plots each respondent's%age of answered questions.




                                                                                                                                               ii
  2. A confidential list of 96 combos from the Medellín's Mayor's Office from 2010;

  3. A confidential list of 190 combos from the Office of the Attorney General from 2015;

  4. A confidential list of 87 combos from the Medellín's Mayor's Office from 2017; and

  5. A confidential list of 89 combos from the Medellín's Mayor's Office, the Office of the
     General Attorney, and the National Police from 2018.

We then tried to validate the existence of the combos as well as identify a prime location,
usually a drug selling spot or their headquarters. We did so using primary contacts with
current and former combo and razón members, local experts (especially journalists and
community leaders), as well as with law enforcement officials. The principal challenges here
included:

   · distinguishing between razones and combos;

   · determining what groups were actually "sub-combos"--departments or subdivisions
     within a single combo;

   · identifying cases of multiple names for the same combo (these may be historical names,
     nicknames, or police/journalist error in one of the lists; and

   · assessing defunct combos that have disbanded or absorbed into another combo.

Altogether, this exercise has some limitations, including:

   · We did not physically search the streets for combos, or speak directly to residents
     and leaders in a systematic way, and confirm combos in that matter. Our many
     qualitative interviews with residents, leaders, combo members and experts did inform
     our classification, however.

   · We also did not systematically count and verify combos in neighboring municipalities,
     and so 50 combos in the rest of the metropolitan area is a rough estimate.

   · Our merger and validation of the existing lists relies heavily on the expertise and
     judgment of 3 professional experts, journalists, and former criminal group members.




                                             iii
C      Formal presentation and extensions of model
This section elaborates details of the model and several claims in Section 4.

C.1     Cournot competition
Setup In each neighborhood, a gang g and a state s compete to sell protection in quantities
qg and qs . Each organization chooses qi to maximize their respective pay-off, and each has
constant marginal cost ci . Products are differentiated, and the price of each one is given by
the linear inverse demand function pi = ai - qi - qj . Here,   (0, 1] since the services
offered by both organizations are substitutes, and  > 0 for downward-sloping demand. The
pay-off for each organization is Vi = pi qi - ci qi . For simplicity, we assume an interior solution.

Nash Equilibria We begin by deriving the best response function for each organization:


                              max Vi = (ai - qi - qj )qi - ci qi
                                qi
                                     Vi
                                        = ai - 2qi - qj - ci = 0
                                     qi
                                          ai - ci    
                                     qi =         -   qj
                                             2      2

We obtain an identical best response function for the other organization analogously, and
replacing values we obtain:


                                            2 (ai - ci ) -  (aj - cj )
                                 qi =
                                                  (4 2 -  2 )

and,

                                            2 (aj - cj ) -  (ai - ci )
                                qj =                                   .
                                                  (4 2 -  2 )

Comparative statics We are mainly interested in whether gang rule is crowded in or out
                                                         q
when there is an exogenous increase in state governance: qij . To obtain this comparative
static, we begin by defining:
                                            Vi
                             G(qi , qj )       = ai - 2qi - qj - ci
                                            qi

which is a continuously differentiable function from R2 - R. At the optimum, we know:
                                                          
                              G(qi , qj ) = ai - 2i qi - qj - ci = 0.



                                                    iv
Since -2 = 0, we can use the implicit function theorem to obtain our main comparative
static:
                                    
                                   qi    G(qi , qj )/qj     
                                      =-                =-
                                   qj    G(qi , qj )/qi    2

Since the two services are not complements, this comparative static implies that increases
in one duopolist's supply of protection will reduce the other's.

Cournot competition with benefits to governing
We now introduce a non-standard feature: externalities stemming from gang rule.

Setup As above, but now the payoff for each organization is Vi = (ai - i qi - qj )qi - ci qi +
(qi , qj )i ), where (qi , qj )i captures the externalities described in Section 4. For simplicity,
we assume an interior solution.

Nash Equilibria We begin by deriving the best response function for each organization:


                      max
                       q
                          Vi = (ai - qi - qj )qi - ci qi + (qi , qj )i
                         i

                             Vi                        (qi , qj )
                                = ai - 2qi - qj - ci +            i = 0
                             qi                        qi
                                                    (qi ,qj )
                               
                                        ai - ci +   qi
                                                              i        
                              qi   =                              -     qj
                                                2                     2

We obtain an identical best response function for the other organization analogously, and
replacing values we obtain:


                 
                                                         qi ,qj )
                         2 (ai - ci ) -  (aj - cj ) + 2 (q i
                                                                  i -  (
                                                                       qj
                                                                         qi ,qj )
                                                                                  j
                qi   =
                                                      (4 2 -  2 )

                                
with an identical function for qj .

Comparative statics Again we are interested in whether gang rule is crowded in or out
                                                         q
when there is an exogenous increase in state governance: qij . To obtain this comparative
static, we begin by defining:

                                       Vi                        (qi , qj )
                     G(qi , qj )          = ai - 2qi - qj - ci +            i
                                       qi                        qi




                                                       v
which is a continuously differentiable function from R2 - R. At the optimum, we know:
                                                                         
                                                                      (qi , qj )
                        G(qi , qj )   = ai -   2qi   -   qj    - ci +            i = 0
                                                                       qi
                                                  ,q  )
                                             2 (qi  j
Additionally, we assume that 2 =              qi qi
                                                        i ,   thus:
                                                         
                                G(qi , qj )         2 (qi , qj )
                                            = -2 +               i = 0
                                 qi                  qi qi
We can use the implicit function theorem to obtain our main comparative static:
                                
                               qi    G(qi , qj )/qj   i - 
                                  =-                =
                               qj    G(qi , qj )/qi   2 - i
             2 (qi ,qj )
where  =     qi qj
                         represents the cross-partial derivative between gang and state governance,
          2 (qi ,qj )
and  =    qi qi
                      reflects the rate of increasing or decreasing returns to governing. We discuss
conditions for this comparative static to be positive in section 4.

C.2     Cournot competition with endogenous demand
We now consider the possibility that providing governance can produce economic growth,
which in turn may produce greater demand for governance. This section incorporates this
idea into the Cournot framework by "endogenizing demand". The next section considers a
political economy model in which "stationary bandits" provide public goods in order to grow
the economic pie that they will tax.

Setup As before, except we now generalize the functional form of demand such that prod-
ucts are differentiated so the price of each one is determined by pi = ai (qi , qj ) - qi - qj ,
where   (0, 1] as services provided by both organizations are substitutes, and ai (qi , qj )
is twice continuously differentiable. The payoff function is Vi = (ai (qi , qj ) - qi - qj )qi -
ci qi + (qi , qj )i , where (qi , qj )i captures the externalities described in Section 4. Again,
we assume an interior solution.

Nash Equilibria As above, we begin by deriving the best response function for each
organization:

           max
            q
               Vi = (ai (qi , qj ) - qi - qj )qi - ci qi + (qi , qj )i
             i

                 Vi                   ai (qi , qj )                      (qi , qj )
                    = ai (qi , qj ) +               qi - 2qi - qj - ci +            i = 0
                 qi                      qi                              qi
                                                 (qi ,qj )
                   
                           ai (qi , qj ) - ci +       qi
                                                           i             
                  qi   =                   ai (qi ,qj )
                                                               -                      q
                                                                          ai (qi ,qj ) j
                                  2 -        qi
                                                                   2 -      qi




                                                         vi
We obtain an identical best response function for the other organization analogously, and
replacing values we obtain:

                                         (qi ,qj )                       aj (qi ,qj )                                          (qi ,qj )
     
                  ai (qi , qj ) - ci +   qi
                                                   i )      2 -            qj
                                                                                          -  aj (qi , qj ) - cj +              qj
                                                                                                                                         j )
    qi        =                                          ai (qi ,qj )                   aj (qi ,qj )
                                              2 -          qi
                                                                            2 -           qj
                                                                                                        + 2
                   
and similarly for qj .

Comparative Statics To obtain the key comparative static, we define

                              Vi                   ai (qi , qj )                      (qi , qj )
               G(qi , qj )       = ai (qi , qj ) +               qi - 2qi - qj - ci +            i
                              qi                      qi                              qi

which is a continuously differentiable function from R2       - R. At the optimum, we know that
                                        G( q  ,q  )
                                            i   j
G(qi   , qj ) = 0. We also assume that    qi
                                                    = 0.
     Then, we can use the implicit function theorem to obtain our main comparative static in
the formulation with endogenous demand. Note this implies that there is a neighborhood of
                                                     
(qi , qj ) such that when qi is close enough to qi     , we have a unique qj such as G(qi , qj ) = 0,
which makes qj a continuous function of qi . The comparative static is:

                                                           ai (qi ,qj )         2 ai (qi ,qj )                2 (qi ,qj )
              qi    G(qi , qj )/qj                           qj
                                                                          +      qi qj
                                                                                               qi   -+        qi qj
                                                                                                                          j
                 =-                =-                        ai (qi ,qj )         2 ai (qi ,qj )                  2 (qi ,qj )
              qj    G(qi , qj )/qi    2                                     +                    qi    - 2 +                  i
                                                               qi                  qi qi                          qi qi


    Now, a sufficient condition for having a positive cross partial is that ai (·) is downward
                                                                                    2 a (q ,q )
sloping on the product  aiq(qi ,qj )
                                     < 0 , that the decrease is at decreasing rates  q i i j
                                                                                        i qi
                                                                                                <0 ,
                                         i
                                                           2 (qi ,qj )                                   ai (qi ,qj )        2 ai (qi ,qj )
that the loyalty function is concave                       qi qi
                                                                          < 0 , and that                   qj
                                                                                                                        +     qi qj
                                                                                                                                            qi   -+
 2 (q
    i ,qj )
 qi qj
              > 0. The interpretation of the last condition would depend on what captures ai (·).

C.3           Bertrand competition with differentiated products
Now we model a state and a gang engaging in Bertrand competition with differentiated
products and externalities from gang governance. Each organization has a certain valuation
of the loyalty of the people.

Setup A gang g and a state s compete over prices pg and ps . Each organization chooses to
maximize their respective pay-off based on parameters. Both organizations have a constant
marginal cost c. Products are differentiated so the quantity demanded of each one is given
by qi = ai - bi pi - pj , where  < 0 as goods produced by both organizations are assumed to
be substitutes. The pay-off for each organization is i = (ai - bi pi - pj )(pi - c) + F (pi , pj ),
where F (pi , pj ) captures externalities. For simplicity, we assume an interior solution.



                                                                   vii
Nash Equilibria We begin by deriving the best response function for each organization:

                    max i = (ai - bi pi - pj )(pi - c) + F (pi , pj )
                      pi
                           i                                F (pi , pj )
                              = (ai - 2bi pi - pj - bi c) +              =0
                           pi                                 pi
                                                        F (pi ,pj )
                                       ai - bi c +        pi               pj
                            pi   =                                     -
                                                  2bi                      2bi

Analogously, we obtain an identical best response function for the other organization. Re-
placing values we obtain:

                                                                            F (p    
                                                                                i ,pj )       F (p    
                                                                                                  j ,pi )
                           2bj ai - aj - (2bj bi - bj )c + 2bj                pi
                                                                                          -     pj
               pi =
                                                        (4bi bj -  2 )

Comparative statics To obtain our key comparative static, we define:

                                     i                                F (pi , pj )
                   M (pi , pj )         = (ai - 2bi pi - pj - bi c) +
                                     pi                                 pi
which is a continuously differentiable function. In the optimum we know that:

                                  i                                   F (p     
                                                                          i , pj )
                M (p     
                    i , pj ) =       = (ai - 2bi pi - p j
                                                        
                                                          - b i c ) +              =0
                                  pi                                    pi
                                           2 F (p    
                                                 i ,pj )
Additionally, we assume that 2bi =          pi pi
                                                         ,   so:

                                 M (p     
                                     i , pj )           2 F (p     
                                                              i , pj )
                                              = -2bi +                 =0
                                   pi                     pi pi
Then we can use the implicit function theorem, obtaining the following result:
                                                                     2 F (p     
                                                                           i ,pj )
                             pi    M /pj                           -  pi pj
                                =-       =                   -       2 F (p                                 (8)
                             pj    M /pi                                     i ,pj )
                                                               2bi - pi p       i


                                        pi                                i j              2 F (p ,p )
Thus, to have a crowding in effect p     j
                                           > 0 we require that  < pi p     j
                                                                              . Since  < 0, a
sufficient condition for the state to crowd in the gang is that both services are complements
in loyalty. Generally, it is enough that the complementarity in loyalty is higher than the
degree of substitution of these services.




                                                        viii
C.4     Public goods and encompassing interest
Section C.2 showed how state-provided protection and governance may "grow the pie", and
how this can be incorporated into standard models of duopolistic competition. This idea lies
at the very heart of standard political economy of governance and public-goods provision.
This section adapts the classic Olson & McGuire (1996) (henceforth OM) model, in which
stationary bandits face incentives to curtail their own coercive taxation and provide public
goods at their own expense, precisely because doing so grows the pie that the bandit later
taxes. We abstract from OM's comparison of autocracy and democracy, instead comparing
the baseline OM model of a monopolistic, autocratic stationary bandit to a modified version
in which two stationary bandits tax and provide public goods to the same subject popula-
tion. A simple two-bandit model predicts crowding out. We first illustrate the single-bandit
baseline model and then add the second stationary bandit.

C.4.1    Baseline: One Autocratic Stationary Bandit
   · One player: The state (S ) makes two independent choices, setting a level of public
     goods provision (Gs ) and a uniform tax rate ts  [0, 1].

   · The output of the economy Y is increasing convexly in the total amount of public
     goods provided G (which here equals GS since there is only one stationary bandit),
     and no production is possible without some amount of public goods. That is, for Y (G)
                                            2 Y (G)
     we assume Y (0) = 0,  YG
                             (G)
                                 > 0 , and  G2
                                                    < 0.

   · We assume that taxation distorts economic activity. Write  (ts )  [0, 1] represent the
     loss factor due to taxation, so that final GDP is equal to  (ts )  Y (Gs ). We assume
       (ts )
       t
             < 0.
         s


   The state maximization problem is given by:

                                   Vs =  (ts ) · ts · Y (G) - cGs                               (9)
For simplicity, we normalize c to 1. By construction, S sets taxes independently of the desired
level of public good. At the optimal ts , S 's gains from taxation and the increases of potential
output losses due to further distortion into the economy are equal:  (ts )  ts =      ts
                                                                                        (ts )
                                                                                              . This
can be seen in the FOC for Equation 9:

                             Vs
                                =       (ts ) + ts  t
                                                     (ts )
                                                           · Y (Gs ) = 0
                             ts                       s


                                           (ts ) + ts  t
                                                        (ts )
                                                              =0
                                                           s




                                                   (ts )
                                           ts = -   (ts )                                      (10)
                                                      ts




                                                 ix
    Finally, the state selects the level of public good in the point were the marginal revenue
is equal to the marginal cost of the public good c multiplied by the reciprocal of state's share
of the national potential income.

                                     Vs
                                        =  (ts ) · ts · Y (Gs ) - 1 = 0
                                     Gs


                                                                        1
                                                     Y (GS) =                                 (11)
                                                                   t     
                                                                    s  (ts )


C.4.2    Dual stationary bandits
The setup is similar but with two players, a state (s) and gang (g ).
   · Players i  {s, g } simultaneously choose levels of public-goods provision (Gi ) and a
     uniform tax rate (ti ) which, as before, is independent of public-goods provision.
   · Economic output depends on the total of the two actors' public good provision: Y (G)
                                                              2 Y (G)
     where G  Gs + Gg . As before, Y (0) = 0,  Y
                                               G
                                                 (G)
                                                     > 0 and  GG
                                                                      <0
   · Distortion  (t) depends on the total amount of taxes levied: t  ts + tg . As before:
      (0) = 1 and  t
                    
                      < 0.
   · To ensure that neither player sets ti > .5, we assume that  (.5) = 0.
   Players' utility functions and maximization problems are symmetrical:

                     Vi = ti ·  (ti + tj ) · Y (Gi + Gj ) - ci Gi for i, j  {s, g }           (12)
    In this simplest, symmetric-players iteration, we will assume that ci = cj = 1. Asymmet-
ric costs raise important questions of sequencing, and will be considered in future iterations.
As before, we solve the two maximization problems separately, starting with taxation.

Optimal taxation with dual stationary bandits
Lemma C.1. In equilibrium, players' optimal tax rates are identical: t     
                                                                      i = tj .

Proof. From 12, the FOC for player i is

                           Vi
                              =  (ti + tj )Y (G) + ti   (t
                                                         ti +tj )
                                                                  Y (G) = 0                   (13)
                           ti                               i

                                                                   (ti +tj )
                                    =            (t     
                                                   i + tj ) + ti    t
                                                                             =0               (14)
                                                                            i


                   (ti +tj )          (ti +tj )  t         (ti +tj )
We can rewrite      ti
                               as      t        ti
                                                     =      t
                                                                       =  (t). This yields:

                                                                  (ti + tj )
                                               ti (tj ) = -
                                                                  (ti + tj )


                                                               x
                                      (ti +tj)
By a similar derivation, tj (ti ) = - (ti +tj)
   So in Nash Equilibrium:
                                                  (t     
                                                    i + tj )
                                     ti = -              
                                                             = tj
                                                  (ti + tj )


   In words, when i increases ti he gets a larger share of a smaller pie. These two effects
must be of equal size at the optimum t  i . But the negative effect on the size of the pie is the
same whether i or j is raising their rate. Therefore, the increase in i s share at t  i must be
the same as the change in j s share if she were to raise her rate. But these "shares" are just
each player's tax rate. So these must be equal.

Optimal public-goods provision with dual stationary bandits In this simultaneous
setup, we identify Nash equilibria in which player i's choice of Gi is a best response to player
j 's choice of Gj and vice versa. Solving FOC for Equation 12 for Gi and Gj yields


                        max Vi = ti ·  (ti + tj ) · Y (Gi + Gj ) - ci Gi
                        0Gi
                           Vi
                              =      ti  (ti + tj )Y (Gi + Gj ) - ci  0
                           Gi

   where the last condition hold with equality if Gi > 0. We can write player i's best
response function implicitly (i.e. i wants to set Gi such that):

                                                                       ci
                              G              
                               i (Gj ) : Y (Gi + Gj )                                       (15)
                                                               t     
                                                                i  (ti   + tj)

and player j wants to set Gj such that

                                                                    cj
                              G                   
                               j (Gi ) : Y (Gi + Gj )                                       (16)
                                                               t     
                                                                j  (tj+ tj)

If we assume ci = cj = c and with no loss of generality that c = 1 then (because t     
                                                                                  i = tj )
there is a unique total G that is optimal for both players, call it G2B :

                                                           1
                                    Y (G2B ) =                                              (17)
                                                     t     
                                                      i  (tj   + tj)

   And there is a continuum of Nash equilibria characterized by G               
                                                                     i = G2B - Gj . Obviously,
                                          
                                         Gi
the cross-partial of this relationship, G   is negative.
                                          j
   In words, there is an optimal total amount of public-goods to be provided, and either
player is happy to provide goods until total goods supplied reached that optimum. Obviously,
each prefers that the other do it. But for any division of the optimal total amount between
the two players, neither has an incentive to deviate. Whats more, if some force outside the



                                                    xi
model pushed the result from one equilibrium to another, in which one player's public goods
provision increased, it is obvious that the other player's optimal response would decrease.
   In this way, the basic stationary bandit model, which explicitly accounts for economic
growth produced by governance provision, can be said to predict crowding out.

C.5     General formulation and alternative models
Here we abstract away from the examples of Cournot and Bertrand competition, or stationary
bandits above. Instead of modeling competition with one model or the other, we could use
a general form D(qi , qj ) that encompasses all of these models (including Bertrand. Likewise,
instead of modeling the externality as (qi , qj )i we use a general form F (qi , qj ).

Comparative statics We now define a value function where we are agnostic about how
duopolistic competition takes place:

                                     Vi = D(qi , qj ) + F (qi , qj )
Then we can define the first partial in qi as:

                                         Vi   D(qi , qj ) F (qi , qj )
                          G(qi , qj )       =            +
                                         qi    qi           qi

which is a continuously differentiable function from R2    - R. As a technical note, we assume
that there exists a point such that   qi
                                        Vi
                                           = 0 , and the functions D(·) and F (·) are concave so
that the sum of both functions is also concave. This implies there is a unique solution. At
                                                                     G(qi ,q  )
                                                                            j
the optimum, we know that G(qi     , qj ) = 0. We also assume that      qi
                                                                                = 0.
    Finally, we can use the implicit function theorem to obtain our main comparative static
                                                                                       
in the general formulation. Note this implies that there is a neighborhood of (qi      , qj ) such
                                  
that when qi is close enough to qi , we have a unique qj such that G(qi , qj ) = 0. This makes
qj a continuous function of qi . The comparative static is:

                                               D(qi ,qj )2              2 F (qi ,qj )
                     qi    G(qi , qj )/qj       qi qj
                                                             +           qi qj
                        =-                = -  2 D( qi ,qj )            2 F (qi ,qj )
                     qj    G(qi , qj )/qi                    +
                                                qi qi                    qi qi

        2             2
where  q D(qi ,qj )
          i qi
                     0,  q
                         F (qi ,qj )
                           i qi
                                      0 would mean decreasing returns of production in loyalty and
profit. With this assumption, a positive numerator is sufficient for a positive cross partial.




                                                  xii
D      Supplemental analysis

                               Table D.1: Correlates of relative state governance
                                                                                                          Governance
                                                                                                                                      Vacuna
                                                                                            Relative State    State      Combo
                                                                                                                                     incidence
                                                                              Sample Mean      Estimate      Estimate    Estimate    Estimate
                                                                                 (SD)            (SE)          (SE)        (SE)        (SE)
                                                                                  (1)            (2)           (3)         (4)          (5)
     Income strata (2018)                                                        2.430         0.026***         0.001   -0.026***      -0.010
                                                                                (0.940)         (0.010)       (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.019)
     Avg distance to drug corner and gang main location (100 meters)             3.452        0.011***       0.006***    -0.005**    -0.011**
                                                                                (2.158)         (0.003)       (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.005)
     Average distance to the casas de justica and police (100 meters)           11.467           -0.001        -0.000      0.000       -0.001
                                                                               (12.837)         (0.001)       (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.001)
     Block average elevation (100 meters)                                       16.262            0.007        -0.007   -0.014***   -0.064***
                                                                                (1.426)         (0.006)       (0.004)     (0.005)     (0.011)
     Average slope of the neighborhood                                          89.933           -0.014         0.019      0.024       -0.073
                                                                                (0.185)         (0.027)       (0.023)     (0.025)     (0.076)
     Years of antiquity of the neighborhood                                     38.920            0.000         0.000      0.000       -0.001
                                                                               (15.186)         (0.001)       (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.001)
     Log of total population (2018)                                              8.836           -0.009         0.000      0.009      0.027**
                                                                                (0.992)         (0.006)       (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.013)
     Percent of population no education (2018)                                   2.206          -0.017*        -0.002     0.014*    0.063***
                                                                                (1.098)         (0.009)       (0.007)     (0.008)     (0.017)
     Percent of population aged 0 to 14 (2018)                                  16.892        -0.010***       -0.004*   0.007***      0.012**
                                                                                (4.951)         (0.003)       (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.006)
     Percent of population who recently migrated (2018)                          5.543           -0.001         0.001      0.002       0.008*
                                                                                (3.441)         (0.002)       (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.004)
     Area of city center inside neighborhood (per sqr meter)                     0.149        -0.068***         0.016    0.072***       0.007
                                                                                (0.280)         (0.026)       (0.022)     (0.024)     (0.053)

     Individual Demographics
     Block Clustered SE
     Dep. var. mean                                                                             0.069         0.408       0.333       0.331
     N                                                                                          4,399         4,544       4,403       1,830
     # of Clusters                                                                              1,877         1,898       1,878       1,297
     Notes: We run ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions of each measure on a range of available block- and neighborhood characteristics.
    Regressions are estimated at the individual level including individual demographics such as age, gender, time in the neighborhood and a
    dichotomous variables for whether the respondent belongs to business or household. Standard errors are clustered by block. Income strata
    is a city-block level administrative measure from the 2018 census running from 1 to 6. Years of antiquity of neighborhood is the mean of the
    approximate number of years each block has been historically present, based on historical cartography for 1948, 1970, 1985 and 1996.




                                                                       xiii
Table D.2: Coefficient of closeness to state services for police stations and Casas de
                                 Justicia, separately


                                                     Police &        Casas de      Police
                                                  Casa de Justicia   Justicia     station
                                      Subsample       Estimate       Estimate    Estimate
                                        Mean            (SE)           (SE)        (SE)
                                        (SD)          [p-value]      [p-value]   [p-value]
                                          (1)           (2)            (3)          (4)
 Relative State Governance Index         0.01           -0.002        0.010**      0.005
                                        (0.30)         (0.006)        (0.005)    (0.005)
                                                       [0.792]         [0.047]   [0.287]
    State Governance Index               -0.03       -0.019***         -0.006   -0.009**
                                        (0.27)         (0.005)        (0.004)    (0.004)
                                                       [0.000]         [0.170]   [0.031]
    Combo Governance Index               -0.03        -0.014**       -0.015*** -0.010**
                                        (0.28)         (0.005)        (0.005)    (0.004)
                                                       [0.010]         [0.003]   [0.024]
 Relative State Legitimacy Index         0.05           -0.009          0.004  -0.019***
                                        (0.33)         (0.007)        (0.007)    (0.006)
                                                       [0.227]         [0.522]   [0.001]
    State Legitimacy Index               -0.02       -0.014***         -0.006     -0.004
                                        (0.22)         (0.005)        (0.004)    (0.004)
                                                       [0.003]         [0.152]   [0.307]
    Combo Legitimacy Index               -0.05          -0.007        -0.009*    0.010**
                                        (0.29)         (0.006)        (0.005)    (0.005)
                                                       [0.223]         [0.096]   [0.041]
 N for Governance outcomes                               531             531        531
 N for Legitimacy outcomes                               404             404        404
 Notes: This table calculates the effect of being 100 meters further from either the nearest
comuna police station, or the nearest Casa de Justicia in the comuna. Note that other state
agencies and service may be correlated with these two agencies, and so we cannot interpret
these are causal effects of the individual headquarters with any certainty.




                                            xiv
                                        Table D.3: Robustness: Coefficient on closeness to state services for blocks along the inner comuna borders of Medellín, by different specifications


                                                                                                                                        Fixed point
                                                                                                Dropping     Bounded     Dropping                         Elevation adjusted     Border     Elevation adjusted   Relaxed     Unrestricted
                                                        Main       300m to BD    100m to BD                                          Distance to border
                                                                                                covariates   distances   distances                        Distance treatment   Cluster SE       matching         matching     matching
                                                                                                                                        running var
                                          Subsample
                                                      Estimate      Estimate       Estimate     Estimate     Estimate    Estimate        Estimate             Estimate         Estimate         Estimate         Estimate     Estimate
                                            Mean
                                                        (SE)          (SE)           (SE)         (SE)         (SE)        (SE)            (SE)                 (SE)             (SE)             (SE)             (SE)         (SE)
                                            (SD)
                                             (1)         (2)          (3)            (4)           (5)         (6)          (7)             (8)                  (9)             (10)             (11)             (12)         (13)
      Relative State Governance Index       0.01         -0.002      -0.002          0.006       -0.001    -0.006           -0.005         0.003                0.001            -0.002           -0.001            -0.000      -0.000
                                           (0.30)       (0.006)     (0.005)        (0.009)      (0.006)   (0.006)          (0.006)        (0.006)              (0.006)          (0.008)          (0.006)           (0.006)     (0.005)
        State Governance Index              -0.03     -0.019***    -0.017***      -0.023***    -0.019*** -0.021***       -0.022***      -0.024***            -0.021***         -0.019**        -0.019***         -0.017***   -0.013***
                                           (0.27)       (0.005)     (0.004)        (0.007)      (0.005)   (0.005)          (0.005)        (0.005)              (0.005)          (0.007)          (0.005)           (0.005)     (0.004)
        Combo Governance Index              -0.03      -0.014**    -0.012***      -0.022***    -0.015*** -0.012**         -0.013**      -0.023***            -0.019***           -0.014        -0.014***          -0.013**    -0.010**
                                           (0.28)       (0.005)     (0.005)        (0.007)      (0.005)   (0.006)          (0.005)        (0.006)              (0.005)          (0.009)          (0.005)           (0.005)     (0.004)




xv
      Relative State Legitimacy Index        0.05        -0.009      -0.007        -0.019*       -0.009    -0.012           -0.011       -0.018**              -0.012*           -0.009           -0.007            -0.007      -0.003
                                           (0.33)       (0.007)     (0.006)        (0.011)      (0.007)   (0.008)          (0.007)        (0.008)              (0.007)          (0.010)          (0.007)           (0.007)     (0.006)
        State Legitimacy Index              -0.02     -0.014***    -0.013***        -0.001     -0.013*** -0.011**         -0.010**      -0.013***             -0.010**          -0.014*         -0.012**          -0.012**      -0.006
                                           (0.22)       (0.005)     (0.004)        (0.007)      (0.005)   (0.005)          (0.005)        (0.005)              (0.005)          (0.008)          (0.005)           (0.005)     (0.004)
        Combo Legitimacy Index              -0.05        -0.007      -0.008          0.013       -0.007    -0.005           -0.004         0.004                0.001            -0.007           -0.007            -0.006      -0.005
                                           (0.29)       (0.006)     (0.005)        (0.009)      (0.006)   (0.006)          (0.006)        (0.007)              (0.006)          (0.007)          (0.006)           (0.006)     (0.005)
      N for Governance outcomes                           531         736             303         531       528              531            479                  531              531              533               534         544
      N for Legitimacy outcomes                           404         535             227         404       402              404            368                  404              404              407               407         415
      Notes: This table compares alternative specifications, changing one feature of the model at a time (not cumulatively). Column (2) reports our main results, as expressed in Table 4. Columns (3) and (4) use 300-meter
     and 100-meter bandwidths around the comuna borders rather than the 200-meter default. Columns (5) and (7) drop covariates corresponding to demographics and distance to other state agencies and business centers
     (these covariates are displayed in Table 3). Column (6) uses a measure of distance to other state agencies and business center in the block's comuna, rather than the nearest. Column (8) uses an alternate distance to
     the border running variable, calculated to a fixed point in the nearest border for each pair (rather than coordinates). Column (9) adjusts the treatment variable, distance to police and Casa de Justicia, by elevation.
     Column (10) computes standard error clustered by border. Columns (11), (12) and (13) use alternate matching algorithms for pairing blocks, adjusting matching distances by elevation and relaxing various matching
     criteria.
Table D.4: Coefficient of closeness to state services for blocks along the inner comuna
                 borders of Medellín on governance index components


                                                                          Relative
                                                                                       State       Combo
                                                                           state
                                                             Subsample
                                                                         Estimate    Estimate     Estimate
                                                               Mean
                                                                           (SE)        (SE)         (SE)
                                                               (SD)
                                                                (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)
      Relative State Governance Index                           0.08        -0.002   -0.019*** -0.014**
                                                              (0.24)       (0.006)     (0.005)  (0.005)
        HH: Someone refuses to pay a big debt                  -0.15         0.004      -0.007   -0.007
                                                              (0.33)       (0.012)     (0.009)  (0.009)
        HH: There is domestic violence                          0.16         0.003     -0.017*  -0.015*
                                                              (0.32)       (0.011)     (0.009)  (0.009)
        HH: Two drunks fight on the street                      0.15      -0.027**   -0.028***   -0.007
                                                              (0.34)       (0.012)     (0.009)  (0.009)
        HH: Kids fight on the street                           -0.03        0.017*      -0.014 -0.022***
                                                              (0.30)       (0.010)     (0.009)  (0.008)
        HH: Home improvements affect neighbors                  0.17        -0.014   -0.030***   -0.012
                                                              (0.32)       (0.010)     (0.010)  (0.008)
        HH: Someone is making noise                             0.23     -0.048***   -0.048***   -0.002
                                                              (0.31)       (0.010)     (0.008)  (0.006)
        HH: People smoking marijuana near children              0.07        -0.008   -0.033*** -0.017**
                                                              (0.31)       (0.010)     (0.008)  (0.008)
        HH: Someone is mugged on the street                    -0.03        -0.007   -0.029*** -0.014*
                                                              (0.32)       (0.010)     (0.008)  (0.008)
        HH: A car or motorbike is stolen                        0.06         0.002   -0.025*** -0.024***
                                                              (0.36)       (0.012)     (0.009)  (0.008)
        HH: Someone is threatening someone else                 0.02        -0.011     -0.017*   -0.011
                                                              (0.35)       (0.011)     (0.009)  (0.008)
        HH: It is necessary to prevent a theft                 -0.00        -0.010     -0.015*   -0.009
                                                              (0.34)       (0.010)     (0.008)  (0.009)
        HH: You have to react to a robbery                      0.01        -0.002     -0.017*   -0.012
                                                              (0.36)       (0.011)     (0.009)  (0.008)
        Biz: Someone does not want to pay a debt               -0.06       -0.037*    -0.030** -0.030**
                                                              (0.38)       (0.020)     (0.015)  (0.014)
        Biz: Businesses in this sector are robbed               0.07         0.016      -0.013   -0.027
                                                              (0.47)       (0.023)     (0.016)  (0.018)
        Biz: Someone disturbs a business                        0.12        -0.017     -0.024*   -0.010
                                                              (0.45)       (0.020)     (0.013)  (0.015)
        Biz: It is necessary to prevent a theft                 0.07        -0.009    -0.026**   -0.022
                                                              (0.47)       (0.020)     (0.013)  (0.015)
        Biz: You have to react to a robbery                     0.11        -0.014      -0.009   -0.014
                                                              (0.48)       (0.024)     (0.014)  (0.017)
      Number of observations                                                  525        531      526
      Notes: This table calculates the effect of being 100 meters further from the state on the 17 components
     of our governance indexes. HH indicates questions asked to households, and Biz represents questions
     asked to businesses.




                                                       xvi
Table D.5: Test of systematic measurement error: Coefficient of closeness to state services
  for blocks along the inner comuna borders of Medellín on measurement error proxies

                                                                                                                                         Correlation with
                                                                                                            Y         Correlation with
                                                                                                                                           StateDist
                                                                                                        sample mean     StateDist
                                                                                                                                          (as sample sd)
                                                                                            Subsample
                                                                                                          Estimate        Estimate          Estimate
                                                                                              Mean
                                                                                                            (SE)            (SE)              (SE)
                                                                                              (SD)
                                                                                               (1)          (2)             (3)                (4)
 Vacuna payment rate difference (RR-DR)                                                       -0.05         0.042          -0.021            -0.026
                                                                                             (0.82)       (1.085)         (0.032)
 Difference in proportion of questions answered for governance index (State - Com             0.03         -0.037          -0.005            -0.042
                                                                                             (0.13)       (0.188)         (0.003)
   Proportion of questions answered for mayor governance index                                 0.89         0.008        0.009**              0.067
                                                                                             (0.14)       (0.197)         (0.004)
   Proportion of questions answered for combo governance index                                 0.86         0.045        0.015***             0.079
                                                                                             (0.18)       (0.265)         (0.005)
 Difference in proportion of questions answered for legitimacy index (State - Com             0.09         -0.012          -0.002            -0.013
                                                                                             (0.18)       (0.215)         (0.005)
   Proportion of questions answered for state legitimacy index                                 0.97         0.012           0.001             0.008
                                                                                             (0.08)       (0.101)         (0.002)
   Proportion of questions answered for combo legitimacy index                                 0.87         0.023           0.003             0.015
                                                                                             (0.20)       (0.243)         (0.006)
 Number of observations                                                                                      537             536               536
 Minimum N                                                                                                   235             234               234
 Notes: This table takes the proxies for measurement error discussed in Appendix A and calculates the effect of being 100 meters more distant from the
state on these proxies, using the same estimation for our main treatment effects. The vacuna rate difference computes the difference between randomized
response and direct response to the question of whether the household pays vacunas. The other measures capture non-response to sensitive items (the
proportion of questions answered). We look at the proportion of questions answered for each index, and whether this is different for the state versus the
combo. More questions answered for the state could indicate a reluctance to talk about or disclose combo activities.




                                                                         xvii
   Table D.6: Coefficient on closeness to state services for blocks along the inner comuna
                            borders of Medellín, other outcomes

                                                                                                                         Correlation with
                                                                                            Y         Correlation with
                                                                                                                           StateDist
                                                                                        sample mean     StateDist
                                                                                                                          (as sample sd)
                                                                            Subsample
                                                                                          Estimate        Estimate          Estimate
                                                                              Mean
                                                                                            (SE)            (SE)              (SE)
                                                                              (SD)
                                                                               (1)          (2)             (3)                (4)
 Panel A: Efficacy outcomes

   How easy is it to contact the combo                                         0.57         0.004         -0.013**           -0.072
                                                                              (0.25)      (0.268)          (0.005)
   How fast is the...                                                          0.52        -0.013        -0.024***           -0.114
                                                                              (0.29)      (0.302)          (0.007)
   How easy is it to contact the state                                         0.45        -0.009        -0.023***           -0.093
                                                                              (0.18)      (0.354)          (0.008)
   How fast is the...                                                          0.38        -0.073         -0.025**           -0.083
                                                                              (0.21)      (0.422)          (0.010)
 Panel B: Payments to combos and state

   Payment rate of security fee (vacuna)                                       0.13        -0.011          -0.007            -0.025
                                                                              (0.28)      (0.352)         (0.008)
   Perception about neighbors of this sector pay security fee (vacuna)         0.32         0.030         -0.017*            -0.045
                                                                              (0.35)      (0.469)         (0.010)
   Approves that the combo charges a security fee (vacuna)                     0.06        -0.003          -0.004            -0.024
                                                                              (0.15)      (0.221)         (0.004)
   Considers security fees (vacuna) by the combo very high                     0.28         0.019           0.011             0.030
                                                                              (0.37)      (0.536)         (0.013)
   Percentage of bussines paying taxes                                         0.50        -0.022         -0.032*            -0.066
                                                                              (0.49)      (0.700)         (0.019)
   Approves that the Mayor's office taxes for services                         0.59         0.013        -0.022***           -0.068
                                                                              (0.30)      (0.446)         (0.008)
   Considers that the Mayor's office charges very high                         0.61        -0.042          0.009              0.028
                                                                              (0.31)      (0.491)         (0.010)
 Number of observations                                                                      537             536               536
 Minimum N                                                                                   307             306               306
 Notes: This table calculates the effect of being 100 meters further from the state on a number of additional outcomes. We preregistered
relative state governance and legitimacy as primary and secondary outcomes for the experiment. We collected a number of other measures
of state and combo performance, however, and report them here.




                                                                xviii
                                Figure D.1: Treatment and control sectors



                            N




                                                                                  Control
                                                                                  Treatment




                      0.0          2.5       5.0 km




Notes: The main constraint on the number of treated sectors was the city's immediate implementation
capacity. To select the 80, first the city omitted non-residential downtown areas, where crime is organized
differently, there are few territorial combos, and criminal governance is limited. Second, city staff from each
comuna were asked to identify small, informal neighborhoods where a combo: (i) provided security and taxed
residents for security; (ii) was a major resource for the community to resolve disputes; (iii) regulated illegal
and legal markets; and (iv) provided other government services (e.g., garbage collection). Our research team
validated these sectors with city social workers from other branches of the government (e.g., the Victims
Unit). Many hundreds of sectors have a serious combo presence, and the city narrowed these to the 80 where
they believed criminal governance was greatest. From a list of 100 such sectors provided by the city, we
discarded those less than 250 meters away from one another to minimize the risk of spillovers, for a final set
of 80 sectors.




                                                      xix
                                        Figure D.2: How treatment experiences varied by initial levels of gang rule
                                                                (treated sectors only)

(a) Failed promises of the wider state apparatus (b) Instances of combo interference and capture

                                   1                                                                                                              1




                                                                                                     Index of intervention capture by the combo
                                   .8                                                                                                             .8
   Index of sector state failure




                                   .6                                                                                                             .6




                                   .4                                                                                                             .4




                                   .2                                                                                                             .2




                                   0                                                                                                              0
                                        0         .2        .4         .6        .8         1                                                          0         .2        .4         .6        .8         1
                                        Baseline - Combo Governance Index (Relative to State)                                                          Baseline - Combo Governance Index (Relative to State)

Notes: In February 2020, after completion of the experiment, we surveyed every liaison from the experiment
about their experiences in their sector. Based on their responses, we created two indexes of program experi-
ences. The first, in Panel (a), is the frequency of various failures of the liaison or the wider state apparatus
to deliver on promises. This include a scale of the perceived frequency of failures from the liaison, police,
and mayor's office bureaucrats and binary variables for whether specific local state agency failed. Values
closer to 1 mean higher state failure. The second, in Panel (b), captures the degree with which the combo
interfered with liaison activities. Our intervention capture measure aggregates the following sub components:
a scale for the frequency and difficulties of interaction with local gangs, a set of binary variables on whether
local actors, including the gang, took credit for the intervention activities; and, a set of binary variables for
activities by which the gang curtailed or helped the liaison on the interventions. Values closer to 1 represent
higher involvement from locals gang on intervention activities.




                                                                                                xx
                 Table D.7: Field experiment baseline summary statistics and balance
                                                                                           Means                 Regression Difference
 Covariate                                                                            Control  Treated          Coeff   p-value      SE
 Neighborhood size (floorspace area in sq meters)                                    28,252.83   27,159.17    -1,093.65     0.69    2,729.92
 Additive index of combo presence and governance                                        0.01       -0.01        -0.02       0.88       0.13
   Index of relative visibility of the combo and the state                              0.01       -0.01        -0.02       0.88       0.13
     How frequently do you see combo members when you visit the secor? (0               2.38       2.35         -0.02      0.86       0.14
     How infrequently do you see mayor's workers when you visit the secto               0.87       0.90          0.03      0.77       0.10
     How infrequently do you see police when you visit the sector? (0-3)                0.97       0.90         -0.06      0.49       0.09
     How many of the youth support the combo? (0-3)                                     1.74        1.47        -0.27     0.03**      0.12
   Ease to work in sectror for liasons                                                  1.50        1.57         0.08      0.63       0.15
   Ease to work in sectror for community leaders                                        1.05        1.30         0.25      0.06*      0.13
   Index of relative governance of the combo and the state                              0.01       -0.01        -0.02       0.90      0.13
     Who solves disputes between neighbors in the sectos? (0-2)                         0.95        1.00         0.05      0.55       0.08
     Who solves intra-family violence in the sector? (0-2)                              0.73        0.78         0.05      0.55       0.09
     Who solves thefts in the sector? (0-2)                                             1.04        1.00        -0.04      0.64       0.09
     Who gives permission to use sports fields in the sector? (0-2)                    0.32        0.37          0.05      0.46       0.07
     Who solves disputes over permits in the sector? (0-2)                              0.88        0.91         0.04      0.68       0.09
     Who solves infrastructure problems in the sector? (0-2)                            0.12        0.18         0.05       0.29       0.05
     Who solves problems of hunger and poverty in the sector? (0-2)                     0.25        0.26         0.01       0.89       0.08
     Who solves problems of people doing drugs in inappropriate places in               1.17        1.07        -0.10      0.31       0.10
     Who solves problems of sexual abuse in the sector? (0-2)                           0.86        0.73        -0.13      0.11       0.08
     Who solves problems of disappearing people in the sector? (0-2)                    0.42        0.45         0.03       0.75      0.09
     Who solves murders in the sectors? (0-2)                                           0.45        0.42        -0.03      0.78       0.09
     Who gives permission for political events in the sector (0-2)?                     0.45        0.48         0.03      0.73       0.09
     Who gives permission for who becomes a JAC in the sector? (0-2)                    0.48       0.40         -0.08      0.28       0.07
     Who gives permission for loud parties in the sector? (0-2)                         0.94        0.88        -0.05      0.53       0.08
 Standardized index of perceived insecurity and drugs                                   0.07       -0.07        -0.14      0.23       0.11
     How insecure is the sector in general? (0-3)                                       0.61        0.61        -0.00      1.00       0.08
     How insecure is walking at night in the sector? (0-3)                              1.33        1.42         0.09      0.35       0.09
     How insecure is talking on your cell at night in the sector? (0-3)                 1.12        1.00        -0.12      0.32       0.12
     How insecure is it to walk at night as a man? (0-3)                                1.53        1.36        -0.17      0.22       0.14
     How insecure is it to walk at night as a woman? (0-3)                              1.62        1.70         0.08       0.42      0.10
     How many of the youth do drugs? (0-3)                                              2.09        1.88        -0.21     0.01**      0.08
     How would you characterize drugs in the 'vice' areas of the sector?                2.40        2.37        -0.02      0.84       0.11
 Index of crime                                                                         0.10       -0.10        -0.19     0.02**      0.08
     Count of homicides per median sector area in 2014 to 2017                          1.51        1.26        -0.25      0.42       0.30
     Count of gang-related homicides per median sector area 2015 to 2017                0.83       0.57         -0.25      0.22       0.20
     Count of thefts per median sector area in 2014 to 2017                            18.19       14.82        -3.36      0.25       2.89
     Count of calls related to violence per median sector area 2016 to 20              38.82       47.26         8.44     0.08*       4.62
     Count of calls related to drugs per median sector area 2016 to 2017               8.28         6.24        -2.04      0.19       1.53
 Index of distance from public goods and services                                      -0.14        0.14         0.29       0.19       0.21
     Distance to nearest downtown (meters)                                            307.87      339.74        31.87       0.64      67.99
     Distance to nearest social services (meters)                                     273.53      330.70        57.17      0.38      63.82
     Distance to nearest public transit (meters)                                      175.53      234.99        59.46      0.32      58.69
     Distance to nearest cultural center (meters)                                      91.99      107.95        15.96      0.59      29.09
     Distance to nearest educational facility (meters)                                 43.60       77.05        33.45      0.09*     19.36
     Distance to nearest justice or police center (meters)                            553.49      549.62        -3.88      0.97      100.84
     Distance to nearest religious center (meters)                                    162.90      169.58         6.69      0.88      42.43
 Notes: This table reports treatment and control group means and uses an OLS regression to calculate treatment-control differences for neigh-
borhood size and four main indexes, along with all index components. The four indexes are used as control variables in estimation of treatment
effects. All estimates included fixed effects for the 40 treatment-control pairs.




                                                                    xxi
Table D.8: Estimating treatment spillovers onto non-experimental units within a 250 meter
                                          radius

                                                                        Spillover Rings
                                           Treatment Estimate      P-value 0m-250m Spillover Estimate          P-value
                                                  (1)                (2)                (3)                      (4)
     Relative State Governance Index              -0.0432           0.0170               -0.0677                0.1580
       State Governance Index                     -0.0227           0.0850               -0.0516                0.0650
       Combo Governance Index                      0.0168           0.2980                0.0113                0.7130
     Relative State Legitimacy Index              -0.0026           0.8820               -0.0290                0.1780
       State Legitimacy Index                      0.0072           0.5150               -0.0021                0.5040
       Combo Legitimacy Index                      0.0156           0.3820                0.0176                0.7040
     Notes: Our sample includes 6977 survey respondents, including 2,379 in the experimental sectors and 4,598 on blocks
    from the representative city survey. The tale reports treatment estimates along with an indicator for blocks in the
    experimental sectors and an indicator for blocks within 250 meters of a treated sector. We calculate p-values using
    randomization inferences, correcting estimates for fuzzy clustering. To address systematic exposure to spillovers due
    to the geographic distribution, we weight each observation by the inverse probability of each treatment category:
    treated, <250 meters, and >250 meters. See Blattman et al. (2021) for an explanation of this estimation strategy.




                                                            xxii
   Table D.9: Robustness of experimental results to changes in the specification


                                                                    Dropping     Add sector
                                                      Main                                      Main
                                                                    individual   and block
                                                   specification                              collapsed
                                                                     controls     controls
                                      Subsample         Estimate    Estimate     Estimate     Estimate
                                        Mean              (SE)        (SE)         (SE)         (SE)
                                        (SD)            [p-value]   [p-value]    [p-value]    [p-value]
                                          (1)             (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)
 Relative State Governance Index         0.07           -0.028*     -0.029*        -0.014      -0.030
                                                        (0.015)     (0.016)       (0.013)     (0.022)
                                                        [0.064]     [0.062]       [0.296]     [0.181]
   State Governance Index                0.41           -0.017*     -0.017*        -0.013      -0.017
                                                        (0.010)     (0.010)       (0.008)     (0.014)
                                                        [0.089]     [0.096]       [0.112]     [0.243]
   Combo Governance Index                0.35            0.009       0.010         -0.002      0.010
                                                        (0.011)     (0.012)       (0.012)     (0.016)
                                                        [0.414]     [0.375]       [0.842]     [0.535]
 Relative State Legitimacy Index         0.13            0.012       0.010          0.027      0.009
                                                        (0.019)     (0.020)       (0.026)     (0.028)
                                                        [0.550]     [0.629]       [0.319]     [0.762]
   Combo Legitimacy Index                0.44            0.002       0.005         -0.009       0.005
                                                        (0.015)     (0.015)       (0.019)     (0.022)
                                                        [0.874]     [0.768]       [0.642]     [0.803]
   State Legitimacy Index                0.57           0.012*      0.013*        0.016*       0.013
                                                        (0.007)     (0.008)       (0.010)     (0.011)
                                                        [0.094]     [0.097]       [0.096]     [0.241]
 N for Governance outcomes                               2,362       2,362          2,362         80
 N for Legitimacy outcomes                               1,845       1,845          1,845         80
 Notes: Column (2) shows our main specification as reported in Table 6. Each column makes one
change relative to this main specification, non-cumulatively. Column (3) drops respondents demo-
graphics which include age, gender, time in the neighborhood, and whether respondent represents
a business or a household. Column (4) adds block and sector level covariates. Column (5) collapses
our individual observations into an 80-sector dataset.




                                                xxiii
Table D.10: Intervention effects on 17 sub index component of the governance index


                                                                       Relative
                                                                                    State     Combo
                                                                        state
                                                           Subsample
                                                                       Estimate   Estimate   Estimate
                                                             Mean
                                                                         (SE)       (SE)       (SE)
                                                             (SD)
                                                              (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)
      Relative State Governance Index                        0.07       -0.028*   -0.017*     0.009
                                                                        (0.015)   (0.010)    (0.011)
        HH: Someone refuses to pay a big debt                -0.20       -0.025    -0.005      0.014
                                                                        (0.016)   (0.014)    (0.017)
        HH: There is domestic violence                       0.15        -0.015    -0.022     -0.007
                                                                        (0.021)   (0.017)    (0.019)
        HH: Two drunks fight on the street                   0.13        -0.017    -0.001      0.010
                                                                        (0.026)   (0.015)    (0.018)
        HH: Kids fight on the street                         -0.03       -0.020    -0.010      0.002
                                                                        (0.018)   (0.012)    (0.016)
        HH: Home improvements affect neighbors               0.14        -0.007    -0.016     -0.010
                                                                        (0.018)   (0.014)    (0.014)
        HH: Someone is making noise                          0.26       -0.031*    -0.009    0.022**
                                                                        (0.018)   (0.016)    (0.010)
        HH: People smoking marijuana near children           0.03         0.001     0.004      0.012
                                                                        (0.021)   (0.014)    (0.016)
        HH: Someone is mugged on the street                  -0.05        0.013     0.000     -0.005
                                                                        (0.023)   (0.016)    (0.019)
        HH: A car or motorbike is stolen                     -0.01        0.011     0.011      0.002
                                                                        (0.022)   (0.016)    (0.017)
        HH: Someone is threatening someone else              -0.01       -0.020    -0.003      0.012
                                                                        (0.020)   (0.015)    (0.017)
        HH: It is necessary to prevent a theft               -0.04       -0.014  -0.028**     -0.010
                                                                        (0.023)   (0.013)    (0.017)
        HH: You have to react to a robbery                   -0.02       -0.019    -0.018     -0.003
                                                                        (0.023)   (0.017)    (0.017)
        Biz: Someone does not want to pay a debt             -0.05       -0.009   0.048**      0.032
                                                                        (0.026)   (0.023)    (0.029)
        Biz: Businesses in this sector are robbed            0.07       -0.070*    -0.033      0.008
                                                                        (0.041)   (0.034)    (0.032)
        Biz: Someone disturbs a business                     0.16       -0.073*    -0.024      0.035
                                                                        (0.044)   (0.034)    (0.032)
        Biz: It is necessary to prevent a theft              0.08       -0.085* -0.086***     -0.004
                                                                        (0.044)   (0.032)    (0.035)
        Biz: You have to react to a robbery                  0.12      -0.088** -0.061**       0.026
                                                                        (0.037)   (0.030)    (0.034)
      Number of observations                                              2,314     2,362      2,316
     Notes: This table calculates the treatment effects on the 17 components of our governance indexes.
     HH indicates questions asked to households, and Biz represents questions asked to businesses.




                                                    xxiv
         Table D.11: Treatment-control differences in indicators of Measurement error
                                                                                                  Percentage
                                                                                                                       ATE
                                                                          Control Mean   ATE         SE     P-value    as %     N
                                                                                                                       of SD
                                                                              (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)     (5)     (6)
 Extortion rates
   Sector vacuna payment rate difference (RR-DR)                             0.041       -0.051     0.053      0.339   -0.217   80

 Proportion of questions answered
   Proportion of questions answered for relative state governance index      0.033       -0.003     0.008      0.690   -0.096   80
     Proportion of questions answered for mayor governance index             0.891       -0.005     0.011      0.632   -0.113   80
     Proportion of questions answered for combo governance index             0.858       -0.002     0.013      0.876   -0.036   80
   Proportion of questions answered for relative state legitimacy index      0.082       -0.001     0.011      0.895   -0.027   80
     Proportion of questions answered for state legitimacy index             0.971       -0.013     0.006      0.056   -0.471   80
     Proportion of questions answered for combo legitimacy index             0.889       -0.011     0.014      0.420   -0.168   80

 Notes: This table takes the proxies for measurement error discussed in Appendix A and calculates the correla-
tion with our randomized treatment on these proxies, using the same estimation for our main treatment effects.
The vacuna rate difference computes the difference between randomized response and direct response to the
question of whether the household pays vacunas. The other measures capture non-response to sensitive items
(the proportion of questions answered). We look at the proportion of questions answered for each index, and
whether this is different for the state versus the combo. More questions answered for the state could indicate
a reluctance to talk about or disclose combo activities.




                                                              xxv
