                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        GENDER QUOTAS AND SUPPORT FOR WOMEN IN BOARD ELECTIONS

                                          Marina Gertsberg
                                        Johanna Mollerstrom
                                           Michaela Pagel

                                        Working Paper 28463
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w28463


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2021




We thank Mariassunta Giannetti, Alexandra Niessen-Ruenzi, Felix von Meyernick, Vincent Intintoli,
Daniel Greene, Reena Aggarwal, Alex Imas, Elena Simintzi, Jillian Grennan, Alex Rees-Jones, Christine
Exley, Gary Charness, and Neal Galpin for helpful comments and suggestions. We also thank seminar
and conference participants at various institutions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2021 by Marina Gertsberg, Johanna Mollerstrom, and Michaela Pagel. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Gender Quotas and Support for Women in Board Elections
Marina Gertsberg, Johanna Mollerstrom, and Michaela Pagel
NBER Working Paper No. 28463
February 2021
JEL No. G3,J16,J7

                                          ABSTRACT

We study shareholder support for corporate board nominees in the context of the California
gender quota, which was passed in 2018. Using hand-collected data for approximately 600 firms,
we show that, prior to the quota, female nominees received greater shareholder support than their
male counterparts. This is consistent with a pre-quota environment in which female board
nominees were held to a higher standard than male nominees. Second, we show that incumbent
female directors in the post-quota environment receive greater support than incumbent men,
while support for new (mandated) female nominees decreases to the level of support for new
male nominees. This indicates that the quota led to a conversion in the bar for men and women to
become board nominees, and that it did not lead to new female board nominees being of lower
quality than male nominees. We likewise challenge the notion that the negative stock price
reaction to the quota reflects value destruction due to an insufficient supply of female directors.
Instead, we provide evidence that dysfunctional board dynamics are driving the reaction, in the
sense that stock prices reacted negatively to entrenched boards who failed to turn over the least
supported directors when adjusting their boards to comply with the new law.

Marina Gertsberg                                 Michaela Pagel
Monash Business School                           Columbia Business School
Caulfield Campus                                 3022 Broadway
900 Dandenong Road                               Uris Hall
Caulfield East VIC 3145                          New York, NY 10027
marina.gertsberg@monash.edu                      and NBER
                                                 mpagel@columbia.edu
Johanna Mollerstrom
Vernon Smith Hall 5028
George Mason University
3434 Washington Blvd
Arlington, VA 22201
jmollers@gmu.edu
1     Introduction

In September 2018 a quota for corporate boards was passed in California (CA Senate Bill 826). It

requires all publicly held firms headquartered in the state to have at least one appointed female

director by the end of 2019, and two (three) female board members by the end of 2021 for boards

with five (six or more) members. Following the lead of several European countries, this made

California the first US state to impose a binding gender quota on boards. The stock market

reacted negatively to the quota (as documented by Hwang, Shivdasani, and Simintzi, 2018; Von

Meyerinck et al., 2019; Greene, Intintoli, and Kahle, 2020), a fact which has been interpreted as

evidence that shareholders oppose the mandated addition of new female directors (e.g., because

of scarcity of qualified female candidates leading to higher search costs, or to suboptimal trustees

being appointed, see also Ahern and Dittmar, 2012) and prefer the current composition of the

board.

    We challenge this interpretation by providing new evidence using hand-collected data on

shareholder voting results from annual shareholder meetings for approximately 600 firms, before

and after the introduction of the CA quota. Using these data, we conduct a detailed investigation

of shareholder support at the level of individual director nominees. We first show that, prior to

the quota, female nominees (both new and incumbent) received greater support than male nom-

inees. This is consistent with women facing a higher quality bar than men to become nominated

for a board position. Second, we document that, post-quota, now that the number of female

appointees has greatly increased, support for incumbent female nominees remains stronger than

for male incumbents (for whom support decreased post quota). In contrast, support for new

female nominees decreased after the quota and converged to the same level as the support for

new male nominees.

    Our second result fails to support the argument that shareholders prefer existing board mem-

bers to the new female nominees introduced by the quota. It is, however, consistent with previous

findings that: (i) there is a sufficient supply of suitable women to fill board seats; (ii) new fe-

male candidates appointed to boards in response to the quota are not less qualified than male

appointees; and (iii) new female candidates are not less qualified than incumbent female board

members who were appointed before the quota (Bertrand et al., 2019; Von Meyerinck et al., 2019;



                                                 1
Giannetti and Wang, 2020). However, previous findings rely on ex-ante definitions of qualifica-

tions, whereas our shareholder voting is a direct measure of shareholders perceptions of director

quality. We contribute to this literature by providing the first direct evidence indicating that

shareholders view the quota-mandated women as equally qualified as new men.

   In light of these findings, a natural question arises: If shareholders view quota-mandated

women as good candidates, why did the stock market react negatively to the quota? Our third

result reconciles the negative stock price reaction with the evidence that there are enough qual-

ified female candidates. We show that only certain stocks reacted negatively to the quota an-

nouncement. These were the stocks of firms that subsequently failed to replace the director with

the lowest pre-quota support when adjusting the board to comply with the new law. This also

explains the observed decline in shareholder support for incumbent male nominees post quota. It

therefore appears that the negative share price reaction has been driven not by a lack of qualified

female board members, but by correctly anticipated dysfunctional board dynamics in the form

of suboptimal turnover of directors.

   Our results are an important reminder that the share price reaction to any new regulation

is in part a reaction to the regulation and in part a reaction to firms' behaviors given that

regulation. In the case of our specific quota, we provide evidence that shareholders approve of

the female candidates added but disapprove of the way in which boards choose to restructure.

This subtlety is often missing in existing debates about new policies and regulations.

   We hand-collect our data directly from corporate SEC filings and extract information on

voting outcomes for California firms before and after the quota (our data covers all board election

outcomes from annual shareholder meetings from January 2016 until July 2020). This approach

allows us to include smaller firms that have publicly traded equity, but are not part of a major

index. Our sample covers 585 firms. Due to the fact that shareholders vote for every board

nominee separately, our approach allows us to consider aggregate measures (like stock price

movements), while also observing the support for every nominee standing for election at the

annual shareholder meeting. We can thus provide more detailed answers to questions regarding

shareholder reactions to gender quotas. We also introduce a new angle for studying open questions

about effectiveness and viability of affirmative action policies in general (c.f. Leslie, 2019; Dover,

Kaiser, and Major, 2020).


                                                  2
   Our work contributes to the vibrant literature seeking to understand the consequences of

board quotas. An extant literature has documented a positive association between greater female

participation in the boardroom and firm performance (Adams and Ferreira, 2009; Gul, Srinidhi,

and Ng, 2011; Adams and Funk, 2012; Kim and Starks, 2016). Board quotas have been suggested

as one mechanism to increase female participation.

   In 2003, Norway became the first country in the world to introduce a gender quota when they

enacted a law mandating a 40% share of women on the boards of publicly traded companies. In

one of the earliest studies on the effects of the Norwegian quota, Ahern and Dittmar, 2012 argue

that its passage was followed by a negative stock market reaction and a subsequent decline in

firm value and accounting performance (Matsa and Miller, 2013 reach similar results regarding

firm profits using a matched sample of Swedish firms as a control group, as do Yang et al.,

2019 who use a similar empirical design). Additionally, Ahern and Dittmar, 2012 document that

the new women who joined the board post-quota were less experienced than incumbent male

directors. In contrast, however, Nygaard, 2011 found that the stock market reaction to the quota

was positive for firms with low information asymmetries between the board and management.

For firms with high information asymmetries, there was no positive (but also no negative) effect.

They argue that female directors, who more often represent outsiders, will have worse access to

information in the latter type of firms and thus will not be able to fulfill their monitoring role as

well as directors who represent insiders (and who are more likely to be male). Thus, they argue

that the effect of the quota was positive only for the former type of firms.

   The opposing results of Nygaard, 2011 and Ahern and Dittmar, 2012 point to an inherent

challenge for those investigating the Norwegian quota. First, it is unclear what should constitute

the event date; while Ahern and Dittmar, 2012 use 2002 as their event year, Nygaard, 2011

uses 2005.1 Second, Bøhren and Staubo, 2014 find that 50% of firms who would potentially be

impacted by the Norwegian quota changed their organizational form to avoid being impacted.

This, in turn, leads to the sample of Nygaard, 2011 and Ahern and Dittmar, 2012 being differ-

ent. Finally a more recent study, Eckbo, Nygaard, and Thorburn, 2020, considers various event

dates and fails to find any significant (positive or negative) effects on firm value and operating
1 Theenactment of the quota followed long debates, which started in 1999, and firms had time to prepare between
 2002 and 2005 for the implementation of the quota (Ferreira, 2015).




                                                      3
performance in response to the quota.2

       The 2018 CA quota has a precise event date and firms were left with a shorter time to comply

with the law after its passing. The enactment of the gender board quota in CA also represents

a first opportunity to study shareholder attitudes to mandated quotas in a US context. Studies

that provide first evidence on the impact of California's quota on stock prices include Hwang,

Shivdasani, and Simintzi, 2018; Von Meyerinck et al., 2019 and Greene, Intintoli, and Kahle, 2020.

Given that the event was recent, the analyses are limited to the investigation of announcement

returns and cross-sectional analysis, while Californian firms are matched with a set of control

firms in other states. All three studies provide evidence of significant negative announcement

returns to the quota, ranging from -1.2% to -2.2%; however, the exact impact seems to depend

on the extent of compliance. Firms who are already in compliance with the quota at enactment

experience no adverse effect on returns. Of these three papers Greene, Intintoli, and Kahle, 2020

employ the largest sample and include all publicly traded firms headquartered in California.

Hwang, Shivdasani, and Simintzi, 2018 instead focus on Russell 3000 firms and Von Meyerinck

et al., 2019 use firms included in the BoardEx database.

       Regarding the negative stock price reaction, Hwang, Shivdasani, and Simintzi, 2018 show that

firms with an insufficient supply of female directors experience costs as a result of the quota. These

include: weak corporate governance, low profitability, limited access to the local director pool

experience, negative announcement returns, worse earnings forecasts, and wider credit default

spreads. In a similar vein, Von Meyerinck et al., 2019 show how the expected cost of compliance

with the quota impacts the degree to which firms experience negative abnormal returns. However,

their evidence does not suggest that a limited supply of qualified female directors is key. Rather,

their results point to the negative announcement returns stemming from shareholders' reactions

to the government's attempt to regulate non-economic values, as well as the anticipation of more

such policies in the future.

       While these papers (which all use announcement returns) support the view that shareholders

opposed the introduction of the CA quota, analyzing characteristics of the women who joined

boards after the quota indicates that these women are sufficiently qualified. This finding chal-
2 Inaddition, they argue that the positive abnormal returns found in Nygaard, 2011 were unrelated to the passage
 of the quota as foreign firms not subject to the quota, but listed on the same exchange, experienced similar stock
 price increases around that period.



                                                        4
lenges the argument that an insufficient supply of qualified female board members is fueling

the negative stock price reactions. It also calls for a more direct investigation of shareholders'

attitudes towards female board nominees. Here, we provide that investigation using shareholder

voting data and stock market returns. Our results are also complementary with Gormley et al.,

2020. The authors find that after gender diversity marketing campaigns, firms increased female

representation on boards.

   Our work also relates to an emerging literature investigating the determinants of shareholder

support for nominees in board election. These studies generally use the ISS Voting Analytics

and BoardEx databases, resulting in a sample that intersects Russell 3000 and SP1500 firms.

To the best of our knowledge, the only studies considering the relationship between director

gender and shareholder support are Cai, Garner, and Walkling, 2009, Ertimur, Ferri, and Oesch,

2018, and Aggarwal, Dahiya, and Prabhala, 2019. Ertimur, Ferri, and Oesch, 2018 focuses on

ISS recommendations (an advisory firm). They find no relationship between director gender

and voting outcomes. Cai, Garner, and Walkling, 2009 cannot draw firm conclusions about the

association between a director's gender and the amount of shareholder support she enjoys, while

Aggarwal, Dahiya, and Prabhala, 2019 find that being male is associated with fewer future

directorships. However, while these papers include a cursory exploration of the effect of gender

on shareholder support, such analysis disguises the important dynamics created by imposing a

gender quota. We contribute to this literature by being able to separately analyze how support

for new and incumbent nominees of both genders changed in response to the California quota.

   In sum, our study is the first to connect the observed negative stock price reaction to a

gender board quota with shareholder votes for individual board nominees. This enables us to de-

rive detailed insights into shareholders' attitudes toward quota-mandated nominees. Our results

challenge the dominant interpretation in the literature that a negative stock market reaction

indicates shareholder disapproval toward fem nominees.

   The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides background information on the California

gender quota and the director election process. Section 3 describes the data. Section 4 presents

our empirical strategy. Section 5 discusses the results. Section 6 concludes.




                                                5
2     Institutional Setting

2.1    The Quota: California Senate Bill No. 826

Our setting surrounds the enactment of the CA gender quota for corporate boards. The quota

was announced and went into effect on September 30, 2018. The regulation applies to all publicly

held domestic and foreign firms headquartered (with a principal executive office as identified in

the firm's 10-K filing) in the state. In practice, this implies that the California quota impacts

12% of all US firms. The quota requires firms to have at least one appointed female director by

the end of 2019. Boards with five (six or more) members must have two (three) appointed female

board members by the end of 2021. In our sample, an average board consists of eight members,

and is thus subject to a 12.5% quota by the end of 2019, and a 37.5% quota by the end of 2021.

In comparison, the Norwegian quota is 40% for all firms. The CA quota marks the first binding

board quota in the US. Noncompliance comes at a cost of a $100,000 for the first violation and

$300,000 for subsequent violations. Firms comply with the law by filing a report through the

website of the California Secretary of State.

    The CA quota offers an advantageous setting for an event study. The reason is that that the

CA quota, unlike the European mandates, was relatively unexpected, and therefore less likely to

have been anticipated. The Bill (826) was proposed to the California Senate on January 3, 2018

and passed the House with a 22-11 vote on May 31, 2018. On August 29, 2018, it was presented

to the Assembly, where it passed with a 41-26 voting outcome. At this point, it was not clear

whether the bill would become law, as Governor Jerry Brown, who signed the bill into law, did

not make any public statements on his position regarding the law before signing it on September

30 (Sunday), 2018 (Jorge L. Ortiz, 2018). After the passing of the law, firms had 15 months to

prepare for compliance. In sum, this setup ensures both a more specific event time and a shorter

preparation time than, e.g., the well-studied Norwegian gender quota for corporate boards.


2.2    Director Elections

We analyze shareholder attitudes towards mandated female board nominees by studying voting

behavior of shareholders at annual elections of the board of directors. The board represents the



                                                6
shareholders, and as their trustees, the directors are responsible for the oversight of the firm.

The current board selects the nominees for the board of directors for an upcoming fiscal year.

It is mandated that shareholders subsequently vote on these nominees in the yearly shareholder

meeting. Every shareholder is entitled to vote. To inform them about the upcoming election,

the firm sends information about the date and place of the annual meeting, instructions on how

to vote, and a list of the items that will be put to a vote (`proxy material'). For the vote on

the board of directors, information on every nominee (name, age, tenure, bio) is provided. The

shareholders also receive a proxy card, which they can use to vote until the day of the meeting,

when the votes are counted. Votes can be submitted electronically, via mail, or in person at the

shareholder meeting.

   Within the context of our study, it is essential to clarify why shareholder votes are meaningful

and what motivates shareholders to vote. First, it is important to note that director elections

in the vast majority of cases are uncontested and nominees are generally elected unopposed

(Bebchuk, 2007). This is due to the nature of the voting rules, which favor management nominees

and make it highly unlikely for shareholders to vote them out of the board at an election.3

Furthermore, shareholder votes are not binding and firm management can choose to reject the

shareholders' recommendation. As a result, a nominee who stands for election will most likely

be elected (c.f. also Cai, Garner, and Walkling, 2009 and Fischer et al., 2009). The reason this

is important is that it alleviates a potential concern of using shareholder votes as a measure

of support for nominees after a quota. The concern is that shareholders may be more prone

to vote for women simply due to the fact that they want the firm to comply with the quota.

However, as the nominees are basically guaranteed to be elected, shareholders should not actually

be concerned with quota compliance, as long as enough women are nominated.

   While shareholders cannot, in practice, influence whether or not an individual nominee is

elected, their votes matter in other ways. This is another important feature, as it ensures that

shareholders take the voting process seriously, and that their voting decisions are meaningful

as a measure of director support. Bolton et al., 2020 show that disapproving votes in director
3 The voting rules can be broadly divided into plurality and majority voting rules (but companies can formulate
 corporate bylaws to the rules which introduce modifications). Under the plurality voting rule, the nominees with
 the most votes win the election, but since the number of board seats generally equals the number of nominees,
 one vote is enough for the nominee to be elected. Under the majority rule, a nominee needs 50% of the votes. In
 practice, it is extremely rare that this threshold is not met.



                                                       7
elections are one of the main ways institutional shareholders express their disagreement with cor-

porate governance. They hence argue that the votes reflect shareholder preferences. Shareholder

disapproval can have negative consequences for the directors and the firm and are unlikely to

be ignored. Iliev et al., 2015 show that for a director, receiving lower support in an election is

associated with a higher probability that they will nominated again in the following year. Sim-

ilarly, Aggarwal, Dahiya, and Prabhala, 2019 show that shareholder dissent can lead directors

to be moved to a less favorable board position. Also, Grundfest, 2003 argues that poor election

results can induce negative press for the firm (see also Bach and Metzger, 2015 and Fos, Li, and

Tsoutsoura, 2018).

    To conclude, the voting setting provides shareholders an incentive to reveal their honest

opinion about board nominees. While a shareholder can voice their dissent without having to

worry about an immediate disruption through their vote, their votes are not inconsequential. In

our context, this means that a shareholder who considers a female mandated board candidate

unsuitable can express this through voting behavior, without putting the company at immediate

risk of violating the quota. With that said, if a substantial number of other shareholders share

this opinion, it is likely to have other consequences.



3       Data

Our dataset is constructed from the original filings submitted by companies to the US Securities

and Exchange Commission (SEC), which are available through the SEC's Electronic Data Gath-

ering, Analysis, and Retrieval system (EDGAR). All companies with publicly traded securities

that are subject to Section 12 or Section 15(d), are required to file with the SEC. This sample

is referred to in the CA Senate Bill 826 text as "publicly held domestic or foreign corporation

whose principal executive offices, according to the corporation's SEC 10-K form, are located in

California" (Secretary of State California, 2018).4

    For board election outcomes, we hand-collect information from Form 8-K. Unlike the ISS
4 The bill further refers to a public corporation as a corporation with outstanding shares listed on major US stock
 exchanges without specifying the exchanges. In our sample, we include all firms with public equity outstanding.
 If any firm that is not mandated to comply is included, this should bias our results towards zero. In addition,
 we observe that firms who are not part of large stock indices adjust their board compositions to comply with
 the quota.




                                                        8
Voting Analytics Database, which updates data once a year, our approach allows us to collect

data up until the most recent voting event and cover two main voting seasons after the enactment

of the quota (May and June of 2019 and 2020). If there was a vote on the board of directors,

the results are reported in the 8-K under Item 5.07, which states the name of each director

elected at the meeting, the number of votes cast for, against and withheld, and the number of

abstentions and broker non-votes. This form must be filed by firms within four business days of

the election. On EDGAR, we search for firms headquartered in California both before and after

the passage of the quota, and which have direction election results (item 5.07) both pre- and

post-quota. We let the data start in 2016 to ensure we have sufficient coverage of elections before

the passage of the quota. As in Hwang, Shivdasani, and Simintzi, 2018; Von Meyerinck et al.,

2019 and Greene, Intintoli, and Kahle, 2020, we define September 30, 2018 (a Sunday) as the

date of enactment. This is when Governor Brown signed the quota law and when its adoption

was publicly announced. We exclude firms that are subsidiaries of other companies or that were

acquired or delisted during the sample period. Likewise, we exclude nine elections that were

proxy contests, as these elections are likely to have different dynamics. An important implication

of our sampling approach is that it requires firms to remain in business for at least one year

in order to have director election results available in both the pre- and post-quota period. This

means that it diverges from the sample used in Hwang, Shivdasani, and Simintzi, 2018; Von

Meyerinck et al., 2019 and Greene, Intintoli, and Kahle, 2020.5

    Our final sample consists of 585 firms. It is larger than the samples used in Hwang, Shivdasani,

and Simintzi, 2018 and Von Meyerinck et al., 2019, and comparable to the sample size in Greene,

Intintoli, and Kahle, 2020. Our sample is larger due to the fact that we hand-collect data and

include firms with publicly traded equity that are not part of the Russell 3000 or the SP 1500.

    For every election, we search for the matching Form DEF14A (Definitive Proxy Statement),

which contains information on the voting procedure and the backgrounds of the directors who are

nominated to serve on the board for the next fiscal year. This form must be filed in advance of the

shareholder meeting if shareholder votes are solicited. For every election, we collect information
5 While  our sample may contain healthier firms, on average, the results of Hwang, Shivdasani, and Simintzi, 2018;
 Von Meyerinck et al., 2019 and Greene, Intintoli, and Kahle, 2020 may be partially driven by firms with financial
 difficulties around the time of the introduction of the quota and went out of business or were acquired after its
 passage.




                                                        9
on gender, age, tenure, and independence as reported in the form.6 Nominee gender is identified

from the nominee biographies in the DEF14A filings, which use gendered pronouns.

    Our data set comprise the set of directors who are suggested by the firm for the upcoming fiscal

year, which represents exactly the board composition shareholders vote for at the shareholder

meeting. We exclude directors who are listed as nominees in the DEF14A but drop out before

the election takes place. There is a distinction between classified (or staggered) and non-classified

boards. For the purpose of our analysis, this is important due to the fact that in some firms,

not all directors who will be on the board in the upcoming year stand for election. Form DEF14

provides director information for the nominees as well as the continuing directors. In our analysis

on overall board composition, we take the full slate of directors into account; however, our

main analysis focuses on the nominees who are subject to a vote in a given election. Lastly,

we obtain announcements of director appointments and departures from 8-K filings (Item 5.02).

This allows us to track changes in board composition between the last pre-quota election and

the first post-quota election. Thus, we can infer the exact board composition at the time of the

quota announcement and the subsequent changes to it.


3.1     Shareholder Support for Nominees

We define our main variable of interest, Support, as the share of shareholder support received

by a nominee who stands for election for the board of directors at a firm's annual shareholder

meeting. We differentiate between the supporting voting category "for" (which is the same across

all firms) and the non-supporting categories (where nomenclature varies across firms and includes

"against," "withhold," "abstain," "withhold/against," "abstain/against"). Support is measured as

the ratio of supporting votes to the sum of all votes. This is in line with the definition used in

the literature on director elections (Cai, Garner, and Walkling, 2009; Fischer et al., 2009; Iliev

et al., 2015; Aggarwal, Dahiya, and Prabhala, 2019) and with the approach adopted by ISS.7 We
6 We  encountered typos in reported director age. For consistency and because this is the information shareholders
  receive, we abstain from correcting these errors in the data. However, correcting the errors would not does affect
  any of our results.
7 Cai, Garner, and Walkling, 2009 measure support as the number of "for" votes divided by the sum of "for" and

  "withhold" votes. They ignore other voting categories because the ISS Voting Analytics database only reports
  these two categories. They also construct a measure called "excess votes" which is the difference between "for"
  votes for the focal nominee and the average votes for all nominees up for election at the same shareholder
  meeting. We use election fixed-effects throughout our analysis which capture the control measure in Cai, Garner,
  and Walkling, 2009.



                                                        10
also follow the standard of this literature and exclude broker non-votes.8 Typically, these votes

are not considered "votes cast" under the state law.9

    Not every shareholder who is entitled to a vote participates in the election (non-votes): the

voting participation rate in US corporate elections is on average 73%.10 Importantly, we use

election fixed-effects throughout our analysis, which controls for omitted variables at the election

level, such as differences in voting policies, voting participation, or firm performance at the time

of the election.11


3.2       Descriptive Statistics

Our sample consists of 585 distinct firms which held 2,616 elections over the 55 month-year

periods from January 2016 until July 2020. Table 1 shows descriptive statistics and provides an

overview of the overall board characteristics associated with an election, which is our level of

analysis. The total number of observations is greater (20,262) than our nominee sample (14,527),

as it also covers continuing directors at classified boards (which stagger director elections; 43.5

percent of the boards in our sample are classified) who are not standing for election but who

will serve on the board in the upcoming fiscal year.12 In our nominee sample, each observation

represents a nominee who will be voted on at a given election. The average (median) support is

94.1% (97.8%).13

    Table 2 splits our nominee sample by gender. Here, we see that 17.3% of nominees are female,

and that they on average get 1.9% more support from shareholders than male nominees. Also,

female nominees receive higher median support than male nominees and their voting results have

a lower standard deviation. Female candidates are, on average, 2.9 years younger and served 3.5
8 These  are votes held by beneficiaries through brokers or other third parties and for which the beneficiaries did
  not provide any instructions on how to vote.
9 Furthermore, Cai, Garner, and Walkling, 2009 show that broker non-votes have no impact on director election

  outcomes.
10 Cvijanovic, Groen-Xu, and Zachariadis, 2019 report that institutional shareholder with an obligation to vote

   comprise 20% of all shareholders.
11 Cai, Garner, and Walkling, 2009 identify voting recommendations issued by ISS for institutional shareholder as

   an important factor driving voting outcomes. We do not include these in our analysis as they are only provided
   by the ISS for the S&P 1500 firms and are available only until year end 2019. Nevertheless, in Table A1 in the
   Appendix we verify that our main results hold when controlling for ISS recommendations on the sub-period for
   which these are available (2016 to 2019).
12 Our results remain robust when we exclude the sub-sample of classified boards from our analysis. The results

   are reported in Table A2 in the Appendix.
13 Overall, in our sample there are 61 cases where a nominee received less than 50% support. Only 6 of those cases

   involved female nominees.



                                                        11
years less on the board than their male counterparts. This observation is in line with the fact

that the fraction of new nominees is more than twice as high for women as for men.

    Hwang, Shivdasani, and Simintzi, 2018; Von Meyerinck et al., 2019 and Greene, Intintoli, and

Kahle, 2020 show consistent evidence of a negative stock market reaction to the announcement of

the CA quota. In Table 3, we verify that this holds for our sample. For most firms, we obtain raw

and excess returns from CRSP. However, as our sample also contains small firms whose equity

trades on Over-the-Counter (OTC) exchanges, we collect stock returns for 31 firms from Yahoo

Finance.14 Each firm must have at least 30 days of returns for the estimation and there are 31

firms in our sample which do not satisfy this requirement. We use October 1, 2018 as our event

date (as September 30, 2018 is a Sunday), and our estimation window spans over 255 trading

days prior to the event and ends 6 days after it. We exclude 30 firms that have other material

events at the time of the quota announcement that could affect how shareholders react to the

quota announcement.15 As a result, the average return is based on a sample of 524 firms.16 We

estimate daily abnormal returns by subtracting the predicted returns from the raw returns and

employ the market model to estimate the predicted returns using a value-weighted market index

consisting of all sample firms. Our average abnormal return is -1.06% on the event date, and

-1.12% if we exclude the 30 firms that are traded on OTC exchanges.17 Our results are hence

similar to those in previous studies finding average abnormal returns ranging from -1.17% to

-2.2% (Hwang, Shivdasani, and Simintzi, 2018; Von Meyerinck et al., 2019 and Greene, Intintoli,

and Kahle, 2020).



4        Empirical Strategy

4.1        Conceptual Framework

A quota imposes a constraint on board composition in terms of the number of female directors.

Assuming that nominees are selected according to their quality, such a constraint implies that
14 The  returns for these firms are on average higher. We verify that these firms are not driving our results.
15 Based  on 8-K filings, we consider material events as earnings announcements, announcements of de-listings from
   exchanges and mergers. We exclude these events if they take place within (+/-) three days of October 1, 2018.
16 These firms cover 89.5% of our observations in the nominee sample. We verify that our main results are robust

   to the exclusion of the firms for which no stock price information is available, see Table A3 in the Appendix.
17 One firm traded on an OTC exchange was excluded due to a material event at the time of the quota announce-

   ment.



                                                       12
firms have to dip further down in the quality distribution of female nominees. Thus, as firms

are mandated to increase the number of women on boards, we would expect a decline in the

average quality of female relative to male nominees. Assuming that shareholders value quality,

our first prediction is hence that shareholder support for new (mandated) female nominees should

decrease after the introduction of the quota.

   The effect of the quota for the resulting overall quality composition of the board of directors

post-quota (and, relatedly, the interpretation of the stock market reaction) will depend on the

relative average quality of female and male directors on the board before the quota. The standard

narrative used to explain the negative stock price reaction to gender quotas is that, as a result

of the quota, male directors will be replaced by females who are of worse quality than the males

they replace. This is, however, only the case if the quality of female and male directors on boards

is the same before the quota. Then, the quality of the marginal (mandated) female nominee will

be below the marginal quality of a male nominee after the quota. In this situation, the quota has

value-destroying properties which could be reflected in a negative stock price reaction.

   If, however, director selection is biased against women before the implementation of the quota

(in the sense that it imposes a higher bar for female nominees than for males), we would expect

female directors to be of higher quality than males pre-quota. If this is the case, a quota that

mandates firms to move down the quality distribution of female directors to put more women

on boards would not necessarily lead to new female nominees being of lower quality than males.

Under such circumstances, the quota does not represent a value-destroying constraint for firms. If

negative stock price reactions are observed, other explanations than low quality female nominees

must be sought.

   There are two possible cases to consider. First, if we observe that female nominees receive

equal shareholder support with male nominees pre-quota, this indicates that the average quality

of the marginal female nominee is the same as that of a male nominee before the quota. In that

case, we would expect that a post-quota move down the quality distribution for female nominees

would lead to new (mandated) female nominees being of lower quality than new male nominees

after the quota. Thus, new female nominees should receive less shareholder support than new

male nominees after the quota. In such a situation, the negative stock price reactions to the

quota could reflect concerns about an insufficient supply of female directors and a scenario where


                                                13
male nominees are substituted by new female nominees of lower quality.

    A second possibility is that we observe female nominees receiving more shareholder support

than male nominees before the quota. This would imply that the average quality of the marginal

female nominee was higher than the average quality of the marginal male nominee pre-quota, i.e.

that there was a higher bar for women to become nominees pre-quota. If the quota is set too high,

and the post-quota support for new female nominees falls below that of new male nominees, the

negative stock price reaction could reflect a concern about more qualified male nominees being

replaced by less qualified females. If, however, the support for new women remains higher than,

or converges to the same level as, that of new men, a negative stock price reaction to the quota

is unlikely to be related to the perceived quality of female nominees.


4.2     Estimation

We analyze the effect of the 2018 CA quota on female board member (nominee) support using a

difference-in-difference analysis in event time. The aim is to estimate the effect of the quota on

shareholder support for female nominees relative to male nominees before and after the quota.

We specifically differentiate between new and incumbent nominees, and between female and male

nominees. We use the following main specification:


         Supportict = c + 1 F emaleict + 2 P ostict × F emaleict + 3 N ewict × F emaleict
                                                                                                       (1)
                                                          +4 P ostict × N ewict × F emaleict +   ict



    where i indicates a specific nominee in election c in year t. The nominee can be either a new

or incumbent candidate and they can either be female or male. We define a nominee as new

if they stand for election for the first time and were appointed to the board within one year

of the meeting where the election took place.18 c are election fixed effects and P ostict is an

indicator of the observation being pre- versus post- the 2018 quota, which takes on a value of

one if the shareholder meeting where the election takes place is after September 30, 2018 and

zero otherwise. We use election fixed-effects throughout our analysis to control for any observable

characteristics on election level, such as differences is voting rules, firm performance, or degree
18 Directors   can be appointed by firms throughout the year.




                                                        14
of shareholder participation.

    All shareholders can support (vote `for') both male and female incumbent and new board

nominees before and after the 2018 quota. An underlying assumption in our analysis is that any

differences in shareholders' behaviors after the quota is attributable to changes in the new set

of regulations. We verify in Figures 1 and 2a that the parallel trends assumption holds in event

time and provide an additional discussion of those figures below.



5       Results

5.1     Support for Female Nominees in Elections for the Board of Direc-
        tors

Figure 3 shows the average share of female board directors in CA for firms impacted by the

quota. It shows the share of women on boards increasing over the course of our sample period.

There is a clear structural break after the quota was introduced in 2018. While the average share

of women on boards was 12.9% in 2016, it was 15.8% in 2018, and 19.1% (23.2%) in 2019 (2020).

In Figure 4, we also see a strong increase in newly-appointed female directors. Together, these

figures indicate that the quota had the intended effect and resulted in more female nominees and

more female appointed directors.

    Table 4 shows our first key results: female nominees generally enjoy more support than male

nominees before the quota. The marginal effects from this regression are illustrated in Figure

1.19 The fact that female nominees enjoy more support than male nominees before the quota is

consistent with our expectations if female nominees were, on average, more qualified than male

nominees (i.e. they had to clear a higher bar to become a board nominee pre-quota). Table 4

also demonstrates that female nominee support is stronger post-quota relative to pre-quota. The

interaction between the post and female dummy in Column (1) shows that female nominees

receive more support than male nominees after the passage of the quota, as compared to before.

As demonstrated in Column (2), these results are robust to accounting for potential anticipation

of the regulation and exclude one year before its passage (October 2017 until October 2018).
19 Inorder to identify the point estimates for the marginal effects, we use company and year-month fixed-effects
  in place of election fixed-effects in Figure 1.



                                                      15
Columns (3) and (4) show regression results for the pre- and post-quota period separately.

   It is apparent that female nominees, on average, enjoy more support after the introduction

of the quota. Indeed, it appears that the gap in support between female and male nominees has

widened after the quota in favor of female nominees as illustrated in Figure 1.

   Another way to compare shareholder approval for male and female nominees is to look at the

support for the same nominee within the same firm before and after the quota. We only consider

nominees for which voting results are available for both periods (this is the case for 70.37% of

male and 55.07% of female nominees), i.e., incumbent nominees. Furthermore, to account for

election-level effects, we subtract the average support for the nominees in an election from the

focal nominee's support in that election (i.e., we consider excess support ). Table 5 shows that the

incumbent female nominees do not receive more support than incumbent male nominees before

the quota and their support remains stable after the quota. Incumbent men, on the other hand,

lose a substantial amount of support in the post period. This results in a statistically significant

difference between the support for incumbent female and male nominees in favor of women after

the passage of the quota. It also suggests that the increasing gap in support between male and

female nominees post-quota is driven by lower support for the male nominees.

   Next, we separately analyze support for new and incumbent nominees before and after the

quota. We expect that if the negative stock announcement returns reflect shareholder concern

that new (mandated) female nominees of worse quality will replace better qualified male nomi-

nees, post-quota support for new female nominees will be below the pre-quota support of female

nominees. Figure 2a shows the raw data averages for the support of new and incumbent female

nominees and new and incumbent male nominees. In the raw data averages, we see that share-

holder support for new female nominees decreases after the quota and approaches the level of

support of new male nominees. These two groups jointly receive the highest level of support

before and after the quota. There is a slight upward trend for new male nominees, suggesting a

higher bar for this group.

   Figure 2b shows the number of the new versus incumbent female and male nominees who

stand for election every year. The graph uncovers important changes in the composition of the

nominees. The proportion of new female nominees increases from 3.0% in 2018 to 4.9% (6.6%) in

2019 (2020). In turn, the group of new male nominees shrinks from 9.9% in 2018 to 7.0% (5.6%)


                                                16
in 2019 (2020). The proportion of incumbent male nominees remains sticky at first but decreases

from 73.7% in 2019 to 70.4% in 2020. From our data we also learn that the median board size

remains constant at eight until 2019, and increase by one in 2020. We do not observe increases

in the number of directorships (busyness) among directors.20

    Table 6 analyzes post-quota support for new versus incumbent nominees in a multivariate

setting and constitutes the second set of our key results. Figure 5 illustrates the marginal effects

for the regression.21 We note that new nominees generally enjoy stronger support (Column (1)

of Table 6).22 However, in Column (2), we also see that the coefficient on the interaction of being

a new female nominee post-quota is negative, and we conclude that shareholder support for new

female nominees fell more than for their male counterparts after the introduction of the quota.

This evidence is consistent with shareholders attributing lower quality to new female nominees

that are potentially mandated by the quota. In combination with the higher pre-quota support

for female nominees, this is consistent with a decreasing quality threshold for women to become

a board nominee and a correction of a previous bias in the director candidate selection process

which imposed a higher bar for women than for men.

    Importantly, however, even though new female nominee support falls after the quota, it does

not fall below the average support for male nominees after the quota. Columns (3) and (4) of

Table 6 show results for incumbent and new nominees separately. First, the coefficient estimates in

Column (3) illustrate that female incumbent nominees receive more support than male incumbent

nominees after the quota than before (but this is driven by the overall decrease in support for

incumbent male nominees in the post period as illustrated in Figure 5). Second, Column (4)

considers the sub-sample of new nominees, the group with the overall highest support. The

results show that after the passage of the quota, female nominees are almost indistinguishable

from male nominees in terms of support. Thus, despite a fall in support for new female nominees

after the quota relative to before, their support still remains at a high level and they are not less

supported than any group (new or incumbent) of male nominees. This suggests that the quota
20 Both  male and female directors slightly decrease the number of seats on different boards after the quota. There
   a larger decrease in busyness for female directors. The median number of board seats is one per director.
21 In order to identify the point estimates for the marginal effects, we use company and year-month fixed-effects

   in place of election fixed-effects in Figure 5.
22 This is consistent with the idea that new directors are more likely to be independent and, thus, better monitors.

   For instance, Ertimur, Ferri, and Oesch, 2018 show that ISS is likely to issue "withhold" recommendations for
   new directors.



                                                        17
had the effect of bringing the quality of the marginal new female nominee to the quality of the

marginal new male nominee closer together. All of our results are robust when the ISS voting

recommendations are controlled for and the sub-sample of elections in non-classified boards only

(see Appendix, Tables A1 and A2 respectively).

    Previous research shows that stock announcement returns are worst for firms who are violating

the quota requirements before its passage (Hwang, Shivdasani, and Simintzi, 2018; Von Meyerinck

et al., 2019; Greene, Intintoli, and Kahle, 2020): to comply with the quota, they need to add

at least one women to their boards. The current narrative explaining the negative stock price

reaction is that it is particularly costly for these firms to accomplish this due to the limited supply

of qualified women and the costs associated with recruiting them. In Table 7, we investigate to

what extent data supports this narrative. Here, we conduct the same analysis as in Table 6,

but restrict the regression to include only the sub-sample of firms who had no women on their

board in the last election before the passage of the quota (`violators') and who do not expand

their board size from the last pre-quota to the first post-quota election. This implies that we

are only considering the firms where the current board composition is modified by substituting

a male director for a female director (we also only consider the first election in the post period

to capture the first addition of a female nominee after the quota).

    About 30.8% (180) of our sample firms had no female directors at the time of the quota

announcement (September 30, 2018). As soon as the quota went into effect (December 2019)

only 11.5% (67) of firms violated it by having no single female director on their boards. In the

regressions in Table 7, we control for new male nominees given the evidence that shareholders

appear to prefer new nominees over incumbents. We do not control for new female nominees.

The reason is that, by design, it will be entirely new female candidates who violators add to

their boards to comply with the quota.23 The results show evidence of high support for female

nominees relative to (both new and incumbent) male nominees after the passage of the quota.

This, in turn, challenges the notion that shareholders perceive the current board compositions

as value maximizing and that there is a lack of qualified female board candidates.

    Overall, our results show that female nominees enjoy greater support than male nominees
23 Theoretically,  it might be the case that a female nominee who stands for election at a firm after the quota is
  already known and had a connection to the company. The SEC filings suggest that the occurrence of these
  cases, if any, is rare.



                                                       18
both before and after the passage of the quota. In fact, the gap in support becomes larger after

the quota, as incumbent male nominees lose shareholder support in the post-quota period. At

the same time, we observe that female new nominees receive less shareholder support after the

quota relative to before. Despite this drop in approval, the group of new female nominees remains

at least as supported by shareholders as male new nominees and remains more supported than

male incumbent nominees.


5.2    Stock Price Reactions and Board Turnover Decisions

In the preceding analysis, we showed that new female and male nominees receive the same level of

support from shareholders in board elections after the introduction of the quota. This suggests

that the post-quota quality of the marginal new male nominee is equal to the quality of the

marginal new female nominee. We simultaneously observe a negative stock market reaction to

the announcement of the quota, as has been documented in previous research.

   Current explanations for this negative stock market reaction point to the limited depth of

the labor pool for potential female directors (Matsa and Miller, 2013; Hwang, Shivdasani, and

Simintzi, 2018; Greene, Intintoli, and Kahle, 2020). Our results, however, are inconsistent with

this narrative, as the shareholder level of support for female directors at the time they actually

stand as nominees for election is the same as for men. This finding is, on the other hand, in

line with the research documenting that a pool of qualified female candidates exists (Bertrand

et al., 2019; Von Meyerinck et al., 2019; Eckbo, Nygaard, and Thorburn, 2020 and Giannetti and

Wang, 2020.

   We next provide a potential explanation for the apparent disparity between the negative

share price reaction and the relatively high support for new female nominees. It is important to

keep in mind that the board itself is in charge of selecting director nominee and it has significant

power over board composition. The shareholders' reaction might reflect their anticipation of how

the boards and/or firm management will respond to the quota and what actions they will take

to comply with it. Figure 5 shows that support for male incumbent directors falls after the quota

announcement and thus suggests that the board does not replace the worst male directors with

the relatively better female directors. Thus, we propose that the negative share price reaction



                                                19
reflects the concern that the board will sub-optimally replace high quality male directors with

new female directors.

    To test this conjecture, we examine returns based on how the board actually replaces board

members. First, we want to understand which group of boards drives the abnormal negative stock

price reaction. Therefore, we regress the firm's abnormal announcement returns on a dummy

(Violation19 ) that is equal to one if a firm violates the first quota requirement which stipulates

to have one female director by the end of 2019 based on the composition of the board at the

time of the quota announcement (September 30, 2018).24 We also consider a violation dummy

(Violation21 ) that is equal to one for firms who, at the time of the quota, introduction would not

be compliant with the quota requirements that come into effect by the end of 2021 (two female

directors for board sizes of five; and three female directors for board sizes larger than five). Lastly,

we consider a discrete variable (Shortfall21 ) that can take integer values from zero to three and

that represents the number of female directors a board is missing in order to be compliant with

the 2021 requirement. We control for board characteristics associated with corporate governance

quality, including board size, the average tenure of directors, the share of independent directors,

and whether it is a classified (staggered) board. These are based on the board composition at the

time of the quota announcement. All regressions include industry fixed-effects based on two-digit

SIC codes.25 Table 8 shows summary statistics for our sample by violator group.

    We would expect shareholders to be most concerned if firms are not compliant with the

approaching 2019 quota requirement at the time of the announcement. Therefore, we should see

the largest announcement effects for firms in the group Violation19 and the group Shortfall21

who miss three female directors to be compliant with the 2021 requirement. The latter group is a

sub-group of Violation19 representing large all-male boards. Firms in both groups have no female

directors on their boards at the time of the announcement and are thus not compliant with the

upcoming 2019 quota requirement. Firms in the Shortfall21 group who miss one or two female

directors to be compliant with the 2021 requirement may or may not comply with the 2019 quota

requirement at the time of the announcement. If they are already compliant with the 2019 quota
24 The  sample for this analysis is based on the sample in Table 3. These are firms for which a sufficiently time
   series of stock prices was available to calculate abnormal quota announcement returns.
25 The five most frequently represented industries in our sample are: Chemicals and Allied Products (21%),

   Business Services (17%), Electronic & Other Electrical Equipment (11%), Holding and Other Investment Offices
   (10%), Measuring, Photographic, Medical, Optical Goods, & Clocks (9%).



                                                       20
requirement they need a maximum of two women to meet the 2021 quota requirement. However,

the fairly long horizon of over three years to reach compliance should cause less concern among

shareholders.

    Table 9 presents the regression results and shows evidence of negative returns for each group

of violators. The weakest reaction is associated with the Violation19 group (Column (1)) where

there is a small difference in returns between boards who comply and those who do not comply

with the 2019 requirement.26 This might reflect the anticipation of shareholder regarding how

firms will adjust their boards in order to meet the 2019 quota requirement. The group that shows

the strongest negative reaction in terms of announcement returns are boards that miss three

directors to comply with the 2021 requirement at the time of the quota announcement (Column

(3)). This makes intuitive sense since these firms face the largest restructuring efforts to be

compliant. Overall, these results are broadly consistent with the findings in Hwang, Shivdasani,

and Simintzi, 2018; Von Meyerinck et al., 2019 and Greene, Intintoli, and Kahle, 2020 who

examine slightly different samples.

    Our results imply that shareholders have an expectation on how violating boards will adjust

board structure to satisfy the quota requirement. Therefore, we now analyze whether there is a

difference in how shareholders react depending on how firms change their board composition to

comply with the quota requirement. In particular, we test whether shareholders react differently

when male directors depart from the board as female directors are added, as opposed to when no

such turnover takes place.27 We do not consider instances where a female director departs. The

reason is that the concern in the literature relates to the replacement of male directors with less

qualified female directors. We also do not consider CEO or lead director (chair) turnovers and

turnovers due to changes of control, restrictions on age limits, and the passing of a director. Such

types of turnovers are unlikely the result of adjustment efforts to meet the quota requirement.

We re-run the regression specification in Table 9 for each group separately conditional on a firm
26 In this group, the results are driven by firms traded on OTC exchanges. The negative stock price reaction is
   not statistically significant if we remove this group of firms from the regression.
27 One could consider analyzing how shareholders react depending on whether a board is expanded versus con-

   tracted upon the addition of a female director. However, boards make adjustments to composition on a con-
   tinuous basis and do not clearly indicate substitutions. Therefore, a point in time when board composition is
   fixed is difficult to unambiguously determine. Most importantly, director substitutions cannot be accurately
   identified.




                                                      21
being a violator in their respective group.28 We create a variable that identifies firms that turn

over at least one male director in the time period after the quota announcement up until the

first post-quota election (Turnover male director ). Furthermore, the variable Add female director

indicates whether a firm added a female director during the same period of time (and thus became

compliant with 2019 quota requirement).

    The results of the regressions are presented in Table 10 and show a negative and statistically

significant coefficient on the interaction term between Turnover male director and Add female

director for the violator groups for which the addition of female directors is most crucial to

satisfy the immediate 2019 requirement and where the turnover is thus most likely related to

the quota requirement: firms who violate the 2019 requirement irrespective of the number of

female directors needed to satisfy the 2021 requirement (Column (1)) and the group consisting

of firms who violate the 2019 requirement and need three female directors to comply with the

2021 requirement (Column (4)) at the time of the quota announcements. The effect is weaker

for the groups of firms who miss one or two female directors to comply with the 2021 quota

requirement (Columns (2) and (3)). As mentioned above, this is plausible, as some of these firms

may still have more than three years to reach compliance. Thus, current substitutions might be

unrelated to the quota requirement.

    Overall, these results suggests that the stock market reacts more negatively when the addition

of a new female director is accompanied by the departure of a male director for a non-compliant

firm. This lends direct support to the conjecture that shareholders react negatively to an antici-

pated sub-optimal replacement of (high-quality) male directors with new female directors.29

    Next, we connect the stock price reaction to shareholders' support for individual nominees

in elections for the board of directors. In particular, we relate returns to how the board actually

replaces directors when they adjust the board structure to comply with the quota requirement.

In order to determine whether firms restructure boards in way that would maximize shareholder
28 We exclude industry fixed effects in these regressions due to the small sample sizes.
29 Also,note an interesting ambiguity for firms that miss one or two female directors to be compliant with the
  2021 requirement. Imagine a firm with an all-male board of five members that adds one female director. It
  will now have a size of six members which requires them to have three female directors. Despite adding an
  additional female director their shortfall to reach compliance with the 2021 requirement remains two female
  directors. Similarly, a six-member board consisting of two women and four men (and thus has a shortfall of one
  female director) could reduce its board size to five (by eliminating one male director) to reach compliance with
  the 2021 requirement. These considerations might have implications for how shareholders react to the quota
  announcement depending on the current board composition.



                                                       22
value, we determine the least supported director based on shareholder votes in the firm's election

before the quota announcement.

    We re-run the regression specification in Table 9 for the sub-sample of firms who turn over at

least one male director and who have at least one female director by the time of the first post-

quota election and are thus compliant with the 2019 requirement. This requires the addition of

a female director by firms who are not compliant with the requirement at the time of the quota

announcement. We consider turnovers and additions of female directors made by firms by the

time of the end of the first post-quota election to make sure that turnovers are related to the quota

requirement and to more closely connect turned over directors with their pre-quota shareholder

support. Interestingly, we observe that 95% of firms with zero female directors pre-quota add their

first female director by April 2019 and thus become compliant with the 2019 quota requirement.

This coincides with the voting season for the majority of firms.30 As a robustness check, we repeat

the analysis using May 2019 as a cut-off point until which we consider turnover of male directors

and additions of female directors. This way, we use the same time period as a benchmark for

all firms. The results remain qualitatively unchanged and are reported in Tables A5 and A6 (for

the sub-sample non-classified boards) in the Appendix. As in the analysis above (Table 10), we

exclude turnover of female directors, lead directors, CEOs, turnovers due to changes of control,

restrictions on age limits, and the passing of a director. We also exclude cases where there is no

variation in support either because only one director stood for election or because all directors

had the same level of support in the last pre-quota election.31

    To determine whether announcement returns are related to the firms' turnover decisions, we

introduce an interaction term between our violation variables (Violation19 and Shortfall21 ) and

a dummy variable (Least supported replaced ) that is equal to one if the turned over director is the

director with the lowest shareholder support in the last election before the quota announcement.

We also create a dummy that is equal to one if the turned over director is the director with the

lowest or second-lowest shareholder support in the last election before the quota announcement
30 As  mentioned above, most firms conduct their shareholder meetings in May. The proxy material that must
   contain information on the candidates who will be standing for election is typically sent out one months ahead
   of the meeting (April).
31 Overall, this results in a sample of 126 firms who turn over a male director and have a female director on their

   boards after the quota is in place. Out of the 27 (108) firms who violate the 2019 (2021) quota requirement
   based on their board composition in the last election before the quota announcement, 48.1% (50.9%) firms turn
   over the lowest or second-lowest-support director.



                                                        23
(Least or second-least supported replaced ).32,33 The expectation here is that not turning over

either of the two least supported directors is associated with a worse stock market reaction than

not turning over the least supported directors when adding a female director. Summary statistics

for turned over directors are reported in Table 11.

    The results of the regressions are presented in Table 12, and the coefficients reported in Col-

umn (1). The results show that if the board turnover decision by a firm is not accounted for,

there is a negative return for firms with any level of shortfall. However, the turnover decision

reconciles the negative stock price reaction. Firms that replace the lowest-support (or second-

lowest-support) director with a female director have returns that do not differ from those firms

that already had a female director in place. Firms that replace a higher-support director with

a female director have returns that are significantly lower than firms that already had a female

director in place. This is the case for both firms that violate the immediate 2019 quota require-

ment and firms that have the largest gap (three female directors) to fill in order to comply with

the upcoming 2021 requirement.

    Overall, consistent with the suggestive evidence in Table 10, we see differences in the actions

boards take to achieve compliance with the quota. It appears that what is driving the negative

stock price reaction of violating firms is the shareholders' anticipation that these firms will

restructure their boards in a non-value maximizing way by not replacing the least supported

male director with a female director. A caveat of this analysis is that there is only a small sample

of firms that violates the quota (before its announcement) and adjusts board structure to comply

by turning over the lowest-support directors. At the same time, we would not observe average

negative announcement returns in response to the quota if the average firm would respond in a

value maximizing way and replace the right (here least supported) directors.
32 When   there were only two directors up for election, we categorized it as Least or second-least supported replaced
   only if the least-supported director was turned over.
33 When a director was not standing for election in the immediate pre-quota election, their ranking is calculated

   using the last election where they were a nominee during the pre-quota sample period. This can typically occur
   in classified boards. We verify that our results are not driven by the sub-sample of classified boards and report
   results for the sub-sample of firms with non-classified boards only (see Table A4 in the Appendix).




                                                         24
6     Conclusion

We use hand-collected longitudinal data to analyze how the 2018 California quota has affected

shareholder support for new and incumbent male and female board nominees. To our knowledge,

this is the first study to analyze shareholder attitudes towards quota-mandated female board

nominees using direct evidence from voting behavior.

    Our results show that shareholder support for female nominees is greater than for male

nominees before the quota. This continues to be the case, on average, after the quota. When

we distinguish between incumbent and new nominees, we document revealing dynamics. While

support for female incumbent nominees remains flat after the quota, support for new female

nominees falls. But even though the support for new female nominees falls after the quota,

they still receive as much support as new male nominees. Taken together, these observations

are consistent with the presence of a higher bar for female board candidates before the quota.

They also provide evidence that the quota corrects this problem, as the bars for men and women

converge. The higher support for incumbent female nominees in the post period is driven by a

decrease in support for incumbent male nominees.

    Furthermore, we reconcile the negative stock price announcement returns associated with the

quota with our findings and the existing evidence that firms can access a large enough pool of

qualified female nominees for boards. We show that the firms experiencing a negative stock price

reaction are those who do not make value-maximizing decisions when restructuring the board:

when complying, they do not replace the lowest-support director with a female director. This

result provides first evidence that the opposition towards female board directors is driven by

entrenched board dynamics rather than shareholders disliking the new female nominees.

    Our findings challenge the existing narrative, which interprets the negative announcement

returns associated with the quota as shareholder opposition towards women on boards, and as

a preference for the existing board structure due to an insufficient supply of qualified potential

female directors. As a result, we provide important input for future research on the effects of

affirmative action initiatives. Our findings suggest that adverse effects of such policies might be

driven (at least partly) by internal organizational opposition and entrenched dynamics rather

than by a lack of supply of qualified minority candidates.



                                                25
References
Adams, Renée B, and Daniel Ferreira. 2009. "Women in the boardroom and their impact on
     governance and performance." Journal of Financial Economics 94 (2): 291­309.
Adams, Renée B, and Patricia Funk. 2012. "Beyond the glass ceiling: Does gender matter?"
     Management Science 58 (2): 219­235.
Aggarwal, Reena, Sandeep Dahiya, and Nagpurnanand R Prabhala. 2019. "The power of share-
     holder votes: Evidence from uncontested director elections." Journal of Financial Economics
     133 (1): 134­153.
Ahern, Kenneth R, and Amy K Dittmar. 2012. "The changing of the boards: The impact on firm
     valuation of mandated female board representation." The Quarterly Journal of Economics
     127 (1): 137­197.
Bach, Laurent, and Daniel Metzger. 2015. "Why do shareholder votes matter." Working Paper,
     nos. 13-01.
Bebchuk, Lucian A. 2007. "The myth of the shareholder franchise." Virginia Law Review: 675­
     732.
Bertrand, Marianne, Sandra E Black, Sissel Jensen, and Adriana Lleras-Muney. 2019. "Breaking
     the glass ceiling? The effect of board quotas on female labour market outcomes in Norway."
     The Review of Economic Studies 86 (1): 191­239.
Bøhren, Øyvind, and Siv Staubo. 2014. "Does mandatory gender balance work? Changing orga-
     nizational form to avoid board upheaval." Journal of Corporate Finance 28:152­168.
Bolton, Patrick, Tao Li, Enrichetta Ravina, and Howard Rosenthal. 2020. "Investor ideology."
     Journal of Financial Economics.
Cai, Jie, Jacqueline L Garner, and Ralph A Walkling. 2009. "Electing directors." The Journal of
     Finance 64 (5): 2389­2421.
Cvijanovic, Dragana, Moqi Groen-Xu, and Konstantinos E Zachariadis. 2019. "Free-riders and
     underdogs: Participation in corporate voting." Working Paper.
Dover, Tessa L, Cheryl R Kaiser, and Brenda Major. 2020. "Mixed signals: The unintended
     effects of diversity initiatives." Social Issues and Policy Review 14 (1): 152­181.
Eckbo, B Espen, Knut Nygaard, and Karin S Thorburn. 2020. "Valuation effects of Norway's
     board gender-quota law revisited." Working Paper, no. 463.
Ertimur, Yonca, Fabrizio Ferri, and David Oesch. 2018. "Understanding uncontested director
     elections." Management Science 64 (7): 3400­3420.
Ferreira, Daniel. 2015. "Board diversity: Should we trust research to inform policy?" Corporate
     Governance: An International Review 23 (2): 108­111.
Fischer, Paul E, Jeffrey D Gramlich, Brian P Miller, and Hal D White. 2009. "Investor perceptions
     of board performance: Evidence from uncontested director elections." Journal of Accounting
     and Economics 48 (2-3): 172­189.
Fos, Vyacheslav, Kai Li, and Margarita Tsoutsoura. 2018. "Do director elections matter?" The
     Review of Financial Studies 31 (4): 1499­1531.
Giannetti, Mariassunta, and Tracy Yue Wang. 2020. "Public Attention to Gender Equality and
     the Demand for Female Directors." Working Paper.
Gormley, Todd A, Vishal K Gupta, David A Matsa, Sandra Mortal, and Lukai Yang. 2020. "The
     Big Three and Board Gender Diversity: The Effectiveness of Shareholder Voice." Available
     at SSRN 3724653.
Greene, Daniel, Vincent J Intintoli, and Kathleen M Kahle. 2020. "Do board gender quotas affect
     firm value? Evidence from California Senate Bill No. 826." Journal of Corporate Finance
     60:101526.
Grundfest, Joseph. 2003. "Advice and consent: An alternative mechanism for shareholder par-
     ticipation in the nomination and election of corporate directors."
Gul, Ferdinand A, Bin Srinidhi, and Anthony C Ng. 2011. "Does board gender diversity improve
     the informativeness of stock prices?" Journal of Accounting and Economics 51 (3): 314­338.
Hwang, Sunwoo, Anil Shivdasani, and Elena Simintzi. 2018. "Mandating women on boards:
     Evidence from the United States." Working Paper.
Iliev, Peter, Karl V Lins, Darius P Miller, and Lukas Roth. 2015. "Shareholder voting and
     corporate governance around the world." The Review of Financial Studies 28 (8): 2167­
     2202.
Jorge L. Ortiz. 2018. "Gender quotas: California ponders breakthrough bill to boost female
     executives." https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/2018/09/18/gender- quotas-
     california-corporate-boards/1339531002/.



                                               26
Kim, Daehyun, and Laura T Starks. 2016. "Gender diversity on corporate boards: Do women
     contribute unique skills?" American Economic Review 106 (5): 267­71.
Leslie, Lisa M. 2019. "Diversity initiative effectiveness: A typological theory of unintended con-
     sequences." Academy of Management Review 44 (3): 538­563.
Matsa, David A, and Amalia R Miller. 2013. "A female style in corporate leadership? Evidence
     from quotas." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 5 (3): 136­69.
Nygaard, Knut. 2011. "Forced board changes: Evidence from Norway." Working Paper.
Secretary of State California. 2018. "Senate Bill 826." https://leginfo.legislature.ca.gov/
     faces/billTextClient.xhtml?bill_id=201720180SB826.
Von Meyerinck, Felix, Alexandra Niessen-Ruenzi, Markus Schmid, and Steven Davidoff Solomon.
     2019. "As California goes, so goes the nation? Board gender quotas and the legislation of
     non-economic values." Working Paper.
Yang, Philip, Jan Riepe, Katharina Moser, Kerstin Pull, and Siri Terjesen. 2019. "Women direc-
     tors, firm performance, and firm risk: A causal perspective." The Leadership Quarterly 30
     (5): 101297.




                                               27
Figures and Tables




Figure 1: Support for female and male nominees over time. Support is defined as the number
of "for" votes divided by the sum of "for," "abstain," "against," and "withhold" votes. Marginal
effects with 95% confidence intervals from an OLS regression of Support on Female nominee with
an interaction between Post and Female nominee and time dummies (for the main voting seasons
May and June of every year). Includes company fixed effects.




                                              28
          (a) Support for new and incumbent female and male nominees




          (b) Number of new and incumbent female and male nominees over time

Figure 2: (a) Average yearly support for incumbent and new, male and female nominees standing
for election. Support is defined as the ratio of "for" votes to the sum of "for," "abstain," "against,"
and "withhold" votes. New nominees are nominees who stand for election for the first time and
were appointed to board within one year of the meeting where the election took place. (b) Number
of incumbent and new, male and female nominees standing for election. In 2020, votes are only
available until July.

                                                  29
Figure 3: The share of female board nominees/members over time. Based on the full board
sample (N=20,262) that includes directors who never stand for election.




Figure 4: Additions of female and male board nominees/members over time. Based on the
nominee sample (N=14,527) that only includes nominees at elections.




                                          30
Figure 5: Support for incumbent and new, female and male nominees over time. Support is
defined as the number of "for" votes divided by the sum of "for," "abstain," "against," and "with-
hold" votes. Marginal effects with 95% confidence intervals from an OLS regression of Support
on Female nominee with an interaction between Post, Female nominee and New nominee and
time dummies (for the main voting seasons May and June of every year). Includes company fixed
effects.




                                               31
Table 1: Descriptive Statistics of Main Variables - Full board

 Variable                                       N        mean        sd       p25      p50      p75
 Support                                     14,527       0.941     0.09     0.935    0.978     0.992
 Share of female board members               20,262       0.169    0.122      0.1     0.167     0.250
 Number of female board members              20,262      1.471     1.144       1        1         2
 Director age                                20,262      61.102    9.591      55       61         68
 Director tenure                             20,262      7.929     7.478       2        6        11
 Board size                                  20,262      8.274     2.039       7        8         9
 Independent                                 20,262      0.753     0.431       1        1         1
 Classified board                            20,262      0.435     0.496       0        0         1
This table reports descriptive statistics for the full board of directors as well as the nominee sample
that is used for our main analysis. The full board sample is larger because in classified (staggered)
boards not all board members are up for election every year.



           Table 2: Descriptive Statistics of Main Variables - Nominees

            Panel A: Female Nominees

            Variables                N       mean         sd      p25       p50       p75
            Support                2,513      0.956      0.078    0.959    0.986     0.994
            Director age           2,513     59.082      8.048     54       59        64
            Director tenure        2,513      5.215      5.809      1        3         7
            New nominee            2,513      0.230      0.421      0        0         0
            Independent            2,513      0.850      0.358      1        1         1
            Panel B: Male Nominees

            Variables                N       mean         sd      p25       p50       p75
            Support               12,014      0.937      0.093    0.927    0.976     0.991
            Director age          12,014     61.987      9.745     56       62        69
            Director tenure       12,014      8.736      7.928      3        6         13
            New nominee           12,014      0.107      0.309      0        0         0
            Independent           12,014      0.729      0.445      0        1         1
           This table reports descriptive statistics for the nominee sample that is used for
           our main analysis split by nominee gender. The full board sample is larger because
           in classified (staggered) boards not all board members are up for election every
           year.




                                                    32
Table 3: Average raw and abnormal returns for sample firms on quota announcement day

                                                Number of firms         Mean      Median      t-test
 Abnormal return                                        524            -1.06%      -1.05%       ***
 Abnormal return
                                                        494            -1.12%      -1.09%       ***
 (excluding 30 firms traded on OTC)
 Raw return                                             524            -0.84%      -0.83%       ***
 Raw return
                                                        494            -0.99%      -0.87%       ***
 (excluding 30 firms traded on OTC)
This table reports the mean and median raw and abnormal returns on the quota announcement day
(October 1, 2018) for the sample firms. Of the 524 firms, 30 are traded on OTC exchanges. It excludes
31 firms for which no time series of stock prices was available and 30 firms who had material events at
the time of the quota announcement. The abnormal return is calculated based on predicted returns
from a market model using a 255 day event window prior to the event and weights firms by their
market values. The estimation window ends 6 days before the event. The t-test indicates whether the
mean raw and abnormal return is different from zero.  ,  , and  indicate statistical significance at
the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




                                                  33
Table 4: Support for female nominees: pre versus post quota

                                   (1)             (2)                  (3)              (4)
 Variables                        Main       Pre-period clean        Pre-period      Post-period

 Female nominee                 0.005***           0.006**            0.005***         0.013***
                                 (0.002)           (0.003)             (0.002)          (0.002)
 Post x Female nominee          0.008***           0.007**
                                 (0.003)           (0.003)
 Election FEs                      Yes                Yes                Yes              Yes
 R-squared                        0.666              0.665              0.656            0.675
 Observations                    14,527             11,388              8,482            6,045
The dependent variable (Support ) in all OLS regressions is defined as the number of "for" votes
divided by the sum of "for," "abstain," "against," and "withhold" votes. Female nominee takes the
value of one if the focal nominee standing for election is a woman. Post is a dummy equal to one
if the election takes place in October 2018 or later and zero otherwise. Specification (2) excludes
the time period between October 2017 and October 2018. The unit of analysis is an election. We
use election fixed effects in all regressions. Standard errors in parentheses.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,
 p < 0.01.




  Table 5: Support for female nominees: pre versus post quota - within nominee com-
  parison

    Excess support                     N        Pre        Post       Difference (Post-Pre)
    Female Nominee                   1,132     0.005      0.001       -0.004
    Male Nominee                     5,925     0.002     -0.007       -0.009***
    Difference (Female-Male)                   0.002    0.008***
  This table provides average excess support within nominee before (pre) and after (post) the
  quota for incumbent female and male nominees. Excess Support is defined as the focal nomi-
  nee's support in an election minus the average for all other nominees in that election. Includes
  only nominees who stand for election in the pre- and post period.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,
   p < 0.01.




                                                34
Table 6: Support for female nominees: pre versus post quota for new and incumbent nominees

                                                       (1)              (2)                 (3)            (4)
 Variables                                            Main       New-Interaction        Incumbent         New
 Female nominee                                       0.003            0.002               0.002        0.011**
                                                     (0.002)         (0.002)              (0.002)       (0.005)
 Post x Female nominee                               0.005*          0.007**              0.006*         -0.006
                                                     (0.003)         (0.003)              (0.003)       (0.008)
 New nominee                                        0.027***        0.022***
                                                     (0.002)         (0.002)
 Post x Female nominee x New nominee                                -0.016**
                                                                     (0.007)
 Election FEs                                          Yes              Yes                 Yes           Yes
 R-squared                                            0.673           0.674                0.705         0.842
 Observations                                        14,527           14,527              12,664         1,863
The dependent variable (Support ) in all OLS regressions is defined as the number of "for" votes divided by the sum
of "for," "abstain," "against," and "withhold" votes. Female nominee takes the value of one if the focal nominee
standing for election is a woman. Post is a dummy equal to one if the election takes place in October 2018 or
later and zero otherwise. New nominee is equal to one if a nominees stands for election for the first time and was
appointed to board within one year of meeting where the election took place. The unit of analysis is an election.
We use election fixed effects in all regressions. Standard errors in parentheses.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.




                                                       35
Table 7: Support for female nominees: pre versus post quota for
violating firms who do not expand board size

 Variables
 Female nominee                                                    -0.043
                                                                  (0.034)
 Post x Female nominee                                           0.161***
                                                                  (0.041)
 New male nominee                                                0.029***
                                                                  (0.009)
 Post x New male nominee                                           0.030
                                                                  (0.028)
 Election FEs                                                        Yes
 R-squared                                                          0.674
 Observations                                                      1,100
The dependent variable (Support ) in all OLS regressions is defined as the
number of "for" votes divided by the sum of "for," "abstain," "against," and
"withhold" votes. Female nominee takes the value of one if the focal nominee
standing for election is a woman. Post is a dummy equal to one if the election
takes place in October 2018 or later and zero otherwise. New male nominee
is equal to one if a nominees is male and stands for election for the first
time and was appointed to board within one year of meeting where the
election took place. The sub-sample includes firms who had no women on
the board in the period before the passage of quota (`violators'), who did
not expand board size in the post period and where a male director departed
from the board in the post period. Note that, by design, it will be entirely
new female candidates who violators add to their boards to comply with
the quota. Includes only the first election in the post period, i.e., we are
only considering the firms where the current board composition is modified
by substituting a male director for a female director. The unit of analysis is
an election. We use election fixed effects in all regressions. Standard errors
in parentheses.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.




                                     36
Table 8: Descriptive statistics at the firm level by violation type- pre-quota board characteristics

 Panel A: Violation19

                                                              Violation19=0                  Violation19=1
 Variable                                                 N      mean     sd             N      mean     sd
 Abnormal return                                         360     -0.01     0.031        164     -0.012    0.041
 Board size                                              360     8.317     1.86         164     6.165     1.544
 Independent                                             360     0.766     0.169        164      0.704    0.173
 Director tenure                                         360     7.651     4.03         164     7.446     5.043
 Classified board                                        360     0.478      0.5         164      0.409    0.493
 Panel B: Violation21

                                                            Violation21=0                  Violation21=1
 Variable                                                 N    mean     sd               N    mean     sd
 Abnormal return                                         67     -0.001     0.041        457     -0.012    0.033
 Board size                                              67      9.03      2.263        457      7.44     1.912
 Independent                                             67     0.795      0.187        457      0.74     0.169
 Director tenure                                         67     6.739      3.321        457     7.711     4.491
 Classified board                                        67     0.388      0.491        457      0.466    0.499
 Panel C: Shortfall21

                            Shortfall21=1                   Shortfall21=2                  Shortfall21=3
 Variable                 N    mean      sd               N    mean      sd              N    mean      sd
 Abnormal return         160     -0.007     0.034        190    -0.011      0.03        107     -0.02     0.035
 Board size              160      7.719     2.364        190    7.432      1.818        107     7.037     1.081
 Independent             160      0.776     0.149        190     0.727      0.17        107     0.708     0.187
 Director tenure         160      8.328     4.986        190    7.398      4.178        107     7.345     4.178
 Classified board        160     0.412      0.494        190     0.511     0.501        107     0.467     0.501

This table reports descriptive statistics for board characteristics by violation type at the firm level at the time
of the announcement of the quota (September 30, 2018) based on the sub-sample of firms in Table 3). Abnormal
Return, is the market model adjusted stock return on October 1, 2018. Violation19 is a dummy that takes a
value of one if a board has zero female directors in the last pre-announcement election. Violation21 is a dummy
that takes a value of one if a board would not comply with the 2021 quota requirement (which is based on board
size) based on its gender composition at the time of the announcement of the quota. Shortfall21 is equal to
the board's number of female directors missing to comply with the 2021 quota requirement based on its gender
composition at the time of the announcement of the quota and can range from zero to three. Shortfall21 =0 is
omitted in Panel C as it is equivalent to Violation21 =0 in Panel B.




                                                        37
Table 9: Abnormal returns and quota violations

                                              (1)               (2)             (3)
 Variables                                Violation19       Violation21      Shortfall21
 Violation19                                -0.008*
                                            (0.005)
 Violation21                                                  -0.016**
                                                               (0.007)
 Shortfall21: 1 Female director                                                 -0.012*
                                                                                (0.007)
 Shortfall21: 2 Female directors                                               -0.016**
                                                                                (0.007)
 Shortfall21: 3 Female directors                                              -0.026***
                                                                                (0.008)
 Board size                                 -0.002**           -0.002*         -0.002**
                                             (0.001)           (0.001)          (0.001)
 Independent                                  -0.014            -0.014           -0.017
                                             (0.011)           (0.011)          (0.011)
 Tenure                                        0.000             0.000           0.000
                                             (0.000)           (0.000)          (0.000)
 Classified board                           -0.008**          -0.007**         -0.006**
                                             (0.003)           (0.003)          (0.003)
 Constant                                      0.058            0.064*           0.075*
                                             (0.038)           (0.038)          (0.040)
 Industry FEs                                   Yes               Yes              Yes
 Observations                                   524               524              524
 R-squared                                     0.118             0.128            0.147
The dependent variable is Abnormal Return, which is the market model adjusted stock
return on October 1, 2018. Violation19 is a dummy that takes a value of one if a board has
zero female directors in the last pre-announcement election. Violation21 is a dummy that
takes a value of one if a board would not comply with the 2021 quota requirement (which
is based on board size) based on its gender composition in the last pre-announcement
election. Shortfall21 is equal to the board's number of female directors missing to com-
ply with the 2021 quota requirement based on its gender composition at the time of the
announcement of the quota and can range from zero to three. The remaining control
variables are equivalent to those in Table 8 defined at the firm level at the time of the an-
nouncement of the quota. Regressions include industry (two-digit SIC code) fixed effects.
Robust standard errors in parentheses.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.




                                             38
     Table 10: Abnormal returns and quota violations

                                                                     (1)                 (2)                      (3)                       (4)
                                                                                    Shortfall21:             Shortfall21:             Shortfall21:
      Variables                                                 Violation19      1 Female director        2 Female directors       3 Female directors
      Turnover male director                                     0.032**               -0.005                   -0.001                 0.038***
                                                                  (0.012)             (0.006)                  (0.006)                   (0.013)
      Add female director                                          -0.001               0.018                   -0.002                     0.011
                                                                  (0.006)             (0.017)                  (0.006)                   (0.007)
      Turnover male director x Add female director               -0.041**              -0.030                   -0.006                 -0.055***
                                                                  (0.016)             (0.020)                  (0.009)                   (0.018)
      Board size                                                   -0.003              0.000                  -0.003**                    0.004
                                                                  (0.002)             (0.002)                  (0.001)                   (0.004)
      Independent                                                  -0.001              -0.036                   -0.003                    0.010
                                                                  (0.016)             (0.024)                  (0.012)                   (0.014)




39
      Tenure                                                     0.001**               0.001*                    0.000                     0.001
                                                                  (0.001)             (0.001)                  (0.001)                   (0.001)
      Classified board                                             -0.006            -0.008***                -0.008**                    -0.005
                                                                  (0.006)             (0.003)                  (0.004)                   (0.007)
      Constant                                                      0.001               0.013                    0.016                  -0.062**
                                                                  (0.017)             (0.018)                  (0.015)                   (0.031)
      Observations                                                   164                 160                      190                       107
      R-squared                                                     0.117              0.111                     0.077                     0.137
     The dependent variable is Abnormal Return, which is the market model adjusted stock return on October 1, 2018. Violation19 is a dummy that
     takes a value of one if a board has zero female directors at the time of the announcement of the quota. Shortfall21 is equal to the board's number of
     female directors missing to comply with the 2021 quota requirement based on its gender composition at the time of the announcement of the quota
     and can range from zero to three. Turnover male director identifies firms that turn over at least one male director in the time period after the quota
     announcement up until the first post-quota election. Add female director indicates whether a firm added a female director during the same period
     of time (and thus became compliant with the 2019 quota requirement). The remaining control variables are equivalent to those in Table 8 defined at
     the firm level at the time of the time of the announcement of the quota. Robust standard errors in parentheses.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.
     Table 11: Summary statistics for turned over directors

      Panel A: Least supported
                                       Least-supported                                             Least   or second-least supported
      Variables        N     mean       sd      p25      p50                  p75          N     mean          sd     p25     p50    p75
      Support          53 0.883        0.12    0.853    0.913                0.967         72    0.897       0.11    0.864 0.928 0.981
      Excess Support 53 -0.068        0.096 -0.083 -0.028                    -0.006        72    -0.055     0.087 -0.072 -0.02 -0.004
      Independent      53 0.868       0.342       1        1                    1          72    0.875      0.333      1        1      1
      Director age     53 64.604 10.943          57       66                   73          72    65.042     10.534     57      66     74
      Director tenure 53 11.358 8.458             5        9                   15          72    11.236      8.503     5       9.5    15
      Panel B: Other than least or second-least supported
                                 Other than least-supported                                 Other than     least or second-least supported
      Variables        N     mean       sd      p25      p50                  p75          N   mean            sd      p25     p50     p75




40
      Support          88 0.954       0.055    0.939    0.977                0.989         69   0.96         0.052    0.948 0.979 0.991
      Excess Support 88 0.012         0.045 -0.001 0.003                     0.026         69 0.021          0.043    0.001 0.008 0.032
      Independent      88 0.875       0.333       1        1                    1          69   0.87         0.339      1        1       1
      Director age     88 63.216 11.09          56.5      65                  71.5         69 62.377        11.416      56      64      71
      Director tenure 88 8.875        6.475       4        8                   13          69 8.319          5.609      4        7      13
     This table reports descriptive statistics for male directors who were turned over by the time of the first post-quota election split by the
     level of shareholder support in the last pre-quota election. The sample consists of director departures in firms (N=126) that have at least
     one female director in the first election after the quota (complying with the 2019 quota requirement) and where a male incumbent director
     departs from the board. This sample excludes female directors, CEO and board chairs that were turned over by time of the first pre-quota
     election. It also excludes turnovers that are unlikely related to the quota (as a result of mergers and restructurings, director deaths, health
     reason, requirements on retirement age). Panel A shows descriptive statistics for turned over directors who had lowest support (and lowest
     or second-lowest support) in the last pre-quota election. Panel B shows descriptive statistics for turned over directors who were not the
     least-supported (and not the least or second-least supported) in the last pre-quota election. When a director did not stand for election in
     the last pre-quota election, their ranking is calculated based on the last election where they were a nominee. A robustness check for the
     sub-sample of only non-classified boards (where each director stands for election every year) is reported in Table A4.
Table 12: Abnormal returns, quota violations, and board turnover


                                                                Least                   Least or second-least
                                                          supported replaced             supported replaced
                                             Base            No       Yes                  No        Yes
 Violation19                              -0.016 *       -0.023 **       0.001          -0.028 **       0.004
                                          (0.011)        (0.013)         (0.014)        (0.009)         (0.010)
 Shortfall21: 1 Female director           -0.013 **      -0.013          -0.005         -0.010          -0.011
                                          (0.006)        (0.008)         (0.008)        (0.011)         (0.007)
 Shortfall21: 2 Female directors          -0.016 ***     -0.015 *        -0.006         -0.011          -0.012
                                          (0.006)        (0.009)         (0.008)        (0.011)         (0.008)
 Shortfall21: 3 Female directors          -0.028 ***     -0.037 ***      -0.005         -0.040 ***      -0.006
                                          (0.010)        (0.012)         (0.017)        (0.014)         (0.016)
 Observations                             126
The dependent variable is Abnormal Return, which is the market model adjusted stock return on October 1,
2018. The sample consists of firms that have at least one female director by the first election after the quota
(complying with the 2019 quota requirement) and where a male incumbent director departs from the board by
the first post-quota election. This sample excludes female directors, CEO and board chairs that were turned
over by the first pre-quota election. It also excludes turnovers that are unlikely related to the quota (as a result
of mergers and restructurings, director deaths, health reason, requirements on retirement age). The coefficients
reported in Column Base are based on a regression where Violation19 (Shortfall21 ) is regressed on Abnormal
Return. The coefficients in the remaining Columns include an interaction term between Violation19 (Shortfall21 )
and Least supported replaced or (Least or second-lest supported replaced ). Violation19 is a dummy that takes a
value of one if a board has zero female directors at the time of the quota announcement (September 30, 2018).
Shortfall21 is equal to the board's number of female directors missing to comply with the 2021 quota requirement
based on its gender composition in the last pre-announcement election and can range from zero to three. Least
supported replaced is a dummy that takes a value of one if the departing director is the least supported one
based on shareholder votes (Support ) in the last election before the quota announcement. Least or second-lest
supported replaced is a dummy that takes a value of one if the departing director is the least or second-least
supported one based on shareholder votes (Support ) in the last election before the quota announcement. All
specifications include the control variables listed in Table 8 defined at the firm level at the time of the quota
announcement. A robustness check for the sub-sample of only non-classified boards (where each director stands
for election every year) is reported in Table A4. Robust standard errors in parentheses.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,
 p < 0.01.




                                                        41
Appendix

Table A1: Support for female nominees: pre versus post quota for new and incumbent nominees ­ ISS
recommendations

                                                       (1)              (2)                 (3)             (4)
 Variables                                            Main       New-Interaction        Incumbent          New
 Female nominee                                       0.002            0.000               0.001          0.008
                                                     (0.002)         (0.002)              (0.002)        (0.005)
 Post x Female nominee                              0.009***        0.009***              0.008**         -0.001
                                                     (0.003)         (0.003)              (0.003)        (0.008)
 New nominee                                                        0.007***
                                                                     (0.002)
 Post x Female nominee x New nominee                                 -0.013*
                                                                     (0.007)
 ISS Against Recommendation                        -0.136***       -0.134***             -0.137***      -0.114***
                                                    (0.002)          (0.002)              (0.002)        (0.008)
 Election FEs                                          Yes              Yes                 Yes            Yes
 R-squared                                            0.767            0.769               0.789          0.872
 Observations                                        11,657           11,657               10,141         1,516
Corresponds to specification in Table 6 for the sub-sample of elections for which an ISS recommendation is available.
It excludes all elections that took place 2020 as for these no ISS recommendations were available at the time of the
analysis. The dependent variable (Support ) in all OLS regressions is defined as the number of "for" votes divided by
the sum of "for," "abstain," "against," and "withhold" votes. ISS Against Recommendation takes the value of one if
ISS issued an "against" recommendation for the nominee in the focal election. Female nominee takes the value of one
if the focal nominee standing for election is a woman. Post is a dummy equal to one if the election takes place in
October 2018 or later and zero otherwise. New nominee is equal to one if a nominees stands for election for the first
time and was appointed to board within one year of meeting where the election took place. The unit of analysis is
an election. We use election fixed effects in all regressions. Standard errors in parentheses.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,
 p < 0.01.




                                                       42
Table A2: Support for female nominees: pre versus post quota for new and incumbent nominees ­
Non-classified boards

                                                       (1)              (2)                  (3)             (4)
 Variables                                            Main        New-Interaction        Incumbent          New
 Female nominee                                     0.007***           0.004                0.004         0.014**
                                                     (0.002)          (0.002)              (0.002)        (0.006)
 Post x Female nominee                               0.006*          0.007**               0.006*          -0.007
                                                     (0.003)          (0.003)              (0.003)        (0.009)
 New nominee                                                         0.018***
                                                                      (0.003)
 Post x Female nominee x New nominee                                -0.022***
                                                                      (0.008)
 Election FEs                                           Yes             Yes                   Yes           Yes
 R-squared                                             0.614           0.620                 0.647         0.759
 Observations                                         11,441          11,441                10,093         1,348
Corresponds to specification in Table 6 for the sub-sample of non-classified boards only. The dependent variable
(Support ) in all OLS regressions is defined as the number of "for" votes divided by the sum of "for," "abstain,"
"against," and "withhold" votes. Female nominee takes the value of one if the focal nominee standing for election
is a woman. Post is a dummy equal to one if the election takes place in October 2018 or later and zero otherwise.
New nominee is equal to one if a nominees stands for election for the first time and was appointed to board within
one year of meeting where the election took place. The unit of analysis is an election. We use election fixed effects
in all regressions. Standard errors in parentheses.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.




                                                        43
Table A3: Support for female nominees: pre versus post quota for new and incumbent nominees ­ Firms
with stock returns

                                                       (1)               (2)                 (3)            (4)
 Variables                                            Main        New-Interaction        Incumbent         New
 Female nominee                                     0.006***            0.003               0.004        0.012**
                                                     (0.002)          (0.002)              (0.002)       (0.006)
 Post x Female nominee                              0.007**            0.006*               0.005         -0.008
                                                     (0.003)          (0.003)              (0.003)       (0.009)
 New nominee                                                         0.023***
                                                                      (0.003)
 Post x Female nominee x New nominee                                  -0.014*
                                                                      (0.008)
 Election FEs                                          Yes               Yes                 Yes           Yes
 R-squared                                            0.661            0.669                0.698         0.832
 Observations                                        13,006            13,006              11,332         1,674
Corresponds to specification in Table 6 for the sub-sample of 524 firms for which sufficient stock price information
was available to calculate abnormal returns and who did not have any other material events at the time of the quota
announcement (corresponding to sample in Table 8). The dependent variable (Support ) in all OLS regressions is
defined as the number of "for" votes divided by the sum of "for," "abstain," "against," and "withhold" votes. Female
nominee takes the value of one if the focal nominee standing for election is a woman. Post is a dummy equal
to one if the election takes place in October 2018 or later and zero otherwise. New nominee is equal to one if a
nominees stands for election for the first time and was appointed to board within one year of meeting where the
election took place. The unit of analysis is an election. We use election fixed effects in all regressions. Standard
errors in parentheses.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.




                                                        44
Table A4: Abnormal returns, quota violations and board turnover ­ Non-classified boards


                                                             Least                 Least or second-least
                                                       supported replaced           supported replaced
                                            Base         No     Yes                   No      Yes
 Violation19                             -0.022 **     -0.027 *    -0.007          -0.029 **    0.007
                                         (0.010)       (0.014)     (0.007)         (0.014)      (0.007)
 Shortfall21: 1 Female director          -0.001        0.005       -0.002          0.011        -0.005
                                         (0.007)       (0.010)     (0.006)         (0.016)      (0.017)
 Shortfall21: 2 Female directors         -0.013        -0.006      -0.008          0.004        -0.017
                                         (0.008)       (0.014)     (0.008)         (0.019)      (0.010)
 Shortfall21: 3 Female directors         -0.028 **     -0.032 *    0.001           -0.027       -0.004
                                         (0.013)       (0.017)     (0.008)         (0.021)      (0.010)
 Observations                            59
Corresponds to specification in Table 12 for the sub-sample of non-classified boards only where every director
stands for election every year. The dependent variable is Abnormal Return, which is the market model
adjusted stock return on October 1, 2018. The sample consists of firms that have at least one female director
by time of the first election after the quota (complying with the 2019 quota requirement) and where a male
incumbent director departs from the board by the time of the first post-quota election. This sample excludes
female directors, CEO and board chairs that were turned over by time of the first pre-quota election. It
also excludes turnovers that are unlikely related to the quota (as a result of mergers and restructurings,
director deaths, health reason, requirements on retirement age). The coefficients reported in Column Base
are based on a regression where Violation19 (Shortfall21 ) is regressed on Abnormal Return. The coefficients
in the remaining Columns include an interaction term between Violation19 (Shortfall21 ) and Least supported
replaced or Least or second-lest supported replaced. Violation19 is a dummy that takes a value of one if a
board has zero female directors at the time of the quota announcement (September 30, 2018). Shortfall21 is
equal to the board's number of female directors missing to comply with the 2021 quota requirement based
on its gender composition in the last pre-announcement election and can range from zero to three. Least
supported replaced is a dummy that takes a value of one if the departing director is the least supported one
based on shareholder votes (Support ) in the last election before the quota announcement. Least or second-lest
supported replaced is a dummy that takes a value of one if the departing director is the least or second-least
supported one based on shareholder votes (Support ) in the last election before the quota announcement. All
specifications include control variables listed in Table 8 defined at the firm level at the time of the quota
announcement. Robust standard errors in parentheses.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.




                                                     45
Table A5: Abnormal returns, quota violations and board turnover (alternative specification)


                                                                Least                   Least or second-least
                                                          supported replaced             supported replaced
                                             Base            No       Yes                  No        Yes
 Violation19                              -0.016 *       -0.027 **       0.004          -0.033 **       0.006
                                          (0.009)        (0.013)         (0.014)        (0.011)         (0.010)
 Shortfall21: 1 Female director           -0.013 **      -0.014 *        -0.004         -0.012          -0.010
                                          (0.006)        (0.008)         (0.008)        (0.010)         (0.008)
 Shortfall21: 2 Female directors          -0.018 **      -0.016 *        -0.010         -0.011          -0.014*
                                          (0.006)        (0.009)         (0.010)        (0.011)         (0.008)
 Shortfall21: 3 Female directors          -0.029 ***     -0.042 ***      -0.004         -0.045 ***      -0.005
                                          (0.011)        (0.012)         (0.017)        (0.014)         (0.016)
 Observations                             124
Corresponds to specification in Table 12. Instead of the time of the first post-quota election turnovers of male
directors and additions of new female directors are considered up until and including May 2019 for all firms.
The dependent variable is Abnormal Return, which is the market model adjusted stock return on October 1,
2018. The sample consists of firms that have at least one female director by May 2019 (complying with the 2019
quota requirement) and where a male incumbent director departs from the board by May 2019. This sample
excludes female directors, CEO and board chairs that were turned over by time of the first pre-quota election. It
also excludes turnovers that are unlikely related to the quota (as a result of mergers and restructurings, director
deaths, health reason, requirements on retirement age). The coefficients reported in Column Base are based on
a regression where Violation19 (Shortfall21 ) is regressed on Abnormal Return. The coefficients in the remaining
Columns include an interaction term between Violation19 (Shortfall21 ) and Least supported replaced or Least
or second-lest supported replaced. Violation19 is a dummy that takes a value of one if a board has zero female
directors at the time of the quota announcement (September 30, 2018). Shortfall21 is equal to the board's
number of female directors missing to comply with the 2021 quota requirement based on its gender composition
in the last pre-announcement election and can range from zero to three. Least supported replaced is a dummy
that takes a value of one if the departing director is the least supported one based on shareholder votes (Support )
in the last election before the quota announcement. Least or second-lest supported replaced is a dummy that
takes a value of one if the departing director is the least or second-least supported one based on shareholder
votes (Support ) in the last election before the quota announcement. All specifications include control variables
listed in Table 8 defined at the firm level at the time of the quota announcement. A robustness check for the
sub-sample of only non-classified boards (where each director stands for election every year) is reported in Table
A6. Robust standard errors in parentheses.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.




                                                        46
Table A6: Abnormal returns, quota violations and board turnover (alternative specification) ­
Non-classified boards


                                                               Least                  Least or second-least
                                                         supported replaced            supported replaced
                                             Base           No      Yes                  No      Yes
 Violation19                               -0.024 **     -0.034 **     0.006          -0.037 **     0.006
                                           (0.011)       (0.014)       (0.006)        (0.015)       (0.006)
 Shortfall21: 1 Female director            0.000         0.003         -0.000         0.003         0.000
                                           (0.007)       (0.010)       (0.005)        (0.014)       (0.005)
 Shortfall21: 2 Female directors           -0.016 **     -0.016        -0.008         -0.013        -0.012
                                           (0.007)       (0.013)       (0.007)        (0.016)       (0.008)
 Shortfall21: 3 Female directors           -0.030 **     -0.045 **     -0.001         -0.045 **     -0.001
                                           (0.014)       (0.017)       (0.007)        (0.019)       (0.008)
 Observations                              55
Corresponds to specification in Table A5 for the sub-sample of non-classified boards. The dependent variable
is Abnormal Return, which is the market model adjusted stock return on October 1, 2018. The sample consists
of firms that have at least one female director by May 2019 (complying with the 2019 quota requirement) and
where a male incumbent director departs from the board by May 2019. This sample excludes female directors,
CEO and board chairs that were turned over by time of the first pre-quota election. It also excludes turnovers
that are unlikely related to the quota (as a result of mergers and restructurings, director deaths, health reason,
requirements on retirement age). The coefficients reported in Column Base are based on a regression where
Violation19 (Shortfall21 ) is regressed on Abnormal Return. The coefficients in the remaining Columns include
an interaction term between Violation19 (Shortfall21 ) and Least supported replaced or Least or second-lest
supported replaced. Violation19 is a dummy that takes a value of one if a board has zero female directors
at the time of the quota announcement (September 30, 2018). Shortfall21 is equal to the board's number
of female directors missing to comply with the 2021 quota requirement based on its gender composition in
the last pre-announcement election and can range from zero to three. Least supported replaced is a dummy
that takes a value of one if the departing director is the least supported one based on shareholder votes
(Support ) in the last election before the quota announcement. Least or second-lest supported replaced is a
dummy that takes a value of one if the departing director is the least or second-least supported one based
on shareholder votes (Support ) in the last election before the quota announcement. All specifications include
control variables listed in Table 8 defined at the firm level at the time of the quota announcement. Robust
standard errors in parentheses.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.




                                                       47
