                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               A DIVISION OF LABORERS:
                           IDENTITY AND EFFICIENCY IN INDIA

                                        Guilhem Cassan
                                        Daniel Keniston
                                       Tatjana Kleineberg

                                       Working Paper 28462
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28462


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2021




The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those of the
authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the World Bank and its affiliated
organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they
represent. This work was supported by the Fonds Wetenschappelijk Onderzoek ­ Vlaanderen
(FWO) and the Fonds de la Recherche Scientifique ­ FNRS under EOS project O020918F (EOS
ID 30784531) and by CEPREMAP. We are grateful to Joseph Altonji, Mark Rosenzweig and
Nicholas Ryan and audiences at NES, WEHC, LSU, UBC, UNamur, ULB, BREAD, Warwick,
Chicago, USC, Tulane, SEA, ASSA, and STEG for helpful suggestions. We are extremely
grateful to James Nye at the University of Chicago library for his invaluable help in accessing the
1911 Census data. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Guilhem Cassan, Daniel Keniston, and Tatjana Kleineberg. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
A Division of Laborers: Identity and Efficiency in India
Guilhem Cassan, Daniel Keniston, and Tatjana Kleineberg
NBER Working Paper No. 28462
February 2021
JEL No. E24,E71,J21,J62,O15

                                          ABSTRACT

Workers' social identity affects their choice of occupation, and therefore the structure and
prosperity of the aggregate economy. We study this phenomenon in a setting where work
and identity are particularly intertwined: the Indian caste system. Using a new dataset that
combines information on caste, occupation, wages, and historical evidence of subcastes'
traditional occupations, we show that caste members are still greatly overrepresented in their
traditional occupations. To quantify the effects of caste-level distortions on aggregate and
distributional outcomes, we develop a general equilibrium Roy model of occupational choice.
We structurally estimate the model and evaluate counterfactuals in which we remove castes' ties
to their traditional occupations: both through their direct preferences, and also via their parental
occupations and social networks. We find that the share of workers employed in their traditional
occupation decreases substantially. However, effects on aggregate output and productivity
are very small­and in some counterfactuals even negative­because gains from a more
efficient human capital allocation are offset by productivity losses from weaker caste
networks and reduced learning across generations. Our findings emphasize the importance
of caste identity in coordinating workers into occupational networks which enable productivity
spillovers.

Guilhem Cassan                                   Tatjana Kleineberg
University of Namur, CRED                        The World Bank
8 rue du Rempart de la Vierge,                   tkleineberg@worldbank.org
5000, Namur, Belgium
and CEPR
guilhem.cassan@fundp.ac.be

Daniel Keniston
Louisiana State University
Department of Economics
2325 Business Education Complex South
501 South Quad Drive
Baton Rouge, LA 70803
and NBER
dkeniston@lsu.edu
"...the Caste System is not merely a division of labour. It is also a division of labourers."
"... the Caste System [...] involves an attempt to appoint tasks to individuals in advance, selected
not on the basis of trained original capacities, but on that of the social status of the parents."
The Annihilation of Caste, Ambedkar (1936)


1    Introduction
Work is more than a source of income: it is a part of identity and subject to social norms. Thus
occupational choices are not purely economic, but rather the outcome of an individual's ethnic
background, personality, and social aspirations. The complexity of the occupational choice problem
is widely recognized. However, the challenges of quantifying its non-economic factors have presented
substantial barriers to estimating their importance. In this paper, we analyze occupational choices
in the context of the Indian caste system. Each Indian caste is associated with (usually) a single
traditional occupation. This occupation was historically seen as the proper vocation for members
of that caste in society­their "dharma". While the end of the link between caste and occupation has
often been predicted (Srinivas, 2003), it remains salient for individuals in modern India. Traditional
occupations, which are exogenous from the perspective of any single individual, provide a unique
opportunity to study the role of identity in occupational choice in a context where an important
element of identity is observable and predetermined.
    The goal of this study is to quantify both the importance of identity for an individual's occupa-
tional choice, as well as the impact of these identity-influenced choices on the economy as a whole.
Caste-based occupation identity affects the aggregate economy via two distinct channels. First,
the preference for one's traditional occupation can distort individuals' selection into occupations
away from their comparative advantage, leading to an inefficient allocation of human capital across
occupations. Second, the sorting of castes into traditional occupations can enable the transfer of
occupational knowledge and human capital from parents to children and the formation of social
networks in traditional occupations. These two channels shape the economy in ways that can last-
ingly affect workers' occupational choices and can create "path dependence" well beyond workers'
own preferences: even if workers no longer feel tied to their traditional occupations, they might
nevertheless work in them to take advantage of the productivity effects of large caste networks and
of working in the same occupation as their fathers. Unlike the distortionary effects on the allocation
of human capital, the aggregate impact of these channels of historical persistence may be positive,
and are essential to explaining the remarkable endurance of occupational identity over time.
    We first document a series of new empirical facts that illustrate the role of caste membership
for occupational choices and wages. We find that individuals are about three times as likely to
work in their traditional occupation compared to any other occupation. Within a caste, the work-
ers employed in their traditional occupation earn less than their caste-mates who work in other
occupations. However, when we examine earnings within occupation (i.e., controlling for occupa-
tion fixed effects) we find that workers employed in their traditional occupation earn more than


                                                   2
workers from other castes who work in the same occupation. The data further shows that returns
to ability­measured by schooling and experience­are lower in common traditional caste occupations
compared to "modern" occupations. These empirical findings are informative about how workers
select into occupations based on their comparative and absolute advantage, which we formalize in
our model.
   We develop and estimate a structural general equilibrium Roy (1951) model of education and
occupational choice that incorporates caste identity through several channels: a direct preference for
traditional occupations, productivity effects from working in one's father's occupation, and network
effects at the caste-occupation level. As in the standard Roy model, workers differ in productivity
which varies independently across occupations so that workers select into occupations based on their
comparative advantage. We then extend the model by allowing workers to also differ in general
ability. Because traditional occupations have lower returns to ability, workers with high general
ability who might otherwise work in high skill-returns "modern" occupations may be drawn back
into their traditional low-return occupation by caste identity. We show that allowing selection on
both occupation-specific and general ability is essential to accomodate our empirical findings in the
Roy model.
   To study the importance of castes' affinity for their traditional occupations and to quantify their
aggregate effects, we consider the economy in a general equilibrium context. Since wages reflect the
marginal product of human capital in an occupation, it is essential to allow wages to adjust when
estimating the effects of reallocating human capital across occupations. In addition, occupational
choices are closely linked to individuals' education choices and to the composition of social networks.
We therefore determine wages, educational choices, and social networks endogenously. In particular,
the general equilibrium nature of our analysis allows for the possibility that castes' occupational
identity can serve as a means of equilibrium selection, that can help workers to coordinate on a
human capital allocation and a network composition that maximizes output (Chen and Chen, 2011).
   Identity is rarely expressed solely in terms of occupational preferences, and this is particu-
larly true in the Indian system. The caste system is (perhaps primarily) a hierarchical structure
(Ambedkar, 1936; Dumont, 1970) with certain groups historically seen as ritually superior and oth-
ers as "polluting". We control for the hierarchical ranking to avoid conflating the role of identity
preferences and discrimination which may be correlated with the characteristics of traditional oc-
cupations. In addition, we allow women and workers from hierarchically lower castes to face wage
discrimination and different costs of acquiring education.
   To estimate the model, we construct a novel dataset that includes micro-data on occupational
choices, wages, and demographics, and we use historical sources to link this information to de-
tailed data on castes' traditional occupation. We then use our estimated model to investigate the
importance of occupational caste identity for occupational distributions, wages, aggregate output
and aggregate productivity. We do so by successively removing channels that link castes to their
traditional occupations. Specifically, we remove castes' attachment to traditional occupations, first
holding caste networks constant, and then endogenizing networks as a function of workers' occupa-



                                                  3
tional choices.
    We find very small aggregate effects with constant and endogenous networks: output per worker
increases respectively by 0.6 and 1.1 percent and aggregate output by 0.3 and 0.8 percent. Effects are
small because improvements in workers' selection based on their comparative advantage are offset
by reduced productivity from weaker caste networks and less intergenerational knowledge transfer
since fewer workers work in their fathers' occupation. Despite the trivial aggregate effects, we
nevertheless find large distributional effects: The share of traditional workers decreases by roughly
10 percent in the aggregate, by 4-5 percentage points in the most affected occupation and by roughly
6 percentage points in the most affected caste.
    We then additionally eliminate the last link between castes and their traditional occupations by
removing the correlation between fathers' occupations and traditional occupations. With constant
caste networks, this leads to a substantial drop in output (-3 percent) and a small drop in output per
worker (-0.01 percent). Effects are negative because we remove the option of simultaneously choosing
one's father's and one's traditional occupation­where networks are largest. With endogenous caste
networks, losses are even larger: total output drops by 8.1 percent and output per worker by
5.1 percent. Caste networks are now weaker, since we have removed all coordinating elements
that previously clustered caste networks in their traditional occupations, which lowers productivity
and output. These findings indicate that reduced productivity through weaker networks and less
intergenerational learning can dominate over gains from an improved selection of workers based on
their comparative advantage.
    The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 reviews the relevant literature. Section 3 and 4
describe the data and our reduced form analysis. Section 5 presents our model. Section 6 describes
the estimation strategy. Section 7 presents the results and Section 8 concludes.


2    Literature Review
Our paper contributes to several branches of the literature which study occupational choice and
human capital allocation both in India and more generally.
    Since at least Akerlof and Kranton (2000), a growing literature studies the role of identity in a
range of economic decisions. Examples include recent studies on religious identity and contributions
to public goods (Benjamin et al., 2016), religious identity and food consumption (Atkin et al., 2021),
criminal identity and cheating (Cohn et al., 2015), national identity and support for redistribution
(Shayo, 2009), as well as attachment to hometown and reduced occupational and geographical
mobility (Munshi and Wilson, 2011). Another relevant literature examines the intergenerational
transmission of education and occupation choices (Altonji and Dunn, 2000; Phelan and Kinsella,
2009). While the concept of "occupational identity" is central in Akerlof and Kranton (2000) and
has attracted a large literature in Western sociology and psychology (see Skorikov and Vondracek
(2011) for a recent review), it received relatively less attention from economists, in particular in
empirical work. However, several theoretical studies have investigated the role of social norms



                                                  4
in economic behavior. Akerlof (1980) for example shows that the fear of loss of reputation may
prevent individuals from making economically optimal choices in the labor market if such choices
imply deviating from social norms. In line with our findings, Akerlof (1976) points out that removing
a taste for following widely shared social norms may not be enough to alter behavior due to the
fear of social sanctions.
       Our paper builds upon the rich literature on the interaction between the Indian caste system and
occupational identity. Sociologists have suggested that occupational links are the origin and defining
feature of the Indian caste system at the jati level (Gupta, 2000).1 Jatis are sub-castes which is
the relevant dimension of caste identity for most Indians (Vaid, 2014). Oh (2019) studies the link
between jatis and their traditional occupations formally using an experimental methodology, offering
workers casual labor tasks that are either linked to their traditional occupation or associated with
a different caste. She finds that workers are significantly less likely to accept casual labor outside of
their traditional occupation, especially if the task is associated with a hierarchically inferior caste.
       Economic studies have further emphasized the importance of castes as occupational networks.
In particular, Munshi and Rosenzweig (2006) examine the educational choices of Mumbai residents,
arguing that lower castes discourage their most able young men from pursuing high skill occupations
in order to preserve strong social networks in low skill traditional occupations. Banerjee and Munshi
(2004) provide a case study of the knitted garment industry in Tirupur and show that community
ties determine firms' capital investments. Munshi (2019) provides a recent comprehensive survey
of this literature.2 Our paper complements this literature by formally analyzing the implications of
the Indian caste system for human capital allocation and aggregate output in a general equilibrium
model where occupational wages and networks adjust endogenously.
       In the Indian context, several studies show that intergenerational transmission is remarkably
strong for education (Borkotoky et al., 2015) and occupation (Kumar et al., 2002; Deshpande and
Palshikar, 2008; Vaid, 2012; Hnatkovska et al., 2013; Iversen et al., 2017). Kumar et al. (2002) and
Vaid (2012) document that castes play an important role in the intergenerational transmission of
occupation, which does not seem to weaken over time.
       Our work further relates to recent studies that explore the aggregate implications of frictions
to human capital allocation. Perhaps the work most similar in spirit is the paper by Hsieh et al.
(2019), which quantifies the effect of decreased discrimination against women and blacks in high
skill-return US occupations on aggregate wage and GDP growth. It is common in this literature
to assume that occupation-specific productivity is uncorrelated across occupations. Under this
assumption, workers' selection is such that expanding sectors increasingly attract individuals with
lower comparative and absolute advantage, while contracting sectors shed the least productive
workers (as noted by Young in his 2014 study of US industries). A rent Alvarez-Cuadrado et al.
(2019) re-examine the selection into agriculture at the micro level, and find that individuals who
   1
     See also the literature on the pattern of caste based patron-client relationships and occupational specialization,
the "jajmani" system, initiated by Wiser (1936).
   2
     The long-term case study of the Palanpur Village (Lanjouw and Stern, 1998) contains a detailed description of
the caste roles in the village. In line with our results, this study demonstrates that traditionally agricultural castes
perform better in agriculture than others, and are less likely to enter off-farm occupations.


                                                           5
are more productive at farming are also more productive in their secondary occupations.3 We add
to this literature by empirically testing the model implications of different sorting mechanisms with
observed occupational choices and wage distributions across and within castes. One contribution
of our paper is the combination of a general equilibrium approach with a structural estimation by
maximum likelihood that relies on rich individual-level data.


3    Data
In the Indian context, workers' identity and social network is defined by their sub-caste, or jati,
rather than by the larger varna caste groupings or the government reservation categories. We use one
of the few datasets providing jati-level identity, the Indian Household Development Survey (IHDS),
which also provides detailed information on individuals' demographics, occupations, wages, and
family characteristics. We complement this dataset with two additional data moments. First, we
construct social networks at the jati-occupation level with data from the Demographic and Health
Survey (DHS) (IIPS, 2007). Second, we retrieve information on each jati's traditional occupation
from the colonial Census in 1911 which we again complement with other historical sources. Merging
these three datasets at the jati level poses particular challenges and required a very labor-intensive
harmonization of jati names. In the following paragraphs, we first explain our strategy of merging
jati names across datasets before briefly describing the three main data sources in more detail.

Harmonization of Jati names:

The IHDS and DHS both report jati names declared by respondents verbatim. This complicates
classification, first because the meaning of "caste" itself can be ambiguous (Headley, 2013), and
second because there are many synonyms and spellings for each jati, not to mention typos. To
clean and harmonize jati names in a systematic manner, we use the People of India project which
was launched in 1985 by the Anthropological Survey of India and which made an extraordinary effort
to systematically collect data on all Indian jatis. The project produced a volume (Singh, 1996) that
lists all jati names and their various synonyms at the state level. We digitized this volume to create
a jati "master list" with state-specific lists of all jati synonyms. We then hand-merged this master
list with the IHDS and DHS with the help of several research assistants, ultimately categorizing
32,137 recorded names into 1,000 unique castes.

Individual-level data from IHDS Household Survey:

The primary dataset used in this project is the second round of the Indian Household Development
Survey (IHDS), which was conducted in 2011 (Desai et al., 2008; Desai and Vanneman, 2015). This
dataset contains rich demographic data on 42,152 households, including an extensive occupation
   3
     In spatial general equilibrium, Eckert and Peters (2018), Heise and Porzio (2019) and Bryan and Morten (2018)
find that the Roy model with uncorrelated shocks can not explain the patterns of regional migration and productivity
in the data.



                                                         6
and income module that records income and time spent in each occupation for each individual
in the household.4 The survey also documents the occupation of the household head's father or,
in female headed households, father-in-law. When this occupation is missing, we impute it by
constructing occupational probabilities based on the data of fathers' occupations from members
of the same caste.5 We add information on jatis' social status by matching the jati names in our
dataset to their contemporary classification as Scheduled Castes (SC), Scheduled Tribes (ST) or
Other Backward Classes (OBC), which are rough proxies of social ranking. To do so, we follow
Cassan (2019) and use the classifications from official state-wise lists of reservation.

Occupation-specific caste networks from DHS Household Survey:

The estimation of social networks at the jati-occupation-level for 1,000 jatis and 49 occupations
requires a very large sample size. We therefore construct networks by combining the IHDS data
with the third round of the DHS (2005-06) (also called NFHS) which provides jati and occupation
information for a very large sample of 109,041 households. We use the DHS only for the social
network data because it contains very sparse information on income and parental occupation. We
therefore cannot use it for the main part of our analysis.

Traditional occupations from historical data sources:

We obtain information on jatis' traditional occupations in each Province(the colonial equivalent of a
state) from the colonial Census of 1911 (Conlon, 1981). We complement the data with several other
historical data sources to improve the completeness of the dataset.6 We create a crosswalk between
historical occupation classifications and their contemporaneous counterparts in the IHDS and DHS
datasets by defining 49 consistent occupational categories (see list in Appendix Table A3).7
   4
      The IHDS is a panel dataset with two rounds, however, we use the first round (2005-06) only when necessary to
complement data that is missing or incomplete data in the second round. In particular, we use jati names from the
first round if they are missing or coded in a very general way, such as "scheduled caste" (SC), in the second round.
Similarly, we use parental occupation from the first round if it is missing in the second round. Income and time use
data on secondary occupations, home work, animal care, money lending, and land rental posed specific challenges in
the cleaning and construction of our final dataset, which we explain in detail in Appendix A1.
    5
      Overall, information on father's occupation is missing for 12.8 percent of men and for 84.7 percent of women.
Our regressions include a dummy indicating if the father's occupation has been imputed. In Appendix A2.2, we use
additional data from a different survey, which provides full data on all parents' occupations, to show that our main
results are not affected by this imputation.
    6
      Our primary source are the 1911 Tables titled "Occupation by selected castes, tribes or races". If jatis are missing
in the 1911 Census, we use data from Kitts (1885), which is based on the 1881 Census. If jatis are missing in both
datasets, we use the People of India "India's Communities" volume which provides rich historical and anthropological
information about all jatis­usually including jatis' traditional occupation. For jatis whose traditional occupation was
labeled as "criminal" in colonial era sources, we found historical evidence that these groups were nomadic and subject
to state-level discrimination that aimed at sedentarizing those groups (Schwarz, 2010). For these jatis, we instead
retrieve their traditional occupation from data in Crooke (1896) or­if missing there­from the People of India volume.
    7
      Note that in the structural estimation, we drop the "Beggars" occupational categories, which has only 4 individuals
in our sample.




                                                            7
4        Reduced Form Evidence
Traditional occupation and occupational choice

We measure the extent to which the traditional occupation of a jati determines the contemporary
occupational choice of its members. Figure 1a documents the share of male workers in each oc-
cupation who work in their jati's traditional occupation and the share who works in their father's
occupation. Figure 1b does the same for women. Both show large heterogeneity across occupations.
Some occupations are predominantly done by workers who follow their jati's traditional occupation­
for example "dyeing and cleaning" in which half of all workers follow their traditional occupation.
Other occupations have close to no traditional workers­such as legal or medical professions. Over-
all, 16.8 percent of men work in their jati's traditional occupation, versus 9.1 percent if workers
were randomly allocated across occupations (keeping the occupational distribution constant). For
women, 8 percent are in their jati's traditional occupation against 5 percent if randomly allocated.8
Workers also tend to follow their father's occupation, however, this is much less marked for women.
Occupations with a high share of traditional workers tend to have more workers who follow their
father's occupation, but these relations are not perfectly correlated.
        These findings suggest that caste identity is closely linked to traditional occupations. An alter-
native explanation could be that consumers prefer products which are provided by members of the
traditional caste (i.e., from castes whose vocation it is to produce that good). This may be true
in some cases,9 however, Figures 1a and 1b show that occupations, in which the identity of the
producer is unknown to consumers, nevertheless remain strongly associated with their traditional
castes. Examples for such occupations include fishing, jewelry, or cultivation. Oh (2019) confirms
in an experimental study that workers' preference for their traditional occupation is not affected by
whether occupational choices are made in public or private.
        To quantify the effect of traditional occupational preferences more formally, we turn to a re-
gression analysis. We rectangularize our dataset at the individual×occupation level, so that each
individual is observed once for each potential occupation (i.e., 49 times). We then run the following
OLS regression:


                               Occiok =  + T radOccok + Xo + Zi + iok ,

where Occiok indicates that individual i of jati k works in occupation o, T radOccok indicates that
occupation o is jati k 's traditional occupation, and Xo and Zi are occupation and individual fixed
effects. We cluster standard errors at the PSU level in accordance with the 2-stage sampling of
the IHDS, following Abadie et al. (2017). Table 1 presents the results. Column 1 of Panel A
shows that men are 6.8 percentage points more likely to work in an occupation if it is their jati's
traditional occupation, holding constant occupational and individual characteristics. In Column
    8
     These ties are stronger in rural areas with 20 percent of rural men and 11.4 percent of rural women in their
traditional occupations.
   9
     For example for Hindu religious workers of the priestly Brahman caste. However, religious service providers
constitute only 93 out of 98,344 workers in our sample.


                                                       8
2 we include individuals' jati network, defined as the share of workers in their chosen occupation
who belong to their caste, and an indicator for whether they work in the same occupation as their
father as additional covariates. We find that both variables are significant and large in magnitude:
the probability that male workers choose an occupation increases by 31 percentage points if it
is their father's occupation; and by 10 percentage points for each 1 percentage point increase
in the occupation's caste network (Column 3). The impact of traditional occupations remains
significant with these controls but is lowered to roughly 4 percentage points. This finding implies
that workers are three times more likely to work in their traditional occupation compared to a
random occupational choice. Male workers of scheduled castes (SCs) have less affinity for their
traditional occupations, although these results are imprecisely estimated (see Column 4).
       Panel B of Table 1 shows that effects are present but much smaller for women. On aver-
age, women are 2.7 percentage points more likely to work in their traditional occupation, which
reduces to 1 percentage point when controlling for father's occupation and caste-occupation net-
works. Women's occupational choice probability increases by 18 percentage points for their father's
occupation and by 4 percentage points for each 1 percentage point increase in the occupation's caste
network (Column 3).

Selection and productivity in traditional occupations

To examine the relationship between occupational identity and hourly wages, we run the following
regression:


                          log(wage/hour)iok =  + T radOcciok + Xiok + iok

where log(wage/hour)iok is the log of hourly wages of individual i from jati k working in occupation
o, T radOcciok is a dummy indicating whether occupation o is the traditional occupation of worker
i's jati, and Xiok is a set of individual characteristics which include father's occupation and caste
networks. Table 2 presents the results where we consider two specifications, controlling first for
jati fixed effects and then for occupation fixed effects. All specifications condition on labor force
participation, which particularly affects sample size for women.
       With jati fixed effects (Columns 1 and 3), we find that male workers earn lower hourly wages
in their traditional occupation, compared to workers from the same jati who work in any other
(non-traditional) occupations. The result also holds for women with a slightly smaller coefficient
(Column 3). This finding is consistent with the standard selection effects of the Roy model: because
workers get a utility boost, they are willing to accept lower wages in their traditional occupation.10
       Perhaps surprisingly, the results are reversed with occupation fixed effects (Columns 2 and 4).
Here we find that workers in their traditional occupation earn 11-13 percent more per hour than
non-traditional workers in the same occupation. This result is at odds with the selection of the
  10
    These results provide evidence against the hypothesis that consumers, or intermediaries, have a higher willingness
to pay for products sold by traditional workers. If that were the case, workers might earn more in their traditional
occupation than their fellow caste members in other occupations.



                                                          9
standard Roy model: if we assume uncorrelated occupational skills, then traditional workers should
have lower average productivity and hence lower hourly wages than other workers in the same
occupation.

Returns to ability in traditional occupations

To explain these findings, we examine differences in returns to ability as a potential driver of
occupational choices and wages. Traditional occupations existed (by definition) in pre-industrial
times, so it is possible that they offer differing returns to ability than non-traditional, "modern"
occupations. We test for this by running the following regression:


               log(wage/hour)iok =  + T radOccio + Xiok + T radOccio  Xiok + iok ,

where Xiok are years of schooling and experience, which measure workers' general ability. We now
define T radOccio as traditional occupations of any jati (hence, it is not indexed by caste k ) to
examine the characteristics of traditional occupations at the occupation level.11 The coefficient of
interest is  which captures differential returns to schooling and experience in traditional occupa-
tions. All regressions include caste and occupation fixed effects and are estimated separately by
gender and conditional on labor force participation.
    Column 1 of Table 3 shows that returns to ability are indeed lower in traditional occupations:
each year of schooling increases wages of male workers by 7.4 percent in non-traditional occupations
and by only 4.2 percent in traditional occupations. Similarly, returns to experience are more than
twice as large in non-traditional occupations. Father's occupation and caste networks increase
wages significantly and substantially in magnitude, but these effects are not significantly different
in traditional occupations (Column 2). Including all covariates together in Column 3 does not
change the findings.
    For women (Columns 4-6), we find much lower and imprecisely measured returns to education
and experience in all occupations. Returns to fathers' occupation and caste networks are again
large but do not differ significantly between traditional and non-traditional occupations.

Discrimination

We examine whether there is wage discrimination by gender or by castes' social ranking. To do so,
we proxy castes' ranking by their categorization into other backward classes (OBC), scheduled castes
(SC), and scheduled tribes (ST).12 All specifications control for individual characteristics, including
education and experience. Column 1 of Table 4 shows very large wage discrimination against
women (-0.6 log-points) and much smaller effects for castes lower in the traditional hierarchy. With
  11
     All results are qualitatively the same, and in some cases more precise, if we restrict our definition of "traditional
occupations" to occupations that are traditional for a minimum share of the population (e.g. for more than 0.5
percent).
  12
     These groups are eligible for affirmative action policies by the Indian government. SCs were historically most
discriminated, STs are aboriginal tribes with limited access to public goods, OBCs are low in the caste hierarchy but
were subject to less discrimination than SCs.


                                                           10
occupation fixed effects (Column 2), we find smaller estimates for women (albeit still large at -0.4
log-points) but larger and more precise estimates for lower-ranked castes (-0.1 log-points for OBCs,
-0.2 for SCs and -0.2 for STs). The estimates are robust to controlling for father's occupation, caste
networks, and a traditional occupation dummy (Columns 3 and 4).

Selection and productivity: Model implications

Our reduced form results show that traditional occupations are important for occupational choices.
Yet the standard selection in a Roy model with uncorrelated occupational productivity cannot fully
explain the wage patterns that we observe for workers in their traditional occupations.13 In the
uncorrelated Roy model, the first workers to enter an occupation have the highest occupation-
specific productivity. Average occupation-specific productivity of a caste would therefore decrease
if preferences draw more of its workers into a given occupation. This finding is consistent with
the empirical result that workers earn less in their traditional occupation than their caste mates in
other (non-traditional) occupations (cf. Columns 1 and 3 of Table 2).
         However, when comparing workers within an occupation, we find that traditional workers earn
more than outsiders in the same occupation (cf. Columns 2 and 4 of Table 2). This finding
contrasts with the prediction from the uncorrelated Roy model. To reconcile these results, we show
that traditional occupations have lower returns to general ability than "modern" (non-traditional)
occupations. If workers differ in general ability, then high-ability workers sort a priori into modern
occupations and low ability workers into traditional occupations. The marginal traditional workers
who are drawn into their caste's occupation due to the utility boost have higher general ability than
the average (non-traditional) worker in the same occupation. Due to their higher general ability,
traditional workers can earn more in their traditional occupation than non-traditional workers in
the same occupation, as we find in the data. Intuitively, our results indicate that some high
ability individuals continue working in their low-return traditional occupations (e.g., agriculture,
laundering, pottery) when, in the absence of the caste-occupation affinity, they might apply their
skills more productively in high-return occupations (e.g., teaching, engineering, law). Guided by
these empirical findings, we specify our general equilibrium occupational choice model to study the
importance of caste identity on aggregate outcomes.


5         Model
We now describe the model setup and solve agents' education and occupational choices. We then
present the aggregation of individual choices, the production side, and market clearing.
    13
    We perform several robustness checks to address potential concerns that our reduced form analysis could be biased
by the differential selection of castes into occupations with heterogeneous characteristics. In particular, we control for
a variety of potential determinants of occupational choice, such as the traditional "purity" of an occupation, and its
interaction with a caste's hierarchical status. We also examine the role of inherited land, and the occupational choices
of other family members. While these variables are often significant, they cause no change in the estimated effects of
traditional occupation. See Section A2.1 for further discussion and A1 for results.




                                                           11
5.1      Model Setup
Individual Characteristics:

Individuals i differ in general ability, which consists of an unobservable component i and an
observable component i . Individuals receive an idiosyncratic education cost shock i and a vector
of idiosyncratic occupation-specific productivity shocks io .

Caste Affiliation and Family Environment:

Individuals i belong to a caste k that affects their utility payoffs and choices via four channels.
First, workers have a direct preference for working in their caste's traditional occupation, which we
denote by ok . Second, caste members can experience wage discrimination, which we denote by Tk .
Third, workers receive productivity effects from their caste network, which we define as the share
of all workers in an occupation who belong to the worker's caste. Last, caste affiliation can affect
costs of schooling, which we denote by k . Costs are per year of schooling and are measured in
utils. They can capture pecuniary costs (e.g., school fees or scholarships) or non-pecuniary factors
such as potential caste-level discrimination, returns to education on the marriage market, or social
norms that make schooling more or less costly for certain castes.
       We allow for productivity effects from working in the same occupation as one's father since
parents can transfer skills, customer networks, or other assets to their children.14 To simplify
notation, we denote the total productivity shifter from father's occupation and caste networks for
an individual i in occupation o by io .

Occupation Characteristics:

Each occupation offers a wage rate wo per human capital unit, which is endogenously determined.
Occupations differ in their returns to general ability, which we denote by o . These returns capture
the inherent skill-intensity of an occupation (e.g., engineering is for example more complex and skill-
intensive than agricultural labor). Occupations further differ in amenities Ao which can capture
both how pleasant it is to work in an occupation as well as attributes such as entry cost that are not
directly measurable in wages. In the Indian context, examples of such entry costs can include exams
to enter government services or high costs of acquiring farm land due to imperfect land markets.

Preferences:

Workers have preferences for the homogeneous consumption good C , for working in their caste's
traditional occupation ok , and for the amenities of their occupation Ao . We assume a log-linear
functional form, so the utility of a worker i from caste k who works in occupation o is given by:


                                           Uio = log(Cio ) + ok + Ao .                                           (1)
  14
    We assume that occupation-specific intergenerational effects only exist when children work in the same occupation
as their father and that they are subsumed into general ability i otherwise.


                                                         12
5.2        Education and Occupation Choices
The timing of the model is the following: Individuals live two periods, childhood and adulthood.
At birth, they know their caste affiliation, their general ability i and their education cost shock i .
Individuals first choose years of schooling si , which remain fixed during adulthood and is a com-
ponent of workers' observable ability level i . Young adults then receive idiosyncratic occupation-
specific productivity shocks io and choose an occupation o in which they work during adulthood.
Occupation-specific shocks are realized only after education is completed, so children take expecta-
tions over these shocks when choosing education. We solve the problem backwards, beginning with
the occupational choice.

5.2.1       Occupational Choice

Young adults choose their occupation to maximize utility over their working period of T years,
subject to discount factor r, by solving:

                                                   T
                                       max             e-rt (log(Cio ) + ok + Ao ) dt ,                         (2)
                                        o      0

where Cio is consumption, ok are workers' preferences for working in their traditional occupation,
and Ao are occupational amenities. Workers spend their entire income on the final consumption
good (which is the numeraire), so that the budget constraint is equal to:


                                                       Cio = (1 - Tk )wo io ,                                   (3)

where Tk is caste wage discrimination, wo is the occupation-specific wage rate, and io are the total
human capital units that a worker supplies to occupation o. This human capital measure depends
on workers' own characteristics, their father's occupations, and their caste networks and is given
by:
                                                       io = (i i )o io io ,                                     (4)

where io captures productivity effects from workers' caste networks and parental occupation, io
is occupation-specific productivity, (i , i ) measure general ability,15 and o captures occupation-
specific returns to general ability. Substituting the budget constraint (Equation 3) and the ex-
pression for human capital (Equation 4) into the utility maximization (Equation 2) allows us to
formulate the occupational choice problem as:

                 T
 max                 e-rt [log ((1 - Tk ) wo (i i )o io ) + ok + Ao + log(io )] dt        r
                                                                                          ¯ max {u
                                                                                                 ¯io + log(io )} ,
       o     0                                                                                 o

  15
    Recall that i are unobserved ability shocks and i is the observed component of ability, which is determined by
workers' education and experience. Since individuals choose their education during childhood, we can treat it as a
fixed characteristic in the occupational choice problem.




                                                                13
where r
      ¯ is the discount factor and u
                                   ¯io is the expected lifetime utility of choosing occupation o (net
of the occupation-specific productivity shock). We provide the complete definitions and derivations
in Appendix A3.1.

Solving the Occupational Choice Problem:

To solve this discrete choice problem, we impose the following assumptions:
   Assumption 1. Idiosyncratic productivity shocks log (io ) are i.i.d. across occupation choices
and are distributed Type-I Extreme Value with location 0 and scale parameter 1/ : Pr(  x) =
exp(- exp(- x)).
   Assumption 2. Idiosyncratic ability i is i.i.d. across workers and is distributed log-normal
with mean 0 and variance 2.

   Under Assumption 1, we can express the probability that worker i with ability i chooses
occupation o as:
                                                       ¯io )
                                                  (exp u
                                     Pio|i =                   ,                                  (5)
                                                         ¯io )
                                                  o (exp u

and the worker's expected utility before knowing occupation-specific productivity shocks io as:

                                                         r
                                                         ¯
                           ¯ max {u
                       Eio r      ¯io + log (io )} =       log               ¯io ) ,
                                                                        (exp u                    (6)
                                o                                   o

We then use Assumption 2 to integrate over unobservable ability i . Worker i's unconditional
occupational choice probability is equal to:

                                         Pio =   Pio|i  (i ) di ,

where  (·) indicates the log-normal PDF. This final integral has no closed-form solution.

5.2.2   Education Choice

Caste affiliation affects education choices through both the cost and expected returns to schooling.
If an individual believes that she is likely to enter her traditional occupation­in which the returns
to education are low­then she will invest less ex-ante in acquiring education. To capture both of
these channels, we augment the standard Mincerian formulation with caste-specific education costs.
Children's choice of schooling si then maximizes the following equation:

                             r
                             ¯                                      2k
                     max       log             ¯io )
                                          (exp u        - 1k +         si + i si .                (7)
                      si             o                              2
   The first term of this equation represents the net present value of expected lifetime utility (de-
rived in Equation 6) before knowing occupation-specific productivity shocks io (which are realized
only after education is completed). Utility u
                                            ¯io increases in years of schooling, capturing expected
returns to schooling from higher wages during workers' years in the labor force. The second term



                                                   14
of Equation 7 represents the cost of education, including both caste-specific shifters k and idiosyn-
cratic education cost shocks i . To facilitate estimation, we make the following assumption:
   Assumption 3. Education cost shocks i are i.i.d. across workers and distributed Normal with
mean 0 and variance 2.

   When choosing the optimal amount of schooling, individuals weigh marginal costs against ex-
pected marginal returns. We can define the optimal schooling level implicitly by differentiating
Equation 7 with respect to si . We present the full derivations, including integration and optimiza-
tion, in Appendix A3.2.

5.2.3   Aggregation of Human Capital in each Occupation

Individuals' education and occupational choices jointly determine schooling levels, the allocation
of general and occupation-specific ability, and the structure of occupational caste networks. These
factors together determine the total amount of human capital that is supplied to each occupation.
To derive human capital supply in each occupation, we use Assumption 1 to solve for workers'
expected occupation-specific productivity io conditional on having chosen occupation o:
                                                         1
                                                         
                                                   1               1
                             E io|i =                         1-       ,                          (8)
                                                 Pio|i             
where  (·) is the gamma function. This expression is typical of a Roy model where productiv-
ity shocks are uncorrelated across occupations. It illustrates that selection on occupation-specific
productivity io is negative within -types: caste members have an affinity for their traditional
occupation which increases their propensity of choosing that occupation (Pio|i ) and decreases their
average occupation-specific productivity in the occupation. Next, we combine this measure with
workers' other characteristics (cf. Equation 4) and we sum over all workers to express total expected
human capital in occupation o as:


                        E (o ) =            Pio|i (i i )o io E io|i d (i ) ,                      (9)
                                    i   i

where we weigh each observation-type by the corresponding occupational choice probability and use
Assumption 2 to integrate unobservable ability i over the PDF of the Normal distribution,  (·).
Across -types, the negative relationship between castes' occupational choice probability and aver-
age human capital is no longer guaranteed. If the utility of working in one's traditional occupation
attracts sufficiently high -types into low-return traditional occupations, then the average human
capital of traditional workers in that occupation can be greater than that of outsiders.

5.2.4   Social Networks

We define caste-occupation networks as the share of all workers in an occupation that belong to a
given caste. It follows that networks are endogenously determined by occupational choices in the



                                                   15
following way:
                                                         ik  Pio|i d (i )
                             SocialNetworkok =                                    .
                                                         i  Pio|i d (i )

    The productivity effects of social networks imply that workers' occupational choices have im-
portant externalities on their fellow caste members. In the absence of a coordinating mechanism,
individuals do not internalize these effects and social networks in equilibrium may feature less
clustering of castes into the same occupation than in an output-maximizing allocation.

5.3   Firms and Market Clearing
Perfectly competitive firms produce the final consumption good C . The production technology is
CES and uses human capital from each occupation o as inputs. Profit maximization is therefore
given by:
                                                                               
                                                 -1        -1                  
                             max A           Zo o
                                                                -       wo o      ,            (10)
                              o
                                                                    o
                                                                               
                                         o

where A is total factor productivity, Zo is the factor share of each occupation's human capital and
 is the elasticity of substitution between occupations. Firms' first order condition with respect to
o determine human capital demand in each occupation. Wage rates wo adjust in equilibrium to
ensure that labor markets clear, equalizing human capital demand and supply (cf. Equation 9) in
each occupation.

5.4   Equilibrium
We formally define the equilibrium in Appendix A3.3. The Appendix further describes how we
endogenize wage discrimination Tk by assuming that entrepreneurs experience a disutility from
employing workers that belong to certain castes similar to Hsieh et al. (2019).


6     Structural Estimation
We use maximum likelihood to directly match the model's predictions of individuals' wages, edu-
cation, and occupation choices to their counterparts in our individual-level data. Consistent with
the timing assumptions in our model, we estimate two separate likelihood functions: the first for
the probability of observed occupational choices and wages, and the second for the likelihood of
observed educational choices. We first describe how we parameterize components of our model and
then present the likelihood functions.

6.1   Parameterization and Heterogeneous Effects
Preferences for traditional occupation: The non-pecuniary utility that individuals receive
from an occupation is allowed to vary according to their traditional occupation, the hierarchical



                                                    16
rank of their caste, and their gender:

         ok    =   I (TraditionalOccupationk = o) (~
                                                   1 + ~2 I (OBCk ) + ~3 I (SCk ) + ~4 I (STk ) + ~5 I (Femalei ))    (11)
               +   I (Homeworko ) × I (Femalei ) × (~
                                                    6 + ~7 I (OBCk ) + ~8 I (SCk ) + ~9 I (STk )) ,

where I (TraditionalOccupationk = o) indicates whether occupation o is a traditional occupation of
caste k . We allow the value of ok to differ by castes' social ranking­captured by the indicator
variables I (OBCk ) , I (SCk ) , I (STk )­to accommodate the fact that many traditional occupations of
lower castes might be unpleasant (for example, carcass removal).16 Women may face social sanctions
when working outside the home, so we interact an indicator for homework with a gender dummy.
We allow this effect to also vary by caste hierarchy, following evidence in Eswaran et al. (2013) and
Cassan and Vandewalle (ming) which show that this stigma is strongest for high-caste women.

Observable components of general ability: Using the standard Mincer formulation, we pa-
rameterize observable human capital i as a function of education si , experience and experience
squared:

                               i = exp ~1 experience + ~2 experience2 + ~3 si +
                                                    i               i

                                  +I (Femalei ) ~4 experience + ~5 experience2 + ~6 si      ,
                                                             i               i


where we define experience as individuals' age minus their years of schooling si minus the typical
age to start school (which we set to 6 years).

Productivity effects from social environment: We model productivity effects from caste
networks and father's occupation as:

                            io = exp ~1 I (Father occ = o) + ~2 SocialNetworkok +

                                +I (Femalei ) ~3 I (Father occ = o) + ~4 SocialNetworkok        ,

where SocialNetworkok is the share of all workers in occupation o that are members of caste k 17
and I (Father occ = 0) indicates whether the father of individual i worked in occupation o. We
allow the effects of caste networks and parental occupation to differ for women because fathers may
differentially transfer their occupation-specific knowledge to sons or daughters, and social networks
may be differentially important for women (as shown in Munshi and Rosenzweig (2006)). We set
SocialNetworkok = 0 for homework, since social networks do not seem relevant in this setting.
  16
     Father's occupation might also have a direct impact on utility and could therefore be included in ok . We tested
this alternative specification and found this effect to be insignificant for males and slightly negative for women, perhaps
due to gender roles. In our preferred specification, we therefore allow for effects from father's occupation only through
the productivity shifter io . This choice also offers a cleaner identification, since simultaneous effects of parental
occupation on their children's utility and productivity could only be separately identified through functional form
assumptions.
  17
     We jackknife this variable for the individual's own occupation, subtracting 1 from both the number of caste
members and the total workers in the occupation.




                                                            17
Wage discrimination: We allow for wage discrimination based on caste hierarchy and gender in
the following way:

                         (1 - Tk ) = exp ~1 I (Femalei ) + ~2 I (OBCk ) + ~3 I (SCk ) + ~4 I (STk ) .


We set Tk = 0 for homework because caste discrimination is unlikely within the home and because
women may face systematic discrimination in all market occupations.

Education cost: We allow costs per year of schooling k to vary by caste hierarchy, gender, and
the number of years of schooling:

              k      =     ~ 1 I (Femalei ) + ~ 2 I (OBCk ) + ~ 3 I (SCk ) + ~ 4 I (STk )
                     +     YearsEducationi × (~
                                              5 I (Femalei ) + ~ 6 I (OBCk ) + ~ 7 I (SCk ) + ~ 8 I (STk )) .


Occupation Parameters: At the occupation level, we estimate amenities Ao , wage rates wo , and
skill returns o . These variables are simple vectors where each element represents an occupational
category.

Distribution Parameters: Last, we need to estimate the dispersion of the three idiosyncratic
shocks in our model: Occupation-specific productivity shocks io which are extreme value dis-
tributed with dispersion parameter  ; general ability shocks i , which are log-normally distributed
with mean 1 and standard deviation  ; and education cost shocks i , which are normally distributed
with mean 0 and standard deviation  .

6.2   Likelihood Function
With these parameterizations at hand, we now turn to our maximum likelihood estimation. The
estimation proceeds in two steps: the first for occupation choices and wages, and the second for
education choices.

Occupation and wage likelihood

The occupation and wage likelihood function estimates the first set of parameters, which are occ =
    ~ ,
 ~, , ~ ,
        ~ Ao , wo , o ,  ,  . The likelihood that a worker i earns wage yio in occupation o can be
expressed as the product of the probability that she chooses occupation o and the probability that
she earns wage yio conditional on that occupational choice, so that:

                Li (^ ^, o
                    yio  ^; , Xi ) =           Pr [yio = y ^ |o = o
                                                                  ^; , Xi , ] × Pr [o = o
                                                         ^io                            ^|, Xi , ] d,           (12)
                                            

where Xi are individual characteristics, o
                                         ^ is chosen occupation, and y
                                                                     ^io
                                                                       ^ is the realized wage in
this occupation. We observe these objects in the data. Under the assumption of extreme value
distributed productivity shocks, the model admits a closed form expression for occupational choice
probability (cf. Equation 5):



                                                                18
                                                     ^|, Xi , i ] = Pio|i ,
                                             Pr [o = o

and for the conditional wage probability (derived in Appendix A3.4):
                                                                                     
                                                                      exp u
                                                                       o  ¯io |i
             Pr [yio = y ^ |o = o
                       ^io      ^; , Xi , i ]    =                                                      ×
                                                     y
                                                     ^io
                                                       ^   exp ok + Ao + o    ¯ - i         y
                                                                                            ^io
                                                                                              ^
                                                                                            
                                                                           oexp u
                                                                                ¯io |i
                                                     exp -                                                  .
                                                                 exp ok + Ao + o    ¯ - i         y
                                                                                                  ^io
                                                                                                    ^


The occupational choice and wage probabilities are both conditional on the level of unobserved
ability i , over which we integrate in the likelihood function in Equation 12.18 In the estimation,
we normalize the mean and standard deviation of the general  ability distribution for males to
one. This normalization does not affect the likelihood value since the mean of unobserved skills is
not separately identified from the average wage rates wo , and the variance of unobserved skills is
not separately identified from the scale of skill returns o and the coefficients ~. More generally,
an environment with high returns to skill in all occupations and a small variance of skills is obser-
vationally equivalent to one with low returns to skill and a large variance of skills. We normalize
the occupational amenity Ao in the first occupational category to 1, since occupational utilities are
only identified in relative terms.
      The wage component of the likelihood is not defined for home workers since they have no
observable wage data. We therefore set it to 1 for home workers, using only their occupational
choice data to estimate the parameters of homework. It follows that "wages" for home workers are
not separately identified from amenities Ao so we normalize whome = 1. We do not endogenize the
homework "wage" in counterfactuals and we measure output only from market workers.

Education likelihood
Conditional on the first set of parameters, we next use the education likelihood to estimate the
remaining parameters: edu = {     ~ ,  } . We specify the education likelihood function as a Tobit to
account for the fact that almost a third of individuals in the data have no formal education. For these
individuals, the schooling choice is likely inframarginal. Their education likelihood corresponds to
the probability that their education cost shocks are sufficiently high to censor their education levels
at zero. The full education likelihood is therefore equal to:
                                                             si >0)
                                                           I(^                    si =0)
                                                                                I(^
                                                1    ^i                    ^i
                             Li (^
                                 si ) =                               1-                   d,                   (13)
                                          
                                                                            

where  is the PDF and  the CDF of the standard normal distribution.     si , y
                                                                    ^i (^    ^io , o
                                                                                   ^; ) are
individuals' education cost shocks which rationalize observed education choices s
                                                                                ^i , conditional on
individuals' observed wages y
                            ^io , occupations o
                                              ^ and parameters . To characterize these education
cost shocks we rearrange the first order conditions of the education choice problem (cf. Equation
 18
      Specifically, we integrate over  using Gauss-Hermite quadrature with 7 nodes.




                                                           19
7) in the following way:

                                                    r                           ~s
                     ^i = -1g - 2g si + r
                                        ¯ -           log         exp ( u
                                                                        ¯io ) +                o Pio|i ,
                                                             o                             o

where the term in brackets represents expected returns to education during individuals' working
period. We provide the full derivation of this expression in Appendix A3.2. As before, we integrate
each likelihood contribution in Equation 13 over the distribution of ability shocks . When solving
for the likelihood, we impose the constraint that the second-order conditions of the education choice
problem must be negative at the optimal education level to ensure that we derive education choices
that maximize agents' utility.19
         It is theoretically possible to estimate the occupation-wage and education likelihoods simulta-
neously. However, it would be computationally infeasible to impose the second order constraint
from the education choice problem on the combined likelihood, since the constraint is linear in
the education cost  in the education likelihood, but non-linear in other parameters. We therefore
implement the estimation in two steps and bootstrap the standard errors to account for this 2-stage
process, clustering at the PSU level.

6.3        Backing out production parameters
Last, we need to determine the parameters from the CES production technology, which are oc-
cupational intensity Zo , total factor productivity A, and the elasticity of substitution  across
occupations. We calibrate  to the literature (setting it to 2/3) and we compute the other pa-
rameters by matching the model's optimality conditions to the data. Dividing firms' first order
conditions across two occupations yields the following expression:
                                                                        -1
                                                Zo  w           o       
                                                   = o                       ,                                     (14)
                                                Zo  wo          o
where we can compute relative occupational shares Zo by using our estimated wage rates wo and
by constructing human capital in each occupation o from the data. The level of occupation shares
Zo is identified because they have to sum to one across all occupations. Using the estimates of 
and Zo , we then rearrange firms' first order conditions to infer total factor productivity A as:
                                                            wo
                                           A=                                     1    .                           (15)
                                                     -1              -1           -1
                                                                     
                                                Zo o        o
                                                                Z o o


7         Results
7.1        Structural Parameters
We present our maximum likelihood estimates in Tables 5 and 6.
    19
    Education choices are not well defined in 55 out of 688,380 individual×alpha-type combinations as our simulated
education choices correspond to local rather than global maxima of the utility function. We interpret this as rejections
of the possibility of observing these  values for these particular individuals, and drop them from the estimation.


                                                          20
      The first two columns of Table 5 present our estimates of workers' preferences for working in their
traditional occupation­the key focus of our paper. To provide an interpretation of the estimated
parameter values, let us consider their effects on occupational choice probabilities, which are shifted
by exp ( io ), as shown in Equation 5. The coefficient on traditional occupation (0.18) implies that
general caste men20 choose their traditional occupation with a 23.1 percent greater probability than
non-traditional occupations. This effect is smaller for women for whom the combined coefficient
from row 1 and 2 implies a 12.4 percent greater attraction to their traditional occupations. Another
perspective comes from comparing the io parameters to the variation in occupational amenities
Ao , the other non-pecuniary source of occupational utility. Here we see that the io shifters are
relatively small: the standard deviation of amenities Ao is 2.98 times larger than general caste men's
preferences for their traditional occupation. Relative to general castes, the appeal of the traditional
occupation is significantly stronger for OBC castes, not significantly different for scheduled castes,
and significantly weaker for scheduled tribes. In rows 6-9 of Table 5 we see that women have a very
strong affinity for homework (or, equivalently, stigma for market work). This effect is weaker for
castes of lower social status as suggested by the literature.
      The second pair of columns of Table 5 displays the estimated coefficients ~ that transform years
of education and experience into general human capital units i . These coefficients are analogous
to the standard Mincer coefficients. The estimated values capture the baseline returns for any
occupation, while actual returns are adjusted by the occupation-specific return to general human
capital o (shown in Table A3). Averaging the adjusted returns over occupations, our estimates of
0.10 for men and 0.09 for women are in line with other studies that focus on the Indian context
or similar countries (Psacharopoulos and Patrinos, 2004). Experience has positive but diminishing
returns for men, while it has little or negative returns for women.
    Column group 4 in Table 5 shows the estimated parameters      ~ that determine the productivity
effects from caste-occupation networks and from working in the same occupation as one's father
io . We find very strong intergenerational effects: individuals working in their father's occupation
earn on average 58 percent more compared to other workers in the same occupation. We also find
very strong network effects: a 1 percent increase in the share of workers of an occupation who are
of the same caste is associated with a 8 percent increase in caste members' wages. Consistent with
the reduced form effects in Table 3, these effects seem to be even stronger for women.
      The fifth set of columns displays the estimates of wage discrimination (1 - Tk ). We find that the
main victims of discrimination are women, who earn only 33.2 percent of the wages from identical
men in the same occupation. STs show a small negative discrimination effect. OBCs and SCs do
not seem to experience wage discrimination, instead wages appear even marginally higher for these
two groups. These caste groups benefit from positive affirmative action in many professions (e.g.,
through quotas in university and medical school admissions), so it is likely that our estimates reflect
the combined effect of these policies and negative discrimination.
      Column group 3 presents the structural coefficients that determine the cost of education. We find
 20
      A caste is "general" if it is neither SC, ST nor OBC.



                                                              21
that education costs are convex and negative for low years of schooling with costs first decreasing
and then increasing after around 6 years of schooling. Costs become positive for schooling levels
beyond 9 years for women and beyond 12 years for men.21 Costs ultimately rise more steeply for SCs
and STs. These non-pecuniary rewards (i.e., negative costs) of receiving low education can reflect
social stigma, returns on the marriage markets, or compulsory elementary schooling. Schooling
choices further depend on idiosyncratic education cost i and forgone earnings.

Occupation characteristics:             For each occupation, we separately estimate wage rates wo , ameni-
ties Ao , and returns to general human capital o . We display the full parameter vectors in Appendix
Table A3. For each occupation, the wage rate per human capital unit can be interpreted as the
intercept of the wage function for individuals with very low human capital. Consistent with this
interpretation, the occupations with the highest wage rates (ln wo ) are construction (0.95), and agri-
cultural labor (0.87), and the ones with the lowest values are legal professionals (-9.21) and doctors
(-8.41). The highest occupational amenities (ln Ao ) are for animal farmers (3.95) and non-labor
income earners (3.71), while garbage workers (1.79) and plantation workers (1.93) have the lowest.
Finally, the returns to general human capital (o ) are highest for professors/teachers (1.29) and legal
professionals (1.14), and lowest for makers of tobacco products (-0.53) and animal farmers (-0.52).
We consider it reassuring that many of these estimates are consistent with reasonable beliefs about
the nature of different occupations.

Distributional parameters: Table 6 shows the estimates of distributional parameters. We find
that the dispersion of occupational-specific productivity  , of general ability  , and of education
cost  is higher for women than for men. These gender differences could be driven by forces outside
our model such as household formation or fertility.

7.2      Counterfactual Results
Our counterfactual analysis explores how the Indian economy would differ if caste identity was not
linked to traditional occupations. We evaluate the effects of all three channels that link castes
to their traditional occupations. In all counterfactuals we first remove the direct attachment to
traditional occupation io , formally setting ~1 = ~2 = ~3 = ~4 = ~5 = 0 (c.f. Equation 11). In
a second step, we eliminate any correlation between traditional occupation and the distribution
of father's occupation. Because workers are more productive in their father's occupation, this
orthogonalization further reduces workers' attraction of their traditional occupations. To eliminate
the correlation, we use a dataset at the occupation×individual level and we regress an indicator
for father's occupation on an indicator for traditional occupation and a constant. We then replace
fathers' observed occupations with the residual from this regression­which is by definition orthogonal
to traditional occupations. To avoid mechanical effects on aggregate output, we rescale the residual
to the same mean as the original father-occupation-indicator. Workers are further linked to their
 21
      See Figure A1 for a graphical presentation of the  values.



                                                          22
traditional occupations through occupational caste networks which increase their productivity. Once
networks are established, these productivity spillovers can sustain the selection of caste members
into their traditional occupations. To evaluate the importance of this mechanism, we first implement
counterfactuals in which we hold caste-occupation networks constant. In the last step, we then allow
networks to adjust endogenously. We assume that individuals have perfect information about all
observable variables including wages and caste-occupation networks.22
    We present our results in Table 7. First, we fix caste-occupational networks (Panel A) and
the distribution of fathers' occupations (Columns 1 and 2). These counterfactuals answer the
question, "what would happen if the current generation of workers stopped valuing their traditional
occupation?" First, we also hold workers' education constant (Column 1), so that we evaluate the
direct effect of eliminating traditional occupation preference io when only occupational choices
and wages adjust endogenously. The impact on the aggregate economy is extremely minor with an
increase in aggregate output by 0.06 percent and in output per worker by 0.3 percent. Labor force
participation decreases as some workers leave their traditional occupations to enter homework. In
Column 2, we allow individuals to adjust their education choices, which increases schooling by 0.49
percent and output by 0.35 percent­again aggregate effects are small.
    Why is the direct impact of removing traditional occupation affinity so small? First, as men-
tioned above, the magnitude of the preference parameters ~ is small relative to the variation in
other structural parameters, in particular relative to amenities Ao and relative to productivity ef-
fects from networks and fathers' occupation io . The basic structure of the economy therefore
remains relatively unchanged as we show in Panel A.ii of Table 7: employment shares drop by
at most 0.72 percentage points for any occupation, even if the share of traditional workers drops
by 5.35 percentage points for the most affected occupation and by 11.6 percent (1.2 percentage
points) in the aggregate. This finding implies that traditional workers simply get replaced by other
(similar) workers, thus keeping the occupational structure and aggregate output similar.23 Despite
the trivial aggregate effects, we see improvements in workers' selection based on occupation-specific
productivity io and general ability (i , i ), as high-ability individuals increasingly select into oc-
cupations with high returns to ability o . However, these gains are partially offset by the fact that
less workers select into their father's occupation and into the occupation where caste-networks are
strongest, which reduces productivity gains from intergenerational learning and caste networks.
    In Column 3, we eliminate one more channel of historical persistence by removing the correlation
between fathers' occupations and traditional occupations. Aggregate output now decreases by 2.98
percent (in Panel A). A part of this drop is driven by a decline in labor force participation as some
  22
     Our counterfactuals use the posterior distribution of i and the values of i generated during the estimation.
Thus when simulating occupation choices, years of schooling, and wages at the estimated parameters we generate a
baseline very close to the empirical values of these outcomes. We maintain these vectors of (i , i ) unobservables
when considering alternative parameters, assuming that the value of i for individuals with zero education is the mean
of the set of i 's consistent with this choice. Alternatively, using the generic normal distributions for i and i yields
nearly identical counterfactual implications, but with greater computational burden.
  23
     Banerjee et al. (2013) find similar results for a different aspect of caste identity: individuals' preference to marry
within caste. The authors show that removing the preference for same-caste spouses significantly reduces the share of
intra-caste marriages, but has only minor effects on marriages and household compositions along other characteristics.


                                                            23
workers who were previously attracted to occupations that were simultaneously their father's and
their traditional occupation now choose home production. Changes in output per worker are there-
fore much smaller but still slightly negative with a decrease by 0.005 percent. Effects are negative
because workers now have to choose between either their father's occupation or their traditional
occupation where caste networks (which we hold constant) are strongest. Overall, the productivity
losses from less intergenerational learning and less sorting towards strong caste networks are larger
than the gains from workers' improved selection based on their individual characteristics. Remov-
ing the correlation between fathers' and traditional occupations has larger distributional effects for
castes and occupations: the most affected caste sees a 54 percent decrease in average income, the
most affected occupation loses 21 percent of its human capital, and the aggregate share of workers
who work in their traditional occupations decreases by 31.6 percent (from 10.4 to 7.1 percent).
       As a final step, we implement the same counterfactuals while allowing caste networks to adjust
endogenously. For this analysis, we first solve for the baseline steady state by fixing all param-
eters at their estimated values and by iterating over caste-occupation networks and occupational
human capital until these objects are consistent with individuals' choices and market clearing. We
then compare all counterfactuals to this baseline steady state. There is a possibility of multiple
equilibria due to the productivity spillovers from caste networks. While we have not exhaustively
investigated the set of all possible equilibria, we adopt a numerical approach that aims at identifying
the equilibrium that is plausibly "closest" to the existing one.24 We argue that this equilibrium
best captures how caste-occupation networks might evolve if attachment to traditional occupations
were to disappear. As a robustness check, we implement all counterfactuals with weaker network
effects to assess the sensitivity of our results to these parameter estimates (see Appendix A4.2 for
more detail).
       The effects of our counterfactuals with endogenous networks are presented in Panel B of Table
7. In Column 1 we again hold fathers' occupations and education constant and we find a decrease
in aggregate output by 0.15 percent, a reduction in labor force participation by 0.3 percent and an
increase in output per worker by 0.17 percent. Removing castes' occupational affinity now leads to
weaker caste-occupation networks, which reduces output and productivity compared to the constant
network case (Column 1, Panel A). In Column 2 we further allow education to adjust endogenously,
which increases output by 0.76 percent, output per worker by 1.1 percent and schooling by 0.7
percent. Compared to Panel A, gains with endogenous networks are now larger, because workers
reallocate their human capital more efficiently and choose more education. The basic structure of
the economy again changes little, even if workers are less likely to choose their traditional occupation
(see Panel B.ii).
       Last, in Column 3 of Panel B we eliminate the influence of traditional occupation via parental
occupation. Effects are negative and remarkably large with an 8.1 percent decrease in output, a
3.2 percent decline in labor force participation and a 5.1 percent drop in output per worker. These
results highlight that castes' ties to their traditional occupation­either direct ties via preferences
  24
   To do this, we start from the baseline human capital distribution and caste networks and we perform only minor
updates, changing exogenous parameters in several small steps, when solving for the new equilibrium.


                                                       24
or indirect ones via parental occupations­play an important role in organizing castes into strong
occupation networks. This coordinating element is essential because individuals do not internalize
the large externality of their occupational choices on caste networks. Removing these coordinating
forces and allowing networks to adjust endogenously leads to occupational networks that are only
weakly clustered at the caste level, which lowers output and productivity. Consistent with this, the
aggregate share of traditional workers now decreases by 24 percent (4 percentage points). For the
most affected occupation, the share of traditional workers decreases by 10.6 percentage points and
for the most affected caste by 27.5 percentage points. Despite the negative aggregate effects, we
find improvements in education (2 percent) and in the selection of workers based on their individual
characteristics. Without strong caste networks in low-return occupations, agents invest more in
education and are more likely to pursue occupations aligned with their comparative advantage.
This leads to larger changes in the occupational distribution with occupations contracting by up to
33 percent and others expanding by up to 9 percent in human capital.
       To document effects on inequality more systemically, we use Growth Incidence Curves, proposed
by Ravaillon and Chen (2003) and popularized by Milanovic (2016), to compare the dispersion of
human capital in the baseline and counterfactual economies. We focus on human capital, instead of
income, because it is defined regardless of labor force participation. We define individuals' human
capital broadly by including occupation-specific productivity, general ability, education, experience,
and productivity effects from social networks and parental learning (cf. Equation 4). Figure 2
presents the Growth Incidence Curves, where the x-axis ranks workers by percentile of their baseline
human capital and the y-axis shows the mean growth rate in human capital for each percentile.25
       Figure 2 shows that workers in the middle of the baseline human capital distribution gain
most, while workers with initially low human capital lose. Figure 2a presents the effects with
constant social networks which display a particularly clear inverted U-shaped pattern. Workers
with the lowest initial human capital, particularly women who face discrimination in the labor
market, have such low probability of entering high-skill occupations that the counterfactuals do
not induce them to increase their education. Meanwhile, they suffer from weaker networks and
the reduction of paternal learning in traditional (low-skill) occupation. The highest human capital
workers are already in high-skill occupations and have little scope to increase their education (since
education costs are convex). Incumbent workers in high-skill occupations can also now experience
more competition from new entrants, which can decrease wages and make additional education
investments less attractive. Figure 2b shows that the pattern is similar with endogenous social
networks. Workers with lowest initial human capital lose most due to weaker caste networks in
their traditional occupations. With endogenous networks, workers with high initial human capital
benefit more, because their social networks become stronger in high-skill occupations. These results
confirm the findings of Munshi and Rosenzweig (2006) who show that caste networks are important
and particularly beneficial for low-skill workers in their traditional occupations.
  25
    Note that computing the mean growth rate is different from computing the growth rate of the mean, and has
preferable properties as discussed in Ravaillon and Chen (2003).




                                                     25
8    Conclusion
The effect of social identity on occupational choice has often been highlighted as a potential dis-
tortion of human capital allocation and source of economic inefficiency. Examining this question in
the context of the Indian caste system, we find mixed evidence. Occupational identity has a ma-
jor effect on career choices: certain occupations in India are still composed primarily of individuals
"born" into that occupation, and the average person is more than three times as likely to enter their
traditional occupation than any other. It follows that caste-based occupational identities continue
to affect the selection of occupations well into the modern era.
    However, we find that these large effects of caste identity on occupational choices have only
a small impact on the overall efficiency of the economy. This is because three forces diminish
the distortions of caste-based occupational choices on the macro-economy. First, working in a
parent's occupation increases productivity; and castes' traditional occupations are highly correlated
with their parental occupations. Hence, we find that many workers would continue to work in
their traditional occupations, even if the non-pecuniary utility of doing so is removed, because
they can learn occupation skills from their fathers. Second, the clustering of castes into specific
occupations generates positive social network effects that partially compensate for the misallocation
of human capital. Even if individuals may be working in the "wrong" occupations, by doing so they
increase the productivity of all their caste-mates in that occupation. Third, the misallocation of
human capital caused by traditional occupations is primarily limited to the reallocation of low-skill
individuals between different low-skilled occupations. Since these individuals are numerous, the
magnitudes appear high, but the strength of caste identity is not sufficient to draw many high-
skilled individuals out of the "modern workforce".
    We find larger effects when we allow social networks to adjust to a reduction of the links between
caste and occupation. Once the ties of occupational affinity and parentally transmitted human
capital are broken, we find that individuals' occupational choices create social networks that are
less clustered at the caste-occupation level, lowering network-based productivity spillovers. Overall,
these factors lead to a reduction in market output, despite improvements in education and human
capital allocation. These results highlight the need of taking a broad view when studying the
economic importance of frictions. While the direct effects of occupational preferences are small,
their indirect effects via social networks and intergenerational learning are much more important.
    An important limitation of this study, inherent in the revealed preference approach to occupa-
tional identity, is that we can only identify relative and not absolute values of occupation-linked
utility. We can therefore not distinguish between a scenario in which individuals receive positive
utility from working in their traditional occupation, versus an alternative in which they receive
negative utility from all other occupations. With this caveat in mind, we limit our counterfactual
analysis to study effects on income and inequality, leaving the evaluation of welfare effects to future
work that uses a different methodology.
    Our analysis suggests a possible explanation for the remarkable persistence of occupational
identities in the 21st century. If the static economic costs are mild, but individuals receive substantial


                                                   26
utility from conforming with social norms, then these norms can persist over long periods of time.
This may be one reason why castes' occupational identities have endured despite deep changes in
the economic structure of the country­which many thought would lead to the weakening of the caste
system (Srinivas, 2003). Our analysis suggests, as Ambedkar (1936) anticipated, that the main costs
of identity frictions may be dynamic and occur over the course of structural transformation. For
individuals who are attached to disappearing occupations, whether Indian handloom weavers at the
turn of the 20th century or American manufacturing workers at the beginning of the 21st, there
may be substantial costs to occupational change. We leave the study of these important dynamics
to future research.




                                                27
References
Abadie, A., S. Athey, G. W. Imbens, and J. Wooldridge (2017). When should you adjust standard
  errors for clustering? Working Paper .

Akerlof, G. (1976). The economics of caste and of the rat race and other woeful tales. The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 90 (4), 599­617.

Akerlof, G. A. (1980). A theory of social custom, of which unemployment may be one consequence.
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics 94 (4), 749­775.

Akerlof, G. A. and R. E. Kranton (2000). Economics and identity. The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 115 (3), 715­753.

Altonji, J. G. and T. A. Dunn (2000). An intergenerational model of wages, hours, and earnings.
  The Journal of Human Resources 35 (2), 221­258.

Alvarez-Cuadrado, F., F. Amodio, and M. Poschke (2019, May). Selection and absolute advan-
  tage in farming and entrepreneurship: Microeconomic evidence and macroeconomic implications.
  Technical report.

Ambedkar, B. R. (1936). Annihilation of Caste. Speech prepared for the annual conference of the
  Jat-Pat-Todak Mandal of Lahore but not delivered.

Atkin, D., E. Colson-Sihra, and M. Shayo (2021). How do we choose our identity? a revealed
  preference approach using food consumption. Journal of Political Economics .

Banerjee, A., E. Duflo, M. Ghatak, and J. Lafortune (2013). Marry for what? caste and mate
  selection in modern India. American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 5 (2), 33­72.

Banerjee, A. and K. Munshi (2004, 01). How Efficiently is Capital Allocated? Evidence from the
  Knitted Garment Industry in Tirupur. The Review of Economic Studies 71 (1), 19­42.

Benjamin, D. J., J. J. Choi, and G. Fisher (2016). Religious identity and economic behavior. Review
  of Economics and Statistics 98 (4), 617­637.

Borkotoky, K., S. Unisa, and A. K. Gupta (2015). Intergenerational transmission of education in
  India: evidence from a nationwide survey. International Journal of Population Research 2015.

Bryan, G. and M. Morten (2018). The aggregate productivity effects of internal migration: Evidence
  from indonesia. Journal of Political Economy Forthcoming.

Cassan, G. (2019). Affirmative action, education and gender: Evidence from india. Journal of
  Development Economics 136, 51­70.

Cassan, G. and L. Vandewalle (Forthcoming). Identities and public policies: Unexpected effects of
  political reservations for women in india. World Development .

                                                 28
Chen, R. and Y. Chen (2011, October). The potential of social identity for equilibrium selection.
  American Economic Review 101 (6), 2562­89.

Cohn, A., M. A. Maréchal, and T. Noll (2015). Bad boys: How criminal identity salience affects
  rule violation. The Review of Economic Studies 82 (4), 1289­1308.

Conlon, F. (1981). The Census of India as a Source for Historical Study of Religion and Caste.
  New Delhi:Manohar Publications.

Crooke, W. (1896). The Tribes and Castes of the North Western Provinces and Oudh. Calcutta:
  Office of the Superintendent of Government Printing.

Desai, S. and R. Vanneman (2015). India human development survey-ii (ihds-ii), 2011-12.

Desai, S., R. Vanneman, and National Council Of Applied Economic Research, New Delhi (2008).
  India human development survey (ihds), 2005.

Deshpande, R. and S. Palshikar (2008). Occupational mobility: How much does caste matter?
  Economic and Political Weekly , 61­70.

Dumont, L. (1970). Homo Hierarchicus: The Caste System and Its Implications. London: Weiden-
  feld & Nicolson.

Eckert, F. and M. Peters (2018). Spatial structural change. Technical report.

Eswaran, M., B. Ramaswami, and W. Wadhwa (2013). Status, caste, and the time allocation of
  women in rural india. Economic Development and Cultural Change 61 (2), 311­333.

Gupta, D. (2000). Interrogating caste: Understanding hierarchy and difference in Indian society.
  Penguin Books India.

Headley, Z. (2013). Nommer la caste. ordre social et catégorie identitaire en inde contemporaine.
  La Vie des idées .

Heise, S. and T. Porzio (2019). Workers' home bias and spatial wage gaps. Technical report.

Hnatkovska, V., A. Lahiri, and S. B. Paul (2013). Breaking the caste barrier. Journal of Human
  Resources 48 (2), 435­473.

Hsieh, C.-T., E. Hurst, C. Jones, and P. Klenow (2019, September). The allocation of talent and
  U.S. economic growth. Technical report.

Iversen, V., A. Krishna, and K. Sen (2017, 04). Rags to riches? intergenerational occupational
  mobility in India. Economic and Political Weekly Vol. 52 (Issue No. 44).

Kitts, E. (1885). A Compendium of the Castes and Tribes Found in India. Bombay: Education
  Society Press, Byculla.

                                               29
Kumar, S., A. Heath, and O. Heath (2002). Changing patterns of social mobility: Some trends over
  time. Economic and Political Weekly 37 (40), 4091­4096.

Lanjouw, P. and N. Stern (1998). Economic Development in Palanpur over Five Decades. Oxford
  University Press.

Milanovic, B. (2016). Global Inequality: A New Approach for the Age of Globalization. Harvard
  University Press.

Munshi, K. (2019). Caste and the indian economy. FJournal of Economic Literature .

Munshi, K. and M. Rosenzweig (2006). Traditional institutions meet the modern world: Caste,
  gender, and schooling choice in a globalizing economy. American Economic Review 96 (4), 1225­
  1252.

Munshi, K. and N. Wilson (2011). Identity, occupational choice, and mobility: Historical conditions
  and current decisions in the american midwest. Working Paper .

Oh, S. (2019). Does identity affect labor supply? Technical report.

Phelan, S. and E. A. Kinsella (2009). Occupational identity: Engaging socio-cultural perspectives.
  Journal of Occupational Science 16 (2), 85­91.

Psacharopoulos, G. and H. A. Patrinos (2004). Returns to investment in education: a further
  update. Education economics 12 (2), 111­134.

Ravaillon, M. and S. Chen (2003). Measuring pro-poor growth. Economic Letters 78.

Roy, A. D. (1951). Some thoughts on the distribution of earnings. Oxford economic papers 3 (2),
  135­146.

Schwarz, H. (2010). Constructing the Criminal Tribe in Colonial India: Acting like a Thief. Wiley
  Blackwell.

Shayo, M. (2009). A model of social identity with an application to political economy: Nation,
  class, and redistribution. American Political science review 103 (2), 147­174.

Singh, K. (1996). Communities, Segments, Synonyms, Surnames and Titles, Volume 8. Oxford
  University Press.

Skorikov, V. B. and F. W. Vondracek (2011). Occupational identity. In Handbook of identity theory
  and research, pp. 693­714. Springer.

Srinivas, M. N. (2003). An obituary on caste as a system. Economic and Political Weekly 38 (5),
  455­459.

Vaid, D. (2012). The caste-class association in india: An empirical analysis. Asian Survey 52 (2),
  395­422.

                                                30
Vaid, D. (2014). Caste in contemporary india: Flexibility and persistence. Annual Review of
  Sociology 40, 391­410.

Wiser, W. H. (1936). The Hindu Jajmani System. Lucknow Publishing House.

Young, A. (2014). Structural transformation, the mismeasurement of productivity growth, and the
  cost disease of services. American Economic Review 104 (11), 3635­67.




                                              31
9   Tables.

                 Table 1: Traditional Occupation and Occupational Choice

                                                      Probability of occupational choice
                                                    (1)        (2)        (3)          (4)

                                                            A. Male (N =2,269,092)
          Occ. is caste's trad. occ.             0.068***     0.041***     0.038***      0.043***
                                                  (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.002)       (0.002)
          Occ. is father's occ.                               0.307***     0.306***      0.306***
                                                               (0.004)      (0.004)       (0.004)
          Caste-occ. network                                               0.103***      0.105***
                                                                            (0.007)       (0.007)
          Occ. is caste's trad. occ. * SC                                               -0.027***
                                                                                         (0.004)
                                                            B. Female (N =2,535,946)
          Occ. is caste's trad. occ.             0.027***     0.011***     0.010***      0.011***
                                                  (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.002)       (0.002)
          Occ. is father's occ.                               0.183***     0.183***      0.182***
                                                               (0.006)      (0.006)       (0.006)
          Caste-occ. network                                               0.039***      0.040***
                                                                            (0.004)       (0.004)
          Occ. is caste's trad. occ. * SC                                                -0.007**
                                                                                          (0.003)

          Individual FE                             Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes
          Occ. FE                                   Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes
          Notes: This table reports results of a linear probability model of occupational choice,
          using data from all 18-60 year old respondents of the 2011 IHDS. The dataset contains
          all unique combinations of respondents and occupations. The outcome variable is equal
          to 1 for respondents' chosen occupation and 0 for all other occupations. The variable
          "Occ. is caste's trad. occ." indicates that an occupations is traditionally performed
          by the respondent's caste (if any), as defined in Section 3. Caste-occupation networks
          are equal to the jackknifed ratio between the number of respondents' caste-mates in an
          occupation divided by the number of all workers in the occupation. The scheduled caste
          (SC) dummy indicates whether the respondent's reported caste belongs to the state-level
          list of scheduled castes.
          Standard errors clustered at the PSU (village) level. p < 0.10,   p < 0.05,   p < 0.01




                                                     32
                      Table 2: Traditional Occupation and Wages

                                                Log wages in chosen occupation
                                               Male                       Female
                                       (1)            (2)            (3)                      (4)
Occ. is own caste's                -0.237***           0.133***         -0.147**           0.143**
trad. occ.                          (0.029)             (0.030)          (0.042)           (0.041)
Occ. is father's occ.              -0.047***           0.061***         0.318***          0.298***
                                    (0.015)             (0.013)          (0.046)           (0.037)
Caste-occ. network                 1.687***            0.487**          3.620***           2.904**
                                    (0.247)            (0.200)           (0.543)           (0.447)
Occ. is caste's                    0.174***             -0.065          0.297**             -0.082
trad. occ.×SC                       (0.050)            (0.047)          (0.084)            (0.068)



Jati FE                               Yes                No                Yes                No
Occ. FE                                No               Yes                 No               Yes
R-sq                                  0.19              0.25               0.15              0.22
Observations                         45894             458964             22639             22639
Notes: This table reports results of regressing log wages on caste and individual characteristics,
using data from all 18-60 year old respondents of the 2011 IHDS. Wage data is taken from the
respondent's highest income occupation, trimming the 1st and 99th percentiles. The variable "Occ.
is caste's trad. occ." indicates that an occupations is traditionally performed by the respondent's
caste (if any), as defined in Section 3. Caste-occupation networks are equal to the jackknifed ratio
between the number of respondents' caste-mates in an occupation divided by the number of all
workers in the occupation. The scheduled caste (SC) dummy indicates whether the respondent's
reported caste belongs to the state-level list of scheduled castes.
All specifications include controls for state fixed effects, education, age, experience, rural/urban
location, OBC/SC/ST status, religion, missing paternal occupation, and a dummy variable for
individuals who do not associate with a caste.
Standard errors clustered at the PSU (village) level. p < 0.10,   p < 0.05,   p < 0.01




                                                  33
                  Table 3: Returns to Human Capital in Traditional Occupations

                                                        Log wages in chosen occupation
                                                 Male                                          Female
                                  (1)            (2)               (3)            (4)            (5)             (6)
Years education                0.074***                         0.074***       0.027**                        0.025**
                                (0.005)                          (0.005)       (0.013)                        (0.017)
Years education×              -0.032***                         -0.032***        0.006                          0.008
Occ. is any trad. occ.         (0.005)                           (0.005)        (0.013)                        (0.013)
Experience                     0.028***                         0.028***         0.005                          0.004
                                (0.002)                          (0.002)        (0.003)                        (0.003)
Experience×                   -0.019***                         -0.019***        0.001                          0.002
Occ. is any trad. occ          (0.002)                           (0.002)        (0.003)                        (0.003)
Father's occ.                                  0.138**          0.120**                        0.432**       0.385***
                                               (0.065)          (0.058)                        (0.186)        (0.171)
Father's occ.×                                   -0.076           -0.050                        -0.158          -0.111
Occ. is any trad. occ                           (0.066)          (0.060)                       (0.188)         (0.173)
Caste-occ. network                             1.997***           1.021                         2.343           2.265
                                                (0.759)          (0.712)                       (1.533)         (1.550)
Caste-occ. network×                              -1.112           -0.148                        0.712           0.731
Occ. is any trad. occ                           (0.742)          (0.693)                       (1.557)         (1.574)

Jati FE                           Yes            Yes              Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
Occupation FE                     Yes            Yes              Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
R-sq                              0.28           0.26             0.28           0.24            0.24           0.24
Observations                     45894          45894            45894          22639           22639          22639
Notes: This table reports results of regressing log wages on caste and individual characteristics, using data from all
18-60 year old respondents of the 2011 IHDS. Wage data is taken from the respondent's highest income occupation,
with the 1st and 99th percentiles windsorized. The variable "Occ. is any trad. occ" indicates whether an occupation is
traditional for any caste, as defined in Section 3. Caste-occupation networks are equal to the jackknifed ratio between
the number of respondents' caste-mates in an occupation divided by the number of all workers in the occupation.
All specifications include controls for state fixed effects, education, age, OBC/SC/ST status, religion, missing paternal
occupation, urban/rural location, and a dummy variable for individuals who do not associate with a caste. Standard
errors are clustered at the PSU level. p < 0.10,   p < 0.05,   p < 0.01




                                                           34
                              Table 4: Wage Discrimination

                                                Log wages in chosen occupation
                                     (1)           (2)         (3)             (4)
Female                           -0.594***      -0.379***      -0.371***            -0.371***
                                  (0.016)        (0.015)        (0.015)              (0.015)
Other backwards caste            -0.057***      -0.066***      -0.049***            -0.051***
(OBC)                             (0.017)        (0.017)        (0.017)              (0.017)
Scheduled caste                  -0.056***      -0.176***      -0.162***            -0.154***
(SC)                              (0.017)        (0.018)        (0.018)              (0.017)
Scheduled tribe                  -0.167***      -0.234***      -0.214***            -0.215***
(ST)                              (0.036)        (0.037)        (0.037)              (0.037)
Father's occ.                                                   0.111***             0.094***
                                                                 (0.013)              (0.013)
Caste-occ. network                                               1.352**             1.038**
                                                                 (0.212)             (0.217)
Occ. is caste's trad. occ.                                                           0.135***
                                                                                      (0.026)



Occupation FE                         No            Yes            Yes                 Yes
R-sq                                 0.22           0.31           0.31                0.31
Observations                        68662          68662          68662               68662
Notes: This table reports results of regressing log wages on caste and individual characteristics,
using data from all 18-60 year old respondents of the 2011 IHDS. Wage data is windsorized at the
1st and 99th percentile of the non-negative values within occupation category. The variable "Occ.
is caste's trad. occ." indicates that an occupations is traditionally performed by the respondent's
caste (if any), as defined in Section 3. Caste-occupation networks are equal to the jackknifed ratio
between the number of respondents' caste-mates in an occupation divided by the number of all
workers in the occupation.
All specifications include controls for state fixed effects, education, age, experience, religion, ur-
ban/rural location, missing paternal occupation, and a dummy variable for individuals who do
not associate with a caste. Standard errors are clustered at the PSU level. p < 0.10,   p <
0.05,   p < 0.01




                                                 35
                               Table 5: Structural Parameters: Coefficients

         Non-pecuniary utility (io )                 General human capital ~i            Costs of education (i )
                     (1)                                        (2)                                 (3)

Traditional occupation            0.178         Experience              0.111           Constant           -7.253
                                 (0.026)                               (0.006)                            (0.237)

Traditional occupation×           -0.086        Experience2             -0.002          Females            1.347
female                           (0.028)                               (0.000)                            (0.092)

Traditional occupation×           0.078         Education               0.336           Other backwards    0.119
OBC                              (0.035)                               (0.013)          caste             (0.170)

Traditional occupation×           -0.020        Experience×             -0.171          Scheduled caste    1.215
SC                               (0.045)        female                 (0.014)                            (0.157)

Traditional occupation×           -0.133        Experience2 ×           0.003           Scheduled tribe    1.465
ST                               (0.052)        female                 (0.000)                            (0.187)

Homework×                         3.991         Education×              -0.033          Constant×          0.583
female                           (0.071)        female                 (0.008)          education         (0.026)

Homework×                         -0.137                                                Females×           0.071
female×OBC                       (0.021)                                                education         (0.017)

Homework×                         -0.381                                                OBC×               0.045
female×SC                        (0.031)                                                education         (0.022)

Homework×                         -0.726                                                SC×                -0.044
female×ST                        (0.065)                                                education         (0.015)

                                                                                        ST×                -0.007
                                                                                        education         (0.024)

Occupation-specific human capital ~io           Labor force discrimination (1 - Tio )
                     (4)                                        (5)

Father's occupation               1.462         Female                  -1.102
×male                            (0.025)                               (0.052)

Caste's share in                  8.156         OBC                     0.052
occupation×male                  (0.236)                               (0.016)

Father's occupation               0.485         SC                      0.027
×female                          (0.045)                               (0.016)

Caste's share in                  1.280         ST                      -0.050
occupation×female                (0.337)                               (0.032)

Notes: Parameters are estimated by maximum likelihood as described in Section 6. Standard
errors in parentheses clustered at the PSU level.




                                                          36
   Table 6: Structural Parameters: Variances

                                          Parameter value
Occupational wage shocks ( )                     1.169
                                                (0.012)
Occupational wage shocks ( )×                       0.103
female                                          (0.013)
General skills ( )×                                 1.890
female                                          (0.103)
Cost of education shocks ( )                     1.812
                                                (0.121)
Cost of education shocks ( )×                    1.593
female                                          (0.125)
Notes: Parameters displayed as estimated using the maxi-
mum likelihood estimator described in Section 6. Standard
errors in parentheses clustered at the PSU level.




                             37
                                                         Table 7: Effects of Removing Occupational Identity
                                                   No occupational identity                  (1) + endogenous                  (2) + parental occupation
                                                    + endogenous wages                           education                      orthogonal to trad. occ.
                                                                (1)                                    (2)                                   (3)
                                                             Panel A: Estimated Social networks
                                                                             i. Aggregate outcomes (percent changes from baseline)
     Market Output                                               0.062                                 0.346                                 -2.980
     Output per worker                                           0.335                                  0.629                                -0.005
     Labor force participation                                  -0.273                                 -0.281                                -2.975
     Schooling                                                  0.000                                   0.489                                 1.048
                                                                            ii. Occupation/Caste-level Outcomes (percent changes)
                                                     Min       Median         Max          Min        Median        Max          Min        Median        Max
     Occupation: wage rate                          -0.09        -0.03        0.55        -0.28        -0.05        0.55         -1.60       -1.03        6.89
     Occupation: human capital                      -1.56         0.17        0.34        -1.29         0.5         1.18        -20.56        0.1         2.43
     Occupation: employment share (pp)              -0.68        0.003        0.19        -0.72        0.004         0.2         -1.99       0.003         2.07
     Occupation: trad. worker share (pp)             -5.2        -0.42        0.00        -5.35        -0.42        0.00        -12.41       -1.02        0.00
     Caste: % workers in trad. occ. (pp)            -5.68        -0.24        0.34        -6.08        -0.25        0.34        -23.71       -0.79        0.76
38




     Caste: total income                            -0.88       -0.004        1.06        -0.79         0.07        3.38        -53.52       -0.42        13.54
                                                            Panel B: Endogenous Social Networks
                                                                             i. Aggregate outcomes (percent changes from baseline)
     Market Output                                              -0.145                                  0.760                                -8.138
     Output per worker                                           0.168                                  1.056                                -5.130
     Labor force participation                                  -0.313                                 -0.293                                -3.171
     Schooling                                                   0.000                                  0.667                                 1.892
                                                                            ii. Occupation/Caste-level Outcomes (percent changes)
                                                     Min       Median         Max          Min        Median        Max          Min        Median        Max
     Occupation: wage rate                          -0.26        -0.18        0.55        -0.97        0.004        0.73         -5.47       -3.09        11.08
     Occupation: human capital                      -1.79         0.39        0.64        -1.42        0.77         3.76        -32.97       1.03         8.75
     Occupation: employment share (pp)              -0.63        0.004        0.24        -0.66         0.01        0.22         -2.04        0.01        2.42
     Occupation: trad. worker share (pp)            -3.64         -0.3        0.00        -3.86         -0.3        0.00        -10.65        -0.7        0.00
     Caste: % workers in trad. occ. (pp)            -5.93        -0.24        0.41        -6.17        -0.24        0.44        -27.48       -0.77        1.65
     Caste: total income                            -0.97        -0.11         1.0        -1.15         0.13        3.48        -56.12       -2.26         5.50
     Notes: Results in Panel A are relative to a baseline economy that is simulated from the estimated parameter values and the caste network data used in the estimation.
     Results in Panel B are relative to a baseline economy with endogenous caste networks for which we solve conditional on all estimated parameters. All counterfactuals use
     posterior values of i and values of i generated during estimation. All values are percent changes unless noted otherwise; pp denotes changes in percentage points.
10      Figures

             Figure 1: Occupational Composition: Traditional and Parental Transmission
                                                     (a) Male Workers




                                                   (b) Female Workers




Notes: Panel (a) documents the share of male workers in each occupation who work in their jati's traditional occupation
(blue bars) and the share who works in their father's occupation (red bars). Panel (b) does the same for women.




                                                            39
                   Figure 2: Counterfactuals: Human Capital Growth Incidence Curves
                      (a) Counterfactuals with Exogenous Social Networks (see Table 7, Panel A)




                     (b) Counterfactuals with Endogenous Social Networks (see Table 7, Panel B)




Notes: This figure shows Growth Incidence Curves in human capital to document the distributional effects of our counter-
factuals. The x-axis ranks workers by percentile of their baseline human capital. For each counterfactual, the y-axis shows
the mean growth rates of human capital for workers in each percentile. Panel (a) shows the effects of counterfactuals with
exogenous caste-occupation networks and Panel (b) with endogenous networks.




                                                              1
Appendix

A1     Data Appendix
The IHDS records household and individual income from a variety of different income sources. We
restrict our sample to individuals aged 18 to 60 and drop full-time students and unemployed indi-
viduals. The survey provides time spent and income earned from most occupations at the individual
level, however, we have to make assumptions to derive individual income for some occupations.
   First, income is only reported at the household level for some occupations such as household
businesses. For these occupations, we know how much time each household member works in them,
but we do not know individuals' productivity, so that we attribute the same hourly wage to each
individual.
   Second, the IHDS does not record the time spent in animal care but it records how many animals
of each type are owned by the household, and which household members take care of the animals.
To derive information on hours worked, we use an additional household survey, the REDS 2006,
which is representative for rural India. The survey contains information on time spent on animal
care by household members and on the number and types of animals owned by a household. We
predict the time that IHDS household members spent in animal care by using the coefficient of an
OLS regression of the time spent on animal care of REDS household members on the number of
each type of animal and their squared term.
   Third, the IHDS does not provide time spent in some occupations such as money lending and the
rental of land. We did not find alternative data sources that would allow us to infer this information,
so that we instead use information on time spent and income earned by the same individual in other
occupations. For individuals that record income and hours worked for any other occupation, we
compute the time spent in money lending or land rentals so that the share of time spent in these
occupations equals their share of income (that is, we assume that individuals' productivity in these
activities is the equal to their average productivity in other activities). We attribute income from
these activities to the head of the household if he is younger than 60 years and to his eldest son in
the household otherwise.
   Fourth, we find that almost 34 percent of our sample report their "primary activity" to be
housework, who are almost entirely women. However, many of these women indicate that they also
spend many hours working for income. We therefore document a respondent's main occupation only
to be housework if she works less than the median number of hours in all other reported occupations
(or if she reports no other work). Otherwise we assign her to the occupation in which she earns
the highest income. With this procedure, the final sample classifies 12.3 percent of respondents as
home workers.
   Fifth, many individuals report multiple sources of income. We therefore classify individuals'
occupation as the activity in which they earn highest income and spend most time. If these two
definitions are different, then we choose the occupation that the survey identifies as the "main
activity" of the household, and then the activity in which individuals' spend most time.


                                                  2
   Sixth, we trim hourly wages at the 1st and 99th percentiles. Results are robust, and in fact
stronger, when we instead trim at the 0.1st and 99.9th percentiles.


A2     Additional empirical results
A2.1    Robustness of occupational choice
We perform a variety of robustness checks to confirm the importance of traditional occupations for
occupational choices. In Table A1, we show that our main occupational choice analysis (presented
in Table 1) is robust to the inclusion of additional controls. We successively add controls for whether
the occupation is considered ritually polluting (impure) and the individual is member of a forward
caste, whether the occupation is pure (i.e., an occupation traditionally attached to high castes) and
the individual belongs to a scheduled caste, and whether the occupation is agricultural and the
individual inherited land. Finally, we allow for intrafamilial transfers of human capital, in addition
to direct transfers from father to child, by controlling for whether individuals work in the same
occupation as their uncle. None of these additional controls change our finding that individuals are
more likely to work in their jati's traditional occupation.

A2.2    Robustness to imputation of parental occupation
The IHDS data contains information on the occupation of the father of the household head but
no information on the mother's occupation. As a consequence, we have very little information on
father's occupation for women. In our main analysis, we replace missing data on father's occupation
with probabilities based on the data of fathers' occupations for individuals in the same caste. Here
we test how this imputation may affect our results using the National Election Survey (NES),
which contains information on parents' occupations for all respondents. This data was collected
by the Center for the Study of Developing Societies (CSDS) in 2009 and 2014 based on a sample
of registered voters from electoral rolls and contains detailed information about the occupations of
respondents and both of their parents. The dataset also reports respondents' jati names, which have
been cleaned by the CSDS and which are not reported verbatim as in the IHDS and DHS surveys
(our main datasets). In addition, the jati categorization, while detailed, is much more aggregated
than the one that we use in the main part of our paper. The dataset does not provide precise
income data, so we cannot use it as our main data source.
   We combine the 2009 and 2014 NES samples and keep only the respondents aged 18-60 for
which the jati is identified. We use this dataset to reproduce the occupational choice regressions
presented in Table A1 which relied on IHDS data. In the NES data, we now directly observe father's
occupation for women instead of imputing it and we observe mother's occupation for women and
men. To compute jati-occupation networks, we combine the NES data with IHDS and DHS. To
make the jati categorization comparable across the three surveys, we aggregate several jatis to the
broader categories provided in the NES. Table A2 presents the results of our regressions. The
coefficients on "Occ. is father's occ." are similar to our main results for both genders, indicating

                                                  3
that our imputation method is of little consequence. Including mother's occupation does not affect
the coefficient on father's occupation for men, but reduces it for women. The coefficient on caste-
occupation networks is substantially reduced for both genders. We attribute this to the fact that
caste categories are much more aggregated in this regression compared to our main analysis.


A3        Model Appendix
A3.1       Expected lifetime utility
In this section we derive expected lifetime utility. We follow Mincer's original work and assume that
all individuals work for T years after finishing schooling. Lifetime utility at the time of the schooling
choice is the discounted sum of utility starting immediately after schooling ends (i.e., t = s) until
the end of the working period (i.e., s + T ), so that:

                                        s+T
       Ui = max Eio max                       e-rt (log ((1 - Tk ) wo io (i i )o io ) + io + Ao ) dt      .
                    s         o     s


We express observable human capital i as a function of education si and a quadratic function of
experience:
                           i = exp ~s si + ~1 (t - si - b)1 + ~2 (t - si - b)2 ,
                                            x                  x

where (t - si - b) is individuals' experience equal to individuals' age t minus their years of schooling
si and minus the age at which individuals typically begin school, which we denote by b and which
we set to 6. The ~s and ~x coefficients are parameters that map years of schooling and experience
into human capital units.
      Integrating over years of expected labor force participation yields:
                                                                         o
                    Ui = r
                         ¯Eio max log (1 - Tk ) wo io i ¯i                   io + io + Ao
                                    o

                         r
                         ¯Eio max {u
                                   ¯io + log (io )} ,
                                    o

              -rs
      ¯ = e r 1 - e-rT is the discount factor that depends on years spent in school. We define
where r
¯i = exp 
          ~s si + ¯x where ¯x is the pre-employment expected value of experience which is equal
to:

       ¯
             ~1    ~2 2
        x = -x b + x b +     1 - e-rT - e-rT rT       ~1 r + ~2 (-r2b + 2) - e-rT r2 T 2 ~2 / 1 - e-rT r2 .
                                                       x      x                           x



A3.2       Educational Choice
Children choose their years of schooling si to maximize discounted lifetime utility net of school-
ing costs. Occupation-specific productivity shocks io are not known when choosing education, so
individuals form expectations about their future occupational choice probabilities based on their
knowledge of their other individual characteristics, their caste affiliations, and their parental occu-


                                                         4
pation. Children therefore solve:


                                                                               2k
               Vi = max r
                        ¯Eio max {u
                                  ¯io + log (io )} - 1k +                         s i + i s i
                          s            o                                       2
                               r
                               ¯                                     2k
                    = max        log             ¯io ) - 1k +
                                           exp ( u                      si + i si ,
                          s            o                             2

which yields the following first order condition:

                                            r
                                            ¯                             ~s
                     (1k + 2k si + i ) +      r log           ( u
                                                                ¯io ) = r
                                                                        ¯           o Pio .
                                                          o                     o

Individuals choose their level of schooling to equate marginal costs of schooling (left hand side of
the equation) with marginal returns (right hand side of the equation). Education costs depend
on the direct costs ( and  ) and the opportunity cost from foregone income. Total returns to
education depend on the "general" returns to schooling ~s multiplied by the probability weighted
occupation-specific returns to human capital o .

A3.3    Equilibrium
To define the equilibrium, we assume that entrepreneurs experience a disutility from hiring certain
castes in certain occupations, which we denote by k . This disutility generates wage discrimina-
tion Tk which affects castes' effective occupational wage rate per human capital unit.The full set
of exogenous parameters is therefore given by:  = ok , ,    ~ ,~ o , A, Zo , , Ao , ok , k ,  ,  ,  .
            ~ ,
Parameters {, ~ o } determine worker i's productivity in each occupation; {A, Zo ,  } characterize
the aggregate production function; {Ao , ok , k } define individuals' utility; and { ,  ,  } , are
dispersion parameters of idiosyncratic productivity shocks. Given these exogenous parameters ,
the equilibrium of the economy is characterized by:

  1. Occupational choice probabilities Pio that maximize individuals' utility (cf. Equation 5).

  2. Education choices si that maximize individuals' utility (cf. Equation 7).

  3. Human capital demand o in each occupation that is consistent with firms' profit maximiza-
     tion (cf. Equation 10).

  4. Wage discrimination that exactly offsets entrepreneurs' disutility of hiring certain castes, so
     that Tk = k . Entrepreneurs are then indifferent between hiring workers from any caste.

  5. Wage rates per human capital unit wo that clear labor markets in each occupation, ensuring
     that human capital demand equals supply (cf. Equations 10 and 9).

  6. Good market clearing, ensuring that total consumption equals total output.



                                                      5
A3.4       Derivation of the wage distribution and likelihood
We now derive the likelihood functions for observed occupations, wages, and schooling levels. We
proceed in two steps: first, we derive the distribution of occupation-specific productivity shocks
conditional on having chosen an occupation. Second, we build on this result to derive the distribution
of workers' income conditional on their occupational choice.
   Let Vi be the maximum utility of a worker who chooses occupation o before his occupational
choice:
                        Vi = max [Vio ] = max [¯                 ¯
                                               uio + log(io )] = u         
                                                                  io + log(io ).
                                   o              o

We assume that log (io ) is Gumbel distributed. The maximum utility level Vi is therefore also
Gumbel distributed, so that:

                   Pr(Vi  x) = Pr (¯
                                   uio + log(io )  x) o
                                   =       exp {- exp (- (x - u
                                                              ¯io ))}
                                       o
                                                                1
                                   = exp - exp - x -              log          exp ( u
                                                                                     ¯io )        ,
                                                                           o

where the expression in the last row corresponds to the CDF of the Gumbel distribution with
                       1
location parameters        log (   o   exp ( u
                                             ¯io )) and shape parameter  . Using this result, we can
                                                                        for individuals who have
now derive the distribution of occupation-specific productivity shocks io
chosen occupation o:



                                                 exp(Vi )
   Hi (x) = Pr(io  x|Vio = Vi ) = Pr                        x
                                                     u
                                                 exp(¯ io )

                                                                     u
                                           = exp - exp - log [x exp (¯ io )] + log                     ¯
                                                                                                 exp ( uio )
                                                                                             o
                                                      -       -1
                                           = exp -x       (Pio )    .

                                                                         are Frechet distributed
This expression shows that productivity shocks in the chosen occupation io
              )-1 . We now use this result to derive the distribution of workers' income y  in their
with mean (Pio                                                                            io
chosen occupation. Recall that workers' income is given by: yio = (1 - Tk ) wo (i i )o io io , so
that:

                        
          Ji (x) = Pr (yio  x|Vio = Vi ) = Pr (yio
                                                
                                                    x) = Pr ((1 - Tk ) wo (i i )o io io
                                                                                     
                                                                                         x)
                                                              -
                                           x                            -1
                = exp -                                             (Pio )
                               (1 - Tk ) wo (i i )o io
                                                                        
                                               
                                       -u
                                 o (exp(¯ io ))                         .
                = exp                                                
                       exp io + Ao + o     ¯i - i               x



                                                          6
Last, we take the derivative of this expression to obtain the PDF of workers' income in their chosen
occupation:
                              d
   Pr(yio = x|Vio = Vi ) =      Ji (x)
                             dx
                                                                                                
                                       o
                                              u
                                         (exp(¯ io ))                        -    o
                                                                                        u
                                                                                   (exp(¯ io ))
                        =                                         exp                                     .
                             x exp io + Ao + o    ¯i - i   x            exp io + Ao + o   ¯i - i   x


A4     Additional counterfactual results
A4.1    Algorithm
We solve for our counterfactuals with a fixed point algorithm. We first modify parameters (or
model objects) according to each counterfactual scenario. With exogenous (fixed) caste-occupation
networks, we simply iterate on the human capital distribution across occupations­and hence the
occupational wage rates implied by market clearing­until they are consistent with individuals' op-
timal education and occupational choices. With endogenous caste-occupation networks, we add a
second fixed point where we update caste-occupation networks based on individuals' occupational
choices in an outer loop. Hence, we iterate on caste-occupation networks and human capital in each
occupation until these objects are consistent with our equilibrium definition.

A4.2    Counterfactual results with weaker network effects
We implement all counterfactuals with weaker network effects to assess the sensitivity of our results
to these parameter estimates. This robustness check addresses potential concerns about our esti-
mation of social network effects. It is for example possible that unobservable characteristics make
certain castes more productive in certain occupations­attracting more caste members to these oc-
cupations and increasing their wages­which we could not distinguish from network effects. We
therefore recompute all counterfactuals with the strength of network effects reduced by half, for-
mally dividing ~2 and   ~4 by 2. Table A4 shows that our results with weaker network effects are
qualitatively similar and also roughly similar in magnitude. An exception is the counterfactual that
allows for endogenous networks and removes the correlation between fathers' and traditional occu-
pations (Panel B, Column 3). With weaker network effects, this counterfactual leads to substantially
smaller losses in output and output per worker. However, our main qualitative results­that effects
of removing links between castes and their traditional occupations are small and in some cases even
negative­remain unchanged.




                                                      7
A5     Appendix Tables

                                 Table A1: Robustness: Occupational Choice

                                                 Probability of occupational choice- male (N =2,269,092)
                                           (1)           (2)         (3)          (4)        (5)         (6)
 Occ. is caste's trad. occ.             0.047***      0.047***       0.047***      0.045***       0.046***       0.045***
                                         (0.002)       (0.002)        (0.002)       (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.002)
 Occ. is father's occ.                  0.306***      0.306***       0.306***      0.302***       0.306***       0.301***
                                         (0.004)       (0.004)        (0.004)       (0.004)        (0.004)        (0.004)
 Occ. is caste's trad. occ.×SC         -0.026***      -0.026***     -0.026***      -0.024***     -0.026***       -0.024***
                                        (0.004)        (0.004)       (0.004)        (0.004)       (0.004)         (0.004)
 Impure occ.×FC                                         -0.000                                                     0.000
                                                       (0.000)                                                    (0.000)
 Pure occ.×SC                                                       -0.002***                                    -0.002***
                                                                     (0.001)                                      (0.001)
 Agricultural occ.×                                                                0.007***                      0.007***
 land inherited                                                                     (0.001)                       (0.001)
 Occ. is uncle's occ.                                                                             0.150***       0.136***
                                                                                                   (0.022)        (0.021)

 Individual FE                            Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes
 Occ. FE                                  Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes
 R2                                       0.14           0.14          0.14           0.14           0.14          0.14
 Notes: This table reports results of a linear probability model of occupational choice, using data from all
 18-60 year old respondents of the 2011 IHDS. The dataset contains all unique combinations of respondents
 and occupations. The outcome variable is equal to 1 for respondents' chosen occupation and 0 for all
 other occupations. The variable "Occ. is caste's trad. occ." indicates that an occupations is traditionally
 performed by the respondent's caste (if any), as defined in Section 3. Caste-occupation networks are equal to
 the jackknifed ratio between the number of respondents' caste-mates in an occupation divided by the number
 of all workers in the occupation. The scheduled caste (SC) dummy indicates whether the respondent's
 reported caste belongs to the state-level list of scheduled castes.
 Standard errors clustered at the PSU (village) level. p < 0.10,   p < 0.05,   p < 0.01




                                                             8
       Table A2: Traditional Occupation and Occupational Choice: NES data

                                                      Probability of occupational choice
                                           (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)                    (5)
                                                                A. Male (N =446,918)
Occ. is caste's trad. occ.              0.055***      0.020***       0.020***       0.021***       0.021***
                                         (0.004)       (0.003)        (0.003)        (0.003)        (0.003)
Occ. is father's occ.                                 0.541***       0.541***       0.541***       0.514***
                                                       (0.009)        (0.009)        (0.009)        (0.009)
Caste-occ. network                                                  -0.4777***     -0.480***      -0.489***
                                                                      (0.093)       (0.093)        (0.093)
Occ. is caste's trad. occ. * SC                                                       -0.005            -0.005
                                                                                     (0.006)           (0.006)
Occ. is mother's occ.                                                                              0.120***
                                                                                                       (0.007)
                                                            B. Female (N =411,160)
Occ. is caste's trad. occ.              0.023***      0.008***       0.008***       0.007***       0.005***
                                         (0.003)       (0.003)        (0.003)        (0.003)        (0.002)
Occ. is father's occ.                                 0.250***       0.250***       0.250***       0.123***
                                                       (0.011)        (0.011)        (0.011)        (0.009)
Caste-occ. network                                                     -0.043         -0.041           -0.090*
                                                                      (0.050)        (0.051)           (0.047)
Occ. is caste's trad. occ. * SC                                                       0.004             -0.001
                                                                                     (0.007)           (0.005)

Occ. is mother's occ.                                                                              0.529***

                                                                                                       (0.014)

Individual FE                              Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes              Yes
Occ. FE                                    Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes              Yes
This Table reports results of a linear probability model of occupational choice, using data from all
18-60 year old respondents of the 2009 and 2014 NES. The dataset contains all unique combinations
of respondents and occupations. The outcome variable is equal to 1 for respondents' chosen
occupation and 0 for all other occupations. The variable "Occ. is caste's trad. occ." indicates
that an occupations is traditionally performed by the respondent's caste (if any), as defined in
Section 3. Caste-occupation networks are equal to the jackknifed ratio between the number of
respondents' caste-mates in an occupation divided by the number of all workers in the occupation.
The scheduled caste (SC) dummy indicates whether the respondent's reported caste belongs to
the state-level list of scheduled castes.
Standard errors clustered at the PSU (constituency) level. p < 0.10,   p < 0.05,   p < 0.01




                                                      9
                              Table A3: Occupation-level Structural Parameters

                                                  Occupation         Occupation Amenity   Returns to skill o
                                               skill-wage (ln wo )         (ln Ao )
                                                      (1)                    (2)                 (3)
Non-labor income earner                         -3.705 (0.117)          3.713 (0.091)       0.374 (0.032)
Cultivation                                     -0.573 (0.052)          3.365 (0.063)       -0.035 (0.017)
Land manager                                    -3.936 (0.392)          2.658 (0.261)       0.127 (0.069)
Agricultural Laborers                            0.874 (0.035)          2.087 (0.068)       -0.210 (0.011)
Animal farmers                                  -0.858 (0.045)          3.946 (0.055)       -0.517 (0.036)
Plantation; Tree and Shrub Crop Growers         -1.510 (0.184)          1.932 (0.089)       -0.220 (0.033)
Fish related workers                            -2.188 (0.267)          2.129 (0.142)       -0.071 (0.056)
Forest hunters, gatherers and officers          -1.891 (0.259)          1.982 (0.205)       0.033 (0.040)
Mining related worker                           -2.590 (0.235)          2.023 (0.128)       0.119 (0.048)
Laborers, non-agricultural                      -0.508 (0.067)          2.063 (0.069)       0.064 (0.015)
Chemical and pharma related worker              -3.770 (0.544)          2.163 (0.124)       0.306 (0.110)
Textile related worker                          -1.443 (0.136)          2.224 (0.087)       0.039 (0.029)
Wooden crafts and instruments                   -2.448 (0.176)          2.373 (0.151)       -0.150 (0.059)
Dyeing, cleaning and washing related worker     -3.835 (0.281)          2.227 (0.169)       0.108 (0.070)
Dress related workers                           -0.811 (0.136)          2.208 (0.079)       0.007 (0.032)
Leather workers                                 -3.547 (0.321)          2.314 (0.151)       0.228 (0.053)
Wood items related worker                       -1.321 (0.101)          1.986 (0.083)       0.186 (0.018)
Metal related worker                            -1.753 (0.107)          2.188 (0.068)       0.277 (0.020)
Glass, brick and porcelain related worker       -2.082 (0.169)          2.084 (0.087)       -0.089 (0.034)
Food and beverage producers                     -2.043 (0.154)          2.345 (0.112)       0.092 (0.035)
Tobacco products                                -1.899 (0.137)          2.947 (0.083)       -0.525 (0.030)
Barbers and beauticians                         -2.770 (0.155)          2.332 (0.104)       0.228 (0.030)
Construction                                     0.951 (0.040)          2.044 (0.069)       0.018 (0.008)
Workers in utilities (power, water, etc)        -2.692 (0.124)          2.271 (0.085)       0.515 (0.025)
Printers, paper and book makers                 -4.500 (0.411)          2.548 (0.132)       0.531 (0.070)
Precision Instrument Makers and Repairers       -2.725 (0.133)          2.408 (0.102)       0.445 (0.030)
Jewelers and Precision Metal Workers            -2.903 (0.225)          2.031 (0.111)       0.321 (0.035)
Garbage workers                                 -1.036 (0.118)          1.795 (0.098)       -0.080 (0.028)
Transportation of all kinds                     -0.841 (0.081)          2.272 (0.078)       0.288 (0.015)
Post office, Telegraph and Telephone service    -5.054 (0.362)          2.314 (0.147)       0.710 (0.058)
Financial intermediation                        -6.340 (0.267)          3.675 (0.183)       0.874 (0.047)
Trade and retail shops                          -1.114 (0.092)          2.670 (0.083)       0.354 (0.022)
Hotels                                          -3.022 (0.219)          2.456 (0.109)       0.228 (0.057)
Music and entertainment                         -4.022 (0.504)          2.319 (0.263)       0.364 (0.090)
Protective services                             -3.128 (0.118)          2.410 (0.090)       0.525 (0.029)


                                                       10
                                Table A3: Occupation-level Structural Parameters

                                                   Occupation         Occupation Amenity   Returns to skill o
                                                skill-wage (ln wo )         (ln Ao )
                                                       (1)                    (2)                 (3)
Government service                               -6.112 (0.514)          2.683 (0.204)       0.880 (0.073)
Religious workers                                -5.093 (0.332)          2.681 (0.175)       0.469 (0.061)
Legal professionals                              -9.213 (0.417)          3.476 (0.165)       1.136 (0.055)
Doctors, modern and traditional                  -8.412 (0.584)          3.151 (0.247)       1.090 (0.072)
Other medical professionals                      -7.336 (0.416)          3.214 (0.154)       1.129 (0.060)
Professors, teachers, education professionals    -7.755 (0.394)          3.674 (0.135)       1.285 (0.066)
Accountants, secretaries, clerks                 -3.589 (0.196)          2.633 (0.111)       0.821 (0.035)
Architects, surveyors, engineers, and their      -5.555 (0.187)          2.102 (0.112)       0.949 (0.039)
employees.
High skill scientific or artistic                -4.723 (0.304)          2.564 (0.112)       0.633 (0.055)
Cooks and house servants                         -0.417 (0.060)          2.232 (0.075)       -0.283 (0.022)
Manufacturers, business men and                  -2.858 (0.186)          2.469 (0.102)       0.516 (0.033)
contractors otherwise unspecified
Mechanics otherwise unspecified                  -3.996 (0.311)          2.495 (0.144)       0.434 (0.061)
Home work                                        0 (normalized)         0 (normalized)       0.327 (0.014)




                                                        11
                                 Table A4: Effects of Removing Occupational Identity: Weaker network effects

                                                   No occupational identity                  (1) + endogenous                 (2) + parental occupation
                                                    + endogenous wages                           education                     orthogonal to trad. occ.
                                                                (1)                                 (2)                                  (3)
                                                             Panel A: Estimated Social networks
                                                                            i. Aggregate outcomes (percent changes from baseline)
     Market Output                                               0.064                                0.332                                 -2.764
     Output per worker                                           0.318                                 0.595                                 0.081
     Labor force participation                                  -0.254                                -0.261                                -2.842
     Schooling                                                  0.000                                  0.463                                 0.977
                                                                            ii. Occupation/Caste-level Outcomes (percent changes)
                                                    Min        Median         Max         Min        Median        Max          Min        Median         Max
     Occupation: wage rate                          -0.09       -0.023         0.3        -0.26       -0.04         0.42        -1.51       -0.95        6.30
     Occupation: human capital                      -0.82         0.16        0.34        -0.92       0.47          1.13       -19.06        0.09        2.30
     Occupation: employment share (pp)              -0.67        0.003        0.18        -0.71       0.004         0.18        -1.92       0.002         1.96
     Occupation: trad. worker share (pp)            -4.29        -0.39        0.00        -4.39        -0.4         0.00        -9.46       -0.93        0.00
     Caste: % workers in trad. occ. (pp)            -5.68        -0.24        0.34        -6.08       -0.24         0.34       -23.69       -0.74        0.76
12




     Caste: total income                            -0.88       -0.003        1.06        -0.79        0.07         3.38       -53.49       -0.39        13.60
                                                            Panel B: Endogenous Social Networks
                                                                            i. Aggregate outcomes (percent changes from baseline)
     Market Output                                               0.006                                0.233                                 -2.855
     Output per worker                                           0.262                                 0.501                                -0.080
     Labor force participation                                  -0.256                                -0.267                                -2.777
     Schooling                                                  0.000                                  0.459                                 0.949
                                                                            ii. Occupation/Caste-level Outcomes (percent changes)
                                                    Min        Median         Max         Min        Median        Max          Min        Median         Max
     Occupation: wage rate                         -0.123       -0.06         0.96        -0.27       -0.07         0.81        -1.49       -1.03        6.20
     Occupation: human capital                      -2.82         0.2         0.38        -2.15       0.47          1.06       -18.90        0.34        2.18
     Occupation: employment share (pp)              -0.67       0.003         0.17        -0.71       0.004         0.18        -1.87       0.002         1.9
     Occupation: trad. worker share (pp)            -4.63        -0.4         0.00        -4.70       -0.39         0.00        -9.93       -0.88        0.00
     Caste: % workers in trad. occ. (pp)            -5.69       -0.23         0.33        -6.09       -0.23         0.34       -23.66       -0.68        0.75
     Caste: total income                            -0.90       -0.01         1.05        -1.31       0.05          3.41       -53.32        -0.4        13.57
     Notes: The counterfactuals shown here are computed in the same way as in Table 7, except that we now reduce the strength of caste-occupation networks by half, formally
     dividing ~2 and ~4 by 2.
A6       Appendix Figures

                                     Figure A1: Values of education cost 




Notes: This figure presents the cost of education  by years of schooling for general caste men and women, OBCs, SCs, and
STs.




                                                            13
