                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  THE EFFECT OF STOCK OWNERSHIP ON INDIVIDUAL SPENDING AND LOYALTY

                                       Paolina C. Medina
                                         Vrinda Mittal
                                        Michaela Pagel

                                      Working Paper 28479
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28479


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2021




We thank Christian Casebeer, COO of Bumped, Amy Dunn, Marketing, and Andrew Pfaendler,
Data Scientist, for providing us with the data to do this study and helping us understand the
details. We also thank Paul Tetlock, Xavier Giroud, Antonio Gargano, Alberto Rossi, Francesco
D'Accunto, Stefan Zeisberger, Tobin Hanspal, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh for valuable
comments as well as conference and seminar participants at the CEPR Workshop on New
Consumption Data, Columbia PhD Lunch Seminar, Columbia Finance Lunch seminar, Columbia
Pre Thesis Seminar, Barnard Women's Applied Micro Seminar, Georgetown Fintech Apps
Seminar, McIntire University of Virginia, University of Maryland, University of Amsterdam,
SAIF, ANU, Cesifo Conference, University of Vienna, and University of Regensburg. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Paolina C. Medina, Vrinda Mittal, and Michaela Pagel. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effect of Stock Ownership on Individual Spending and Loyalty
Paolina C. Medina, Vrinda Mittal, and Michaela Pagel
NBER Working Paper No. 28479
February 2021
JEL No. G02,G4,G41,G5,G51

                                         ABSTRACT

In this study, we quantify the effects of receiving stocks from certain brands on spending in the
brand's stores. We use data from a new FinTech company called Bumped that opens brokerage
accounts for its users and rewards them with stocks when they shop at previously elected stores.
For identification, we use 1) the staggered distribution of brokerage accounts over time after
individuals sign up for a waitlist and 2) randomly distributed stock grants. We find that
individuals spend 40% more per week at elected brands and stores after being allocated an
account. In response to receiving a stock grant, individuals increase their weekly spending by
100% on the granted brands. Beyond documenting a causal link between stock ownership and
individual spending, we show that weekly spending in certain brands of our users is strongly
correlated with stock holdings of that brand by Robinhood brokerage clients. Finally, we present
survey evidence to argue that loyalty is the dominant psychological mechanism explaining our
findings. We thus provide micro evidence for the idea that stock ownership drives brand loyalty,
which is an intangible asset that leads to lower firm cash flow volatility.

Paolina C. Medina                               Michaela Pagel
Texas A&M University                            Columbia Business School
210 Olsen Blvd.                                 3022 Broadway
College Station, TX 77843                       Uris Hall
pmedina@tamu.edu                                New York, NY 10027
                                                and NBER
Vrinda Mittal                                   mpagel@columbia.edu
Columbia Business School
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall
New York City, NY 10027
VMittal22@gsb.columbia.edu
1    Introduction

According to the canonical asset pricing model, individuals' consumption should not be affected
by their holdings of specific stocks and individuals' investment decisions should not be affected
by their consumption of specific brands. However, it is well documented that investors invest
in stocks from companies with which they are familiar with (Huberman, 2001; Keloharju et al.,
2012), and base their investment decisions on feelings of loyalty (Cohen, 2009; Aspara, 2009).
In this paper, we study how individual ownership of specific stocks increases loyalty and affects
spending behavior. We thus show that behavioral biases in investing are not restricted to trading
but affect consumption, a direct component of individual utility and welfare.
    We analyze the relationship between stock ownership and spending using de-identified transaction-
level data from a FinTech company called Bumped. The company opens a brokerage account for
its users, and rewards them with stocks from the brands and stores they buy from. After the bro-
kerage account is opened, customers link all their checking and credit card accounts, and select
their favorite brands in several retail categories. If and when they spend at their selected brands,
they receive a fraction of their spending in that brand's stock in their brokerage accounts. For
identification, we use the staggered allocation of accounts over time after individuals initially sign
up for a waitlist. Additionally, we look at the effects of stock grants distributed to users at different
points in time.
    We show that customers increase their spending at the selected brands in response to opening
their brokerage accounts. Weekly eligible spending at selected brands jumps up by 40% and stays
persistently high for 3 to 6 months. As eligible spending averages 56 USD per week, this corre-
sponds to a 23 USD increase in spending per week. For ineligible spending, we can rule out a
decrease larger than 5% in the weeks after account opening, from a basis of 295 USD per week.
We can thus say with statistical confidence that the offsetting impact on ineligible spending was
smaller than 16 USD.



                                                   2
    When looking at the behavior of app users after they signed up, standard selection concerns
are present, i.e., there may be unobserved reasons that motivate certain individuals to get the app
at a certain point in time. For example, individuals could time their sign-up to an app that rewards
specific types of transactions when they expect to make a lot of those transactions. To alleviate such
concerns, we exploit a unique feature of our setting: individuals in the sample were first required
to sign up to a waitlist before getting their brokerage accounts. When individuals signed up for
the waitlist, they only provided their email address. The company's operations team then released
batches of users to onboard, how many depended on varying business objectives and constraints,
on a first-come-first-served basis.
    Users spend a considerable amount of time waitlisted, on average, 4.5 months. Because we
restrict our analysis to users who sign up immediately after being allowed to do so, we feel it is
implausible that users hold off certain types of spending in anticipation of receiving an account.
Users have no information when they will receive the account and the distribution of accounts is
not determined by user characteristics since, at that time, only their email addresses are known.1
    We lend additional credibility to our account opening result by exploiting another unique fea-
ture in our setting. A subset of users were granted with $5 or $10 stock grants from the following
companies: Red Robin, Taco Bell, McDonald's, Exxon Mobile, Chevron and Yum! Brands, upon
account opening. These stock grants were distributed for a number of months but were not ad-
vertised when users chose to waitlist or were allowed to sign up for an account. In response to
receiving a stock grant, we find a spending response of 100% in the brands of which individuals
received stocks. For these users, we also find a more persistent response of eligible spending to
account opening.
    Finally, we have some quasi-random variation in the fraction of eligible spending that ulti-
    1
      To add credibility to our identification strategy, we show that there is no spending response in either eligible or
ineligible spending when individuals choose to waitlist. Additionally, we look at the differential response of users that
were waitlisted for relatively short or long periods of time and do not find large differences in our results. Finally, we
show that the amount of time individuals are waitlisted is not well explained by individual characteristics.




                                                            3
mately got rewarded. The reason is that due to company operations, policy changes, and con-
straints, not all eligible spending was rewarded for all users but only approximately 70%. When
we split all users into terciles based on which fraction of their eligible spending got rewarded, we
find a more persistent response in eligible spending for those users that had more of their transac-
tions rewarded.
   In addition to our spending analysis, we are interested in the link between owning more stocks
and investing more or having a broader engagement with the stock market. We find evidence
for the fact that receiving stocks stimulates individual investments, by documenting that outgoing
brokerage transfers to other brokers are increased after individuals start receiving stock rewards.
   To explore the external validity of our findings, we also document that daily and weekly spend-
ing in certain brands for our user population is strongly correlated with holdings of that company's
stock among Robinhood brokerage clients (the holdings data is obtained from robintrack.com).
In fact, a 1% increase in weekly holdings of a certain company (relative to holdings of all other
companies) increases spending at that company's stores (relative to all other spending) by 0.12%,
controlling for brand and week-by-year fixed effects. We argue that this result helps us to ex-
trapolate our findings to actual spending and stock ownership in brokerage accounts. We chose
Robinhood brokerage account data as Robinhood clients are likely a similar population to Bumped
users. In fact, the most common brokerage account of our users is provided by Robinhood.
   What explains customers' spending responses after receiving the stock rewards and grants?
We argue that the mere monetary value or price effect of the rewards is unlikely to fully explain
the changes in behavior we observe. It seems likely that customers pay more in transaction costs
when they alter their spending behavior by 40% to 100% in response to a 1% to 2% price effect.
We argue that, in addition to the monetary benefits of the stock rewards and grants, users receive
non-pecuniary benefits that trigger loyalty, i.e., a preference for a specific brand that goes beyond
the consumption experience. In general, any reward program, based on stock, cash or any other
payoff, can lead to loyalty if the reward is perceived as a gift that triggers reciprocity and affect. In


                                                   4
that sense, affect and gift exchange are additional potential mechanisms behind our results. How-
ever, the magnitude of our results is substantially larger than the effect of cash back on spending
documented in the literature. Vana et al. (2018) calculate that when an additional $1 in cashback
payment is offered, spending increases by $3.51, or an effectiveness of 351%. In contrast, stock
rewards have an effectiveness of 2000%: we find a $23 increase in weekly eligible spending when
the average amount offered in stock rewards are $1.12 per week (stock rewards are about 2% of
weekly eligible spending, which in turn averages $56 during the observation period). We thus
argue that there are additional factors that further enhance the feelings of loyalty that owners of
company stock experience. We discussed a number of psychological mechanisms that can explain
by stock rewards trigger loyalty, ranging from familiarity, reductions in cognitive dissonance, and
illusion of control.
   We also present survey results that inform us about users' motivations and attitudes towards
stock ownership and loyalty. Consistent with Cohen (2009) and Aspara (2009), we find that a
significant fraction of Bumped users report that they are likely to go out of their way to shop in
brands for which they owned stock, shop less from the competition, or pay a higher price. These
measures of loyalty are positively correlated with users reporting being "more excited" about stock
rewards than other types of traditional rewards. Furthermore, survey respondents report being more
likely to invest outside of Bumped as a result of owning stock through Bumped, and this response
is also positively correlated with excitement about stock rewards. Overall, survey results suggest
that stock ownership creates non-pecunary benefits which we argue, explain the large effects of
stock rewards on individual spending.
   Our results have important implications for the economy and for asset prices. The high cor-
relation between spending in certain brands and holdings of that stock suggest that stock price
fluctuations affect spending and thus utility in a more direct way. Additionally, previous work has
found that brand loyalty is an intangible asset that leads to lower cash flow volatility (Dou et al.,
2019; Larkin, 2013), which we confirm in our setting.


                                                 5
Literature Review

Our research is related to prior literature suggesting that purchase behaviors and beliefs about
a company have an impact on investment choices, investors tend to buy what they know, e.g.,
Huberman (2001), Keloharju et al. (2012), Schoenbachler et al. (2004), Frieder and Subrahmanyam
(2005), and MacGregor et al. (2000). Closest to our paper, Keloharju et al. (2012) use individual
brokerage account data to show that clients of a given broker invest in the corresponding broker
stock, and owners of a given car make invest in the respective car company. The authors also
document a causal link between receiving broker and auto stock but that link is weaker. Similarly,
Aspara et al. (2009), Aspara and Tikkanen (2010), and Aspara and Tikkanen (2011) use survey
data to provide an association between stock ownership and future purchase intentions, even in the
event of price increases, which they interpret as loyalty. From a theoretical perspective, Altinkemer
and Ozcelik (2009) explores the role of alignment of incentives between customers and firms, when
loyalty rewards are provided in the form of equity, instead of cash-back. Additionally, the existing
literature has documented that portfolio choice is affected by loyalty Cohen (2009), advertising
to investors increases sales (Lou, 2014) and firms derive benefits when their stocks are owned by
financial intermediaries, i.e., Almazan et al. (2005), Chen et al. (2007), and Aghion et al. (2013).
   To the best of our knowledge, one existing study looks at the random distribution of stocks from
various companies to individuals in an experimental setting is Bernard et al. (2018). In this study,
graduate students are randomly assigned some companies' stocks in an economic experiment,
without any prior knowledge of whether the students are already customers of the invested-in
firms. This study sheds additional light on the behavioral links between stock ownership and firm
performance via increased sales. This study also shows that customer-stockowners purchase more
of the firm's products because they changed their preferences that favor the invested-in firm in line
with Fama and French (2007). In contrast to this paper, we look at a naturally occurring setting
that elicited participation of a broad cross section of the US population and companies that were
selected and are familiar to most customers (i.e., Walmart, Target, and Macy's) from a wide range

                                                  6
of retail categories.
    A causal effect of stock ownership on individual spending can be interpreted as an increase in
loyalty towards a specific brand or company. In that sense, our results contribute to the growing
literature studying the effect of customer capital or brand loyalty on asset prices. Larkin (2013)
studies the relation between brand perception and cash flow stability. She shows that firms with
higher brand loyalty have lower cash flow volatility. Dou et al. (2019) find that firms whose brand
loyalty depends more on talents are riskier and have higher expected returns. We argue that stock
ownership itself triggers brand loyalty, through a variety of behavioral mechanisms by which own-
ership of specific stocks causes increases in spending on brands corresponding to those stocks.
    Our results also relate to the literature studying reciprocity (Falk, 2007), documenting a larger
impact of non-monetary incentives, relative to monetary incentives of comparable value. In a
controlled field experiment, Kube et al. (2012) recruited workers to catalog books from a library
on a temporary basis. They find that incentivizing workers with in-kind gifts (thermos bottles)
triggered substantial reciprocity in the form of increased productivity, whereas an equivalent wage
increase (20% of the hourly wage) did not lead to increases in productivity. However, gift exchange
findings measured in the field were sometimes inconclusive and contradictory (Kessler, 2013).
In our setting we test the role of company stock as a currency for reciprocity. Our findings are
consistent with the supersizing effect of reciprocity on incentives, as they are quantitatively difficult
to explain by the monetary value of the rewards. While we are not able to compare directly the
effect of stock as a currency for monetary rewards, we benchmark our results with previous work
looking at the effect of cash-back rewards on consumers spending. Using data from an anonymous
cash-back website, Vana et al. (2018) find that for every dollar of cash-back offered, spending
increases by $3.51.2
    2
      Vana et al. (2018) decompose the effect of cash-back rewards into two components. The first component relates
to the effect of while of one additional dollar of cash-back offers on spending, where individuals spend to receive
the reward offer. The second component captures the effect of effectively receiving a cash-ward reward on future
spending on the same brand. Both components are jointly estimated with a panel of individual level spending, in a
random effects model. To identify the second component (which is the focus of their paper), the authors use quasi-



                                                        7
    Our paper is also related to the growing literature on consumer spending using data from new
online financial platforms, often called FinTech apps (see Goldstein et al., 2019, for a literature
survey), such as Gelman et al. (2015), Baker (2018), Kuchler and Pagel (2019), Olafsson and
Pagel (2018), Medina (2020), and Koustas (2018). In the domain of stock market investments, our
paper is also related to research papers using bank account data linked with securities trades and
holding data such as Meyer and Pagel (2018) and Loos et al. (2018). But in contrast to looking
at spending responses to income shocks, financial advice, or stock market investments, we look
at spending responses to rewards in the form of company stock. To that end, our paper is related
to new technologies in advising consumers, rewarding consumer behavior, or targeting marketing
efforts, for instance, D'Acunto et al. (2019), Vallee and Zeng (2019), Aridor et al. (2020), and
Chen et al. (2019).
    We organize the remainder of this article in the following way: Section 2 describes the FinTech
app setting and our empirical design. Section 3 presents our empirical spending results. Section 4
contains robustness checks, and Section 5 shows survey evidence. Section 6 discusses in detail the
psychological mechanisms that are consistent with our findings, and Section 7 concludes.



2     Setting, data, and empirical strategy

Subsection 2.1 describes the FinTech app, Subsection 2.2 describes the data used, and Subsection
2.3 discusses the empirical strategy.


2.1     FinTech app setting

Bumped is a loyalty platform that rewards its users with fractional stock from the brands and stores
they buy from.3 To receive a user account, individuals have to first sign up for a waitlist on the
random variation in the time to actually receive the cash-back reward. The calculation of the total effect (inclusive of
both components) cited above is taken from the appendix.
   3
     We are aware of two more companies that consumer spending with equity. The first one is called stash.com.
This platform offers a membership service and provides their users with a new debit card. Users are rewarded with

                                                           8
company's website. At the time of signing up for the waitlist, interested users provide their email
addresses and names. No additional information is provided at that time. In turn, on a first-come-
first-serve basis, users are taken out of the waitlist and are invited to open a brokerage account. If
users fail to open an account when approved, two reminder emails are sent. However, we restrict
our analysis to users who sign up for their accounts within a week of being off-waitlisted. Once
users signed up for an account, they can link all their checking and credit card accounts. In turn,
customers can select their favorite brands in a number of spending categories.
    All featured brands are divided into 16 different retail categories and users can select one brand
from each category. If users then spend at their selected brands, they receive fractional shares
of the corresponding company as a reward. Customers can switch their selected brands every 30
days, and only up to three times per year. The functionalities of the brokerage account are limited
to the users' stock rewards, for instance, the users are not allowed to deposit their own money or
purchase additional stocks. They are however allowed to sell their (entire) position at any time, in
which case the cash preceedings are transferred to a linked bank account.
    Figures 1 and 2 show several screenshots of the FinTech app. Figure 1 shows the screenshots
of brand selection, switching brands, and linked card screens. In the linked card screens, one can
see which transactions were rewarded by stocks. All eligible and ineligible transactions can be
seen in the transactions screen in Figure 2. Additionally, this figure shows two screenshots of the
portfolio containing the stock rewards the user received and their current value, as well as their
daily changes. As part of a promotional program, some users received stock grants upon signing
up for a certain period of time. Figure 3 shows the notification a user receives on receiving a stock
grant.
    We received an anonymized subsample of the user base. As of March 2020, our data subsample
includes 11,424 users. Figure 4 shows the timeline of when our subsample of users were waitlisted
stock from the brands and stores they buy from using the debit card provided by stash.com. The second one is called
upromise.com. Members of this platfom accrue credits on eligible purchases that are directed to a 529 account for
college savings.



                                                        9
for an account, invited to open an account, and received their accounts.


2.2       Data

The dataset we received includes de-identified information on financial transactions and demo-
graphic characteristics, i.e., information on each user in our data sample's age, gender, and 5-digit
zip code.4 Figure 6 shows the number of users that we observe in each US zip code. It is seen
that there is considerable geographic variation across the country. In terms of other demographics,
67% of user are male, 17% are female, and 16% do not report their gender. 871 users are less
than 25 years, 9,431 are between 25 and 49, and 1,122 are greater than 50 years of age. Our user
population is, as often the case for Fintech app data, thus more likely to be male, younger, and
educated than the average American.
       Additionally, we use de-identified daily data on each user's spending transactions from all
linked checking, savings, and credit card accounts. We observe the date of when users sign up
for the waitlist, when they get off the waitlist and invited to open their brokerage account, as well
as the date in which they effectively open their brokerage accounts. While the majority of users
create their accounts right when they are taken off the waitlist, some users wait a few days before
doing so. To avoid selection issues in the timing of account opening after getting off the waitlist,
we restrict the analysis to users that opened their accounts within one week after they were invited
to do so.
       In turn, we see all linked cards and the corresponding history of transactions before and after
each card was linked. We then have a flag of which transactions were selected and thus eligible for
rewards and whether they were actually rewarded. For each transaction after sign-up, we thus know
whether the transaction was selected and rewarded by stocks, and if so by how much. Note that,
because of internal business operations constraints, not all selected transactions were ultimately
rewarded. Finally, we have information on which brands are selected by each user, and when they
   4
       No other personal information of users was shared for this project.


                                                            10
switched their favorite brands.
   Bumped was launched in 2017, and we received a subsample of users' de-identified and ag-
gregated transactions from 2016 to 2020. Thus, we can see transactions by a user both before and
after joining the app. This data is summarized in Table 1. Our subsample of 11,424 users were
waitlisted initially and then received their brokerage accounts. The users we observe had to wait
on average 4.5 months between being waitlisted on the app to opening an account, with a standard
deviation of 3.3 months. The users on average perform 730 transactions with an average of 2.4
linked cards. The average monthly total spending is 1,496 USD, and the average total rewards are
37 USD. The average weekly spending is 350 USD, while the average weekly rewards to users are
0.40 USD. Note that, we only received transactions that were classified as belonging to a certain
brand. In our final dataset, we have 551 different brands that our users spend at.
   We also received information on brokerage account transfers and ATM withdrawals for our
users. 2,156 users have other brokerage accounts, which are primarily with Robinhood, Etrade,
Ameritrade, and Schwab. The median user tranfers 545 USD per month to his or her brokerage
account. We observe ATM transactions for 4,912 users, and see that an average user withdraws
465 USD a month and 233 USD a week.
   Additionally, starting March 2018, users were granted stocks of certain brands upon signing
up for their accounts. Initially, users received a one-time grant of fractional shares from one chain
restaurant, Red Robin. Later, users also received stock grants from other companies: Taco Bell,
McDonald's, Exxon Mobile, and Chevron. The grant was displayed in-app with a description
`thank you for choosing the brand', and a push notification was sent to the user. The amount and
timing was decided by the marketing team. All users who opened an account and selected that
brand received the stock grant at the time of the promotional program. Users has no information
of the promotion at the time they signed up for the waitlist.
   Figure 4 shows the timeline of how many users received a stock grant. Summary of transactions
of users who were part of the promotional program is given in Table 2. 1,371 users were awarded


                                                 11
grants during or one week after the week of account open. Over the observation period, users
that received stock grants spent 519 USD per week on average. The average grant amount was 10
USD. The distribution of grants was quasi-random as users were not informed in advance of the
promotional program, and thus could not select into it endogenously.
   We can perform a covariate balance test between grant recipients and non-recipients, before
they get off the waitlist. In Table 6 we can see that grant recipients are very comparable to non-
recipients in a number of observable characteristics, including age, as well as eligible and ineligible
spending. The only statistically significant difference is in terms of the number of transactions per
month. Grant recipients perform 328 transactions per month, compared to 301 transactions by
non-receivers. We argue that while statistically significant, the difference is not economically
significant, and did not affect whether or not users received a stock grant.
   To ensure that our empirical results are not driven by transactions being observed after but
not before sign-up, we perform a number of checks to then exclude linked cards that might be
observed imperfectly. We exclude all linked cards with less than 2 transactions in the four two-
week periods either before or after the opening account week, before and after the waitlisted weeks,
or before and after the grant weeks. These 8-week windows correspond to our estimation period.
Additionally, we exclude all months in which there were less than 5 days with spending. The
5-days threshold is commonly used in other research papers using transaction-level data to ensure
completeness of records (see, e.g. Kuchler and Pagel, 2019; Olafsson and Pagel, 2018; Ganong
and Noel, 2019). The first step reduces our sample of linked cards by 6,759 cards from 26,813
to 20,054 cards. The second step reduces our sample of spending days by another 15% from
7,829,699 to 6,771,353 observations. Summary statistics for the adjusted sample are reported in
Table 3. Post these adjustments, we have a total of 9,005 users.
   In Table 4 we compare our sample to the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX). Since this
survey is performed at the household level, we normalize spending dividing by the average house-
hold size of 2.52. Our users are younger, more likely to be men, and show an average spending of


                                                  12
$1,496 per month, whereas the average American spends $2,205 during the same time period. We
note that our data includes spending only on 551 identified brands. After taking that into account
we argue that spending levels of our users are broadly similar to those in the CEX.
   In turn, we correlate our spending data with the Safegraph provided card level spending data
from Facteus. Facteus partnered with banks to use a synthetic data process to create a synthetic
version of their transaction data. The process obfuscates each transaction to protect individual
privacy and ensure a zero exact match possibility. Mathematical noise is injected into key data
record attributes, however, when the data is analyzed in aggregate it retains 99.97% of the statistical
attributes as the original data set. Most transactions are debit card transactions primarily from
mobile-only banks with no physical branches. Because of this, the spending likely reflects lower-
income and younger consumers. Nevertheless, it is likely a more broad fraction of the population
than the Bumped users.
   The raw data correlation coefficients between the Bumped and Safegraph spending data are
0.476 and 0.442 at the daily and weekly levels respectively. In Table 5 we show this in a simple
regression that our users' brand-level spending data is strongly positively correlated with the Safe-
graph card spending data. Excluding brand and date fixed effects, the daily estimated coefficient
of our spending data in certain brands, relative to total spending, with the Safegraph card spending
data in the same brand, relative to total spending, correspond to the raw correlation coefficients
as we normalize the spending data by their standard deviations. The estimated coefficient are
highly significant and the adjusted R squared is around 20%. We take these results as indicative
that the our users' spending behavior is broadly consistent with the spending behavior of a more
representative sample of the population.


2.3    Empirical strategy

We aggregate the data to the user-week level keeping track of all eligible and all ineligible spend-
ing. (In)eligible spending, before and after account opening, is defined as spending in brands that

                                                  13
users (do not) select upon account opening. In turn, we run the following specification to look at
the response in eligible and ineligible spending upon receiving a brokerage account:


                          iw                                           iw            iw
                  SpendingEligible = i + w +                   Bumped wBumped +                    (1)
                                                   =-8,...,8


                               iw
   In Specification 1, SpendingEligible denotes eligible spending (i.e., spending at a brand that
the user elects at sign-up) by user i in week w, i is an individual fixed effect, w is a week-
                           iw
by-year fixed effect, and wBumped is an indicator whether user i in week w had received his or
                                                                
her account in his or her user specific  week. The coefficients Bumped thus tell us the path of
eligible spending after the user received his or her account. We consider 8 weeks before and
after receiving the account. Standard errors are clustered at the individual level. We estimate
this equation for all users, as well as separately for users who received a stock grant, and those
who did not. Additionally, we report results of a variant of this specification in which we include
one dummy for the 8 weeks after account opening and one dummy for all other weeks as well as
individual and week-by-year fixed effects.
   We also run the following specification to look at the response in eligible and ineligible spend-
ing (overall and at those brands of which users received the stock grants) upon receiving the stock
grant:
                            iw                                            iw        iw
                    SpendingEligible = i +  w +                    Grant wGrant +                  (2)
                                                       =-8,...,8

                               iw                                                                iw
   In Specification 2, SpendingEligible , i , and w are defined as in Specification 1. In turn, wGrant
is an indicator whether user i in week w had received the grant in his or her  's week. For users
                              iw                                     
that never received a grant, wGrant is always zero. The coefficients Grant thus tell us the history
of eligible spending before and after a user received the stock grant, which coincides with the date
of account opening. We consider 8 weeks before and after individuals received the grant and look
at all eligible spending as well as spending in the granted brands. Standard errors are clustered at



                                                 14
the individual level. Additionally, we report results of a variant of this specification in which we
include one dummy for the 8 weeks after grant receipt and one dummy for all other weeks after
account opening as well as individual and week-by-year fixed effects.
   We also perform an analysis to study the effect of stock grants on spending. First, we estimate
the same specification as in Equation 1, but splitting the sample into users who received a stock
grant and those who did not. Second, we formally compare the differential response in spending
of these two groups, with the following difference-in-difference specification:




           iw                                    iw                                      iw    b    iw
   SpendingEligible = i + w +                   B wBumped +                   BG Granti wBumped +        (3)
                                    =-8,...,8                     =-8,...,8


                               iw                    iw
   In Specification 3, SpendingEligible , i , w and wBumped are defined as in Specification 1. In
turn, Granti is a binary variable taking the value of 1 when if a user received a grant at the time of
                                  
account opening. The coefficients BG thus identify the incremental effect of receiving an account
                                                                             
and a grant, relative to the effect of receiving an account without a grant, B , in each week  . We
consider 8 weeks before and after individuals received the grant. We estimate Equation 3 both for
eligible spending restricted to the specific brands for which stock was granted.
   Finally, as a placebo test, we estimate the following specification to look at the response in
eligible and ineligible spending upon signing up to be waitlisted for an account:


                          iw                                                iw            iw
                  SpendingEligible = i + w +                     W aitlist wW aitlist +                  (4)
                                                     =-8,...,8


                               iw
   In Specification 4, SpendingEligible , i , and w are defined as in Specification 1. In turn,
 iw
wW aitlist is an indicator whether user i in week w was waitlisted in his or her  's week. The

             
coefficients W aitlist thus tell us the history of eligible spending before and after a user signed

up for the waitlist. We consider 8 weeks before and after individuals signed up for the waitlist.



                                                    15
Standard errors are shown as the dotted lines and clustered at the individual level.



3     Results

3.1    Main effects on spending

As a starting point, Figure 7 plots the raw data means of eligible and ineligible spending 8 weeks
before and after account opening. We here look at the ratio of spending relative to the mean average
over the entire 16-week period. Thus, the axis shows the percentage deviation of spending relative
to the sample average in the 8 weeks before and after account opening. We can see in this raw-data
plot that eligible spending increases by approximately 40% in the week of account opening and
stays high. A large spike is visible in eligible spending, while there is no rise in ineligible spending.
                       
    Figure 8 shows the Bumped coefficients and standard errors from Specification 1 for both eli-
gible spending as well as ineligible spending as the left-hand side variables. Spending is measured
as the individual-level percentage deviation from the sample average eligible spending in a given
week. The coefficients thus represent the percentage deviation in eligible spending before and after
users received their accounts. We can clearly see a pronounced spike in eligible spending in the
week that users receive their accounts. Weekly spending at selected brands jumps up by 40% and
stays persistently high for the 8 weeks we look at. In terms of USD, eligible spending averages 56
USD per week so this corresponds to approximately a 22.4 USD increase in spending per week.
Additionally, we do not see a comparable pattern in ineligible spending. For ineligible spending,
we can rule out a decrease larger than 5% in the weeks after account opening, from a basis of 295
USD per week. We can thus say with statistical confidence that the offsetting impact on ineligible
spending was smaller than 15 USD.
                       
    Figure 9 shows the Bumped coefficients and standard errors from Specification 1, splitting the
sample into grant receivers and non-receivers. In both cases, we can see again a clear increase in



                                                   16
eligible spending, in the order of 40%, following account opening.
   We also present the results from estimating Specification 2 in Figure 10, for both eligible
spending in general, as well as eligible spending at the brands of which users received stocks as
the left-hand side variables. As before, the coefficients thus represent the percentage deviation in
eligible spending before and after users received their stock grants. We can clearly see an increase
in overall eligible spending in the week after users received their grants of about 40%, which equals
the account opening effect. Additionally, eligible spending at the brands of which the user received
a grant increases even more, by about 100%.
   As a complement, Column 1 of Table 8 shows the average effect during the 8 weeks following
account opening. With this alternative estimation, we obtain a 38% increase in eligible spending,
relative to the sample average of each individual. Column 2 shows an 3.6% decrease in ineligible
spending with a standard error of 2.3%, we can thus rule out a decrease of more than 8.2% in
ineligible spending with statistical confidence. Columns 3 and 4 show the results for eligible
spending in granted brands and we can document a 93% increase in spending with a negligible
effect on ineligible spending, i.e., spending in categories of which the user received a grant but
didn't select at sign up.
   Columns 1 and 2 of Table 9 shows a similar analysis, but in this case, we directly use dol-
lar spending per week as the dependent variable. Receiving stock rewards leads to substantial
increases in average spending per week, in this case $19 per week in eligible spending, and an
insignficant $8.4 increase in ineligible spending. We can rule out a decrease in ineligible spending
of more than $20 with statistical confidence. Finally, Table 7 shows similar effects for log spending
instead of the absolute amounts.
   Table 8 summarizes the graphical results on changes in spending upon receiving a stock grant.
In columns 3 and 4 we can see that during the 8 weeks following grant disbursement there is
100% increase in spending on brands that match the stock grant, and a non-significant decrease on
ineligible spending. These coefficients represent deviations from weekly average spending during


                                                 17
the period of analysis. Table 9 shows similar results, estimating the effects on spending directly
in dollar terms, instead of deviations from weekly averages. Columns 3 and 4 show a 4 dollar
increase in eligible spending, and a reduction of 67 cents in ineligible spending.
                       
   Figure 11 shows the BG coefficients and standard errors from Specification 3. We present
the results for (in)eligible spending at the brands of which users received stocks as the left-hand
side variables. Spending is measured as the individual-level percentage deviation from the 8-week
estimation period average eligible spending in a given week. The coefficients thus represent the
incremental effect of receiving an unexpected stock grant at the time of account opening, as a
percentage deviation of weekly spending before and after users received their stock grants. Figure
11 shows a pronounced effect on spending in brands corresponding to the stock that was granted.
The incremental effect in spending is in the order of 200% initially, then there is a decrease, and
then we observe another increase.


3.1.1   Sample splits by rewards ratios

Due to company operations and constraints, not all eligible spending was rewarded, on average
over the entire sample period. About 70% of eligible spending was actually rewarded. Only
eligible spending was ever rewarded, ineligible spending was never rewarded. Whether an eligible
transaction was rewarded depended on internal business policy shifts over time. In other words,
the rules governing whether a transaction was rewarded changed over the life of the company and
it is largely not documented how and when. Additionally, some transactions that should have been
rewarded may have been missed. When we look at eligible spending, we thus look at spending in
elected categories rather than spending that was actually rewarded in the pre- and post-periods of
account opening.
   We exploit variation in the fraction of eligible spending that was rewarded, to see if receiving
higher rewards lead to differential effects on spending, compared to receiving lower levels of re-
ward. Are users behaving differently in response to the account opening if a lot instead of little


                                                 18
of their eligible spending was rewarded? We look at the sample splits of terciles of individuals
being rewarded a lot versus little relative to their eligible spending in Figure 16. While we see the
same initial spike, we see a more persistent response in eligible spending for those users who got
rewarded relatively more.


3.1.2   Sample splits by retail categories

Finally, we study the spending response of account opening by category. We focus in the six most
popular spending categories: groceries, burgers, coffee, superstores, ride share and drug stores.
Figure 12 shows increases in eligible spending between 30 and 100%, relative to the average
weekly spending during the window of analysis. Superstores are the only category that shows a
substantial decrease in spending after an initial jump in the two weeks immediately after account
opening. The results for ineligible spending are mixed, with some categories like coffee, showing
substantial offsetting effects, and some others (the majority) showing a flat response to account
opening on ineligible spending.


3.1.3   Sample splits by attention

We also look at heterogeneities, as a function of login activity, which we use as a proxy for attention
to financial accounts. Figure 17 presents the results of estimating Equation 1 after splitting the
sample into terciles of login counts per user. Across the spectrum of the attention distribution,
eligible spending shows an increase in the order of 40% in the weeks following account opening.
Users in the high attention category show larger spikes, reaching up to a 60% increase in eligible
spending on week 6.


3.1.4   Long-term effects

We look at the effects of eligible and ineligible spending further out than 2 months. When we
consider 3 or even 6 months after account sign-up, we find some dissipation but still a significant

                                                  19
increase in eligible spending as can be seen in Figure 13. When we look at this longer estimation
window, weekly spending at selected brands jumps up by 40% and stays persistently high for 3 to
6 months. In terms of USD, eligible spending averages 56 USD per week so this corresponds to
approximately a 23 USD increase in spending per week.


3.2    Spending and stock ownership

We also document that daily and weekly spending in certain brands for our user population is
correlated with holdings of that company's stock among Robinhood brokerage clients (the holdings
data is obtained from robintrack.com). Similar to our previous empirical strategy, we look at the
daily and weekly deviation of spending in a certain brand relative to the total amount of spending
on that day or in that week. We also look at holdings of a certain brand or company relative to all
other holdings of all other companies.
   In Table 10, we find that a 1% increase in holdings of a certain company is correlated with
spending in that company's stores by 0.12% controlling for company and date fixed effects. Ag-
gregated to the weekly level, this coefficient increases to 0.14%. We thus find a very strong positive
correlation in spending and stock ownership in observational data.
   In turn, we run the same analysis but using the Safegraph provided card level spending data
from Facteus that we described as part of the representativeness discussion in Section 2.2.
   In Table 11, we can see that the results line up sensibly. The safegraph card spending data
is positively correlated with Robinhood holdings at the daily and weekly levels. After including
brand and time fixed effects, the correlations are a bit lower for the Safegraph spending relative to
the Bumped spending. This likely reflects the fact that the Bumped population is more interested
in stocks (similar to Robinhood clients) than the overall population of younger bank customers as
in the Safegraph data.
   We argue that this result helps us to extrapolate our findings to actual spending and stock
ownership in brokerage accounts. Our results provide us with a causal estimate of the relationship

                                                 20
between spending and stockholdings. In turn, we also find in observational data from spending
and holdings in brokerage accounts that this relationship exists. We chose Robinhood brokerage
account data as Robinhood clients are likely a similar population as Bumped users.


3.3   Impact on brokerage account transfers

We observe brokerage account transfers for 2,156 of our users. Most of these users have a Robin-
hood or an Ameritrade account, while some users use E-trade or Schwab. Table 12 Column (1)
shows the log of brokerage amount transfers post 8 weeks of opening a user account, controlling
for all future weeks post 8 weeks of account opening, week-by-year fixed effects, and user fixed
effects. It can be seen that log brokerage account transfers increase by 2.7% in the 8 weeks of
account opening. Column (2) shows that the likelihood of brokerage account transfers by a user
post 8 weeks of opening an account increases by 1.4%. Relative to the baseline propensity to in-
vest, these coefficients represent an increase of approximately 5% in the amounts and likelihood
of investing. We see similar results for the case of transfers to a Robinhood brokerage account
(Column (3)) or a non Robinhood brokerage account (Column (4)). These results indicate that
not only users spend more on brands they get stocks as rewards from, but they also increasingly
transfer funds to their brokerage accounts. The stock rewards likely engage user with the stock
market on a more frequent and regular basis which increases their propensity to invest.



4     Robustness checks

4.1   Placebo tests
                    
Figure 14 shows the waitlist coefficients and standard errors for both eligible spending as well as
ineligible spending as the left-hand side variables. Again, spending is measured as the individual-
level percentage deviation from the sample average eligible spending in a given week. The co-


                                                21
efficients thus represent the percentage deviation in eligible spending after users signed up to be
waitlisted. As expected, there is no clear pattern in eligible or ineligible spending in the week that
users chose to sign up and get waitlisted.
   Note that, this specification can be seen as a placebo check. We would not expect a response
in either type of spending when individuals waitlist. The reason is that individuals do not have
much information about which companies are granting stock or which categories they can select
companies from, at the time of being waitlisted.


4.2    Randomization test for time waitlisted and grant receipt

There is substantial variation in the time between being waitlisted and receiving an account. The
average time individuals are waitlisted is longer than the 8-week windows we consider in our esti-
mations (mean of 135.06 days, and standard deviation of 97.95 days). Furthermore, who received
an account was decided on a first-come-first-serve basis given the company's business objectives
and constraints. At the time individuals are waitlisted, only individuals' email addresses but no
other information is known. In turn, they allocate accounts on a simple first-come-first-serve basis.
As a result the time spent on the waitlist can be considered quasi-random (uncorrelated with user
characteristics), and hard to predict by individual users. To confirm this, we perform a randomiza-
tion test regressing the time on the waitlist on individual-level characteristics. Column 1 of Table
13 shows that neither age, gender, or spending patterns before account opening are significant
predictors for the number of days in the waitlist. Furthermore, the R2 is very low (0.0023). As a
predictability test, we add a number of fixed effects in columns 2 and 3, to see how the R2 changes.
We find that the R2 remains low. The one exception are fixed effects for week-by-year of account
opening. Including them increases the R2 to 0.27. However, in contrast to the potential impact of
user characteristics, it is unlikely that individual users had an expectation of specific time trends
on the time it would take to get out of the waitlist. We thus conclude that users would not be able
to predict when they would receive their accounts, and it would be difficult for them to time their

                                                 22
spending to coincide with the week in which they received their actual accounts.
    As discussed, we can also perform a covariate balance test between grant recipients and non-
recipients, before they get off the waitlist. In Table 6 we can see that grant recipients are very
comparable to non-recipients in a number of observable characteristics, including age, as well as
eligible and ineligible spending.


4.3    Sample splits by time on waitlist

Additionally, we study heterogeneous treatment effects based on the time spent on the waitlist.
We do so splitting the sample according to the time individuals were waitlisted at. The results
for receiving an account for three terciles of the time individuals were waitlisted can be found in
Figure 15.


4.4    Substitution from cash spending

There is a concern that users might be withdrawing money post opening an account or may substi-
tute from cash transactions to card transactions. We look at net ATM withdrawals to address these
two possibilities. Table 14 Column (1) shows the net withdrawal ATM amount post 8 weeks of
opening an account, controlling for all future weeks post 8 weeks of account opening, week-by-
year fixed effects, and user fixed effects. Column (2) looks at the percentage deviation of ATM net
withdrawal amounts. An insignificant result in both columns show that increase in spending on
eligible brands by users is not associated with an increase in ATM withdrawals.



5     Stock ownership and self reported loyalty: survey evidence

We analyze the responses of 5 surveys sent to Bumped users between 2019 and 2020. The surveys
were designed and administered by the Bumped team. The number of respondents vary across
surveys, ranging from 358 to 673 respondents per survey. The specific questions in each survey

                                                23
are also different. We now discuss questions that help us understand the characteristics of users,
and their attitudes towards stock ownership and financial markets. For exposition purposes, we
modify the original numbering of the questions.
   The first question asks users about users' different financial instruments as follows:


      Q1. Do you own stock outside of Bumped? If so, where?

           A1.1 Employer-sponsored retirement funds (401k IRA etc).

           A1.2 Investments through other apps (Robinhood, Stash etc)

           A1.3 Traditional or managed investment account

           A1.4 Something else.


   The left panel of Figure 18 shows the fractions of users that responded yes to each of the 4
options presented. The right panel of Figure 18 shows the distribution of users according to the
number of positive answers provided by each user, which is indicative of the number of different
financial accounts held. We can see that the vast majority of survey respondents have at least one
financial account outside of Bumped. The majority have between 2 and 4 instruments, suggesting
that there exposure to the stock market is not limited to their stock rewards.
   The second question asks users about their attitudes towards the brands for which they have
received stock rewards.


      Q2. Since signing up for Bumped... (select all that apply)

           A2.1 I have told my friends about companies I own through Bumped

           A2.2 I have shopped less with competitors of companies I own through Bumped

           A2.3 I have paid more for something because I am an owner of the company
           through Bumped



                                                 24
           A2.4 I have traveled farther or gone out of my way to shop at companies I own
           through Bumped

           A2.5 I haven't done any of these


   Figure 19 shows that, since starting to use the app, almost 50% of users shop less with com-
peting brands, about 20% report to pay more because they are owners of the brand, and almost
50% reported going out of their way or travel longer distances to shop on brands they own. The
responses are consistent with our spending results and the results in Aspara (2009). Overall, these
responses suggest that stock ownership leads to increased brand loyalty.
   The third question asks users about users likelihood of investing outside of Bumped in the
future, as a results of owning stock through Bumped. Finally, the fourth question asks users about
their preferences for stock rewards over other types of rewards, on a likert scale.


      Q3. Does owning stock through Bumped make you more likely to invest outside
      of Bumped in the future?

           A3.1 No

           A3.2 Maybe

           A3.3 Yes


      Q4. In general, how excited do you feel about ownership (stock) compared to
      traditional rewards (points, coupons, cash back, and similar)?


           A4.1 Significantly less excited

           A4.2 Less excited

           A4.3 About the same

           A4.4 More excited


                                                 25
            A4.5 Significantly more excited


   Figure 20 shows that more than 53% of users responded that they are more likely to invest
outside of Bumped in the future, as a result of owning stock through Bumped. Figure 21 shows
that, not surprisingly, survey respondents strongly prefer stock rewards over traditional rewards
such as cash back, points, coupons and similar. Again, these results corroborate our empirical
findings that receiving stock rewards leads to more engagement with the stock market in general.
   Table 15 correlates the answers to question 4 with the answers provided in Questions 2 and 3.
Specifically, we include one dummy variable for every level of the likert scale in the right hand
side of the estimation equation. The omitted category represents users who report significantly
less or simply less excitement for stock rewards over other types of rewards (we pool those two
categories since, as expected, very few survey respondents selected them). Columns 1 to 3 show
that a preference for stock rewards is a strong predictor of loyalty. Similarly, Column 4 shows that
a preference for stock rewards over traditional rewards is also a strong predictor of increases in the
likelihood of investing outside of Bumped, as a result of owning stock through Bumped. Finally,
in Column 5 we test whether the correlation in Column 4 is concentrated on users who do not
invest already in different financial instruments. We interact the continuous likert scale measuring
preferences for stock rewards with the number of financial instruments reported on question 1, and
regress the interaction terms with the corresponding main effects against the self-reported increases
in the likelihood of investing outside of Bumped as a result of owning stock through Bumped. We
find that the correlation of preferences for stock rewards, and the likelihood to invest outside of
Bumped as a result of owning stock through Bumped, is present across the distribution of the
number of financial instruments reported in question 2 (the main effect of preference for stok is
positive and significant, while the interaction coefficient is not statistically significant). Users who
invest in several or few financial instruments outside of Bumped are equally likely to increase their
likelihood of investing outside of Bumped, as a result of owning stock through Bumped. Overall,



                                                  26
these results suggest that there are non-pecuniary benefits of owning stock and these benefits affect
both spending and investment decisions.



6    Psychological mechanisms

Our empirical results show that stock rewards leads to large increases on consumption, that are
not commensurate with the small monetary value of the reward. We argue that, in addition to the
monetary rewards, users receive non-pecuniary benefits that trigger loyalty, i.e. a preference for
a specific brand that goes beyond the consumption experience. In general, any reward program,
based on stock, cash or any other payoff, can lead to loyalty if the reward is perceived as a gift that
triggers reciprocity and affect. In that sense, affect and gift exchange are potential mechanisms
behind the general result that reward programs lead to large increases in consumption.


Affect and Gift exchange Individuals tend to rely on affective feelings when making decisions
(Slovic et al. (2007)). A reward in the form of stocks is likely to accentuate the feelings of affect
that the individuals have towards the company and to positively influence their consumption de-
cisions (Li and Petrick (2008)). The award of shares should be perceived by the customers as a
gesture of goodwill. This perception is expected to enforce the affection of the shareholders and, in
turn, alter their behaviors that positively impact the company. More generally, people are inclined
to have a positive view of themselves and their associations (Greenwald and Banaji (1995)). Given
that stock owners are likely to identify more closely with the firm (Turner and Tajfel (1986)) and
with the shareholder community, the positive views investors have about themselves can result in
additional company-specific feelings affect.
    Similarly, gift exchange can also enhance the effectiveness of rewards. It refers to the phe-
nomenon that the same objects are valued more if acquired or received as gift, rather than if bought.
Gift exchange typically refers to altruistic behavior where the identity and intentions of the sender



                                                  27
matter (see Kube et al., 2012). In our setting, users are involved in a transactional relationship by
which they get rewarded in exchange for specific behavior. Furthermore, the company rewarding
the stocks can be thought of as a third party. However, if users perceive the stock rewards as an
unconditional gift that ultimately came from companies that cooperate with Bumped, then gift ex-
change would be a relevant mechanism behind the effects we see. The stock grant promotional
program, however, was funded and administered by Bumped. Still, we see a spending response
not only in all eligible spending but specifically in spending at those brands of which individuals
received grants.
   In addition to the general gift exchange and affect effects, the currency of the rewards and
grants may enhance their impact on loyalty and consumption. While we are not able to provide
conclusive evidence of an incremental effect of stock rewards over cash re-wards, compared to the
results in the literature about the impact of cash-back on spending, our results are substantially
larger. In the following, we present a number of psychological mechanisms that may be behind the
large effect of rewards that are specifically in the form of stock.


Familiarity Prior research suggests that customer-stockholders are subject to a familiarity bias,
i.e., they tend to gain more exposure towards the stocks they know. As a result, familiarity-biased
investors hold portfolios containing fewer number of stocks (Cao et al. (2009)) and are less well
diversified (Heath and Tversky (1991), Huberman (2001), Keloharju et al. (2012)). It can be
assumed that investors are more active in collecting information about the invested-in company
and that, in turn, they become more familiar with it. An increase in familiarity can breed positive
behaviors by investors, by leveraging the gift exchange, cognitive dissonance, or effect heuristic
channels (Zajonc (1980), Moreland and Zajonc (1982)).


Cognitive dissonance By cognitive dissonance, we refer to the mental discomfort deriving from
simultaneous and conflicting beliefs or behaviors. This status leads to an alteration in either the



                                                  28
beliefs or behaviors to reduce the dissonance and restore balance (Festinger (1962), Gilbert et al.
(1998)). In the context of share ownership, investors experience cognitive dissonance when tak-
ing actions that do not support the invested-in company. To ease the discomfort, shareowners
can change their beliefs by, for example, acknowledging that their individualistic choices are not
important enough to tip the scales for the firm.
   Alternatively, investors could change their behaviors in a way that is favorable for the company
(e.g. by avoiding buying substitute products from a competitor). Gilbert and Ebert (2002) have
shown that individuals are more likely to act not in a fully rational manner, if the decisions are
reversible ex-ante.
   Upon receiving shares, we expect customers to feel as part of a community and to perceive
it as a betrayal if they engage in behavior that can damage the company. In line with Gilbert
and Ebert (2002), we assume that customers are able to ex-ante tell which behaviors could cause
them discomfort. Consequently, customers are expected to act coherently with the goal of avoiding
experiencing cognitive dissonance (e.g. they would not buy products of other companies, but rather
drive an increase in the consumption of company products).


Illusion of control   Receiving the shares of a certain company may make individuals believe that
their actions are able to affect the company's stock price. Despite atomistic behaviors having a
very small probability to produce tangible outcomes (Feddersen (2004)), by believing so investors
tend to make decisions that positively affect the company's share price, and consequently their
investments' value. The reason for this behavior is that individuals tend to overestimate the like-
lihood of small probability events (Lichtenstein et al. (1978), Fox and Tversky (1998)) and their
ability to influence events they demonstrably cannot (Langer (1975)). Given that the stock grant
promotional program was funded and administered by Bumped. This mechanism could explain
why we see more spending at the brands of which individuals received stock in response to the
grant. While individual spending could not effectively affect stock prices, illusion of control could


                                                   29
also trigger alignment of incentives, giving stock rewards a similar role to that of stock compen-
sation in corporations (Hochberg and Lindsey, 2010; Oyer and Schaefer, 2005; Altinkemer and
Ozcelik, 2009).



7    Conclusion

In this study, we quantify the effects of receiving stocks from certain brands on spending in the
brand's stores. We use data from a new FinTech app called Bumped that opens a brokerage account
for their users and rewards them with company stock when they shop at previously elected brands
and stores in several retail categories. For identification, we use the staggered distribution of
brokerage accounts over time after individuals had signed up for a waitlist. To lend credibility to
our identification strategy, we show that the average time spent waitlisted equals 4.7 months, we
perform a randomization test for time waitlisted, and we split our sample by the time users spent on
the waitlist. Finally, we show that there is no spending response to users waitlisting. Additionally,
we utilize the fact that users received stock grants of certain companies at different points in time,
as part of a promotional program.
    We show that customers increase their spending at the selected brands after receiving stock
rewards in their brokerage accounts. Weekly spending at selected brands jumps up by 40% and
stays persistently high for 3 to 6 months. In terms of USD, eligible spending averages 54 USD per
week so this corresponds to approximately a 23 USD increase in spending per week. We can rule
out a decrease larger than 5% in the weeks after account opening, from a basis of 292 USD per
week. We can thus say with statistical confidence that the offsetting impact on ineligible spending
was smaller than 16 USD.
    When users are granted with a certain company's stock, we find a weekly spending response of
100% at the brands of which individuals received stock grants. For these users, we also find a more
persistent eligible spending response to account opening as the grant was received in that same


                                                 30
week. Finally, for internal company reasons, not all eligible spending got ultimately rewarded. We
thus use variation in the amount of spending that got rewarded to show that users respond more
persistently if they get rewarded on a more consistent basis.
   We argue that our findings cannot be fully explained by a pure price effect, i.e., we would not
expect individuals to change their spending behavior in such a material way in response to rewards
ranging from 1% to 2%. Using survey evidence and data on transfers to brokerage accounts, we
argue that loyalty appears to be the dominant psychological mechanism explaining the spending
responses. As with any reward program this loyalty could be triggered by gift exchange and affect,
if consumers perceive the rewards as a positive gesture from the companies. Furthermore, famil-
iarity, illusion of control and reductions in cognitive dissonance could explain the enhanced effect
of stock rewards, relative to estimates in the literature for the effect of cash-back rewards.
   When interpreted along with the existing literature that documents the effect of brand loyalty
on investments (Cohen, 2009; Aspara, 2009), our results suggest that there are feedback effects by
which stock ownership leads to spending loyalty and additional investments, which leads to more
stable cash flows and increases in firm value (Larkin, 2013; Dou et al., 2019).




                                                  31
References
Aghion, P., Van Reenen, J., Zingales, L., 2013. Innovation and institutional ownership. American
  economic review 103, 277­304.
Almazan, A., Hartzell, J.C., Starks, L.T., 2005. Active institutional shareholders and costs of
  monitoring: Evidence from executive compensation. Financial management 34, 5­34.
Altinkemer, K., Ozcelik, Y., 2009. Cash-back rewards versus equity-based electronic loyalty pro-
  grams in e-commerce. Information Systems and E-Business Management 7, 39­55.
Aridor, G., Che, Y.K., Nelson, W., Salz, T., 2020. The economic consequences of data privacy
  regulation: Empirical evidence from gdpr. Available at SSRN .
Aspara, J., 2009. Stock ownership as a motivation of brand-loyal and brand-supportive behaviors.
  Journal of Consumer Marketing .
Aspara, J., Nyman, H., Tikkanen, H., 2009. The interrelationship of stock ownership and customer
  relationship volume: case of a nordic retail bank. Journal of Financial Services Marketing 14,
  203­217.
Aspara, J., Tikkanen, H., 2010. Consumers' stock preferences beyond expected financial returns:
  The influence of product and brand evaluations. International Journal of Bank Marketing 28,
  193­221.
Aspara, J., Tikkanen, H., 2011. Individuals' affect-based motivations to invest in stocks: Beyond
  expected financial returns and risks. Journal of Behavioral Finance 12, 78­89.
Baker, S.R., 2018. Debt and the response to household income shocks: Validation and application
  of linked financial account data. Journal of Political Economy 126, 1504­1557.
Bernard, D., Cade, N.L., Hodge, F., 2018. Investor behavior and the benefits of direct stock
  ownership. Journal of Accounting Research 56, 431­466.
Cao, H.H., Han, B., Hirshleifer, D., Zhang, H.H., 2009. Fear of the unknown: Familiarity and
  economic decisions. Review of Finance 15, 173­206.
Chen, M.A., Wu, Q., Yang, B., 2019. How valuable is fintech innovation? The Review of Financial
  Studies 32, 2062­2106.
Chen, X., Harford, J., Li, K., 2007. Monitoring: Which institutions matter? Journal of financial
  Economics 86, 279­305.
Cohen, L., 2009. Loyalty-based portfolio choice. The Review of Financial Studies 22, 1213­1245.
D'Acunto, F., Prabhala, N., Rossi, A.G., 2019. The promises and pitfalls of robo-advising. The
  Review of Financial Studies 32, 1983­2020.
Dou, W., Ji, Y., Reibstein, D., Wu, W., 2019. Inalienable customer capital, corporate liquidity, and
  stock returns. Journal of Finance, forthcoming .
Falk, A., 2007. Gift exchange in the field. Econometrica 75, 1501­1511.
Fama, E.F., French, K.R., 2007. Disagreement, tastes, and asset prices. Journal of financial
  economics 83, 667­689.
Feddersen, T.J., 2004. Rational choice theory and the paradox of not voting. Journal of Economic
  perspectives 18, 99­112.
Festinger, L., 1962. A theory of cognitive dissonance. volume 2. Stanford university press.
Fox, C.R., Tversky, A., 1998. A belief-based account of decision under uncertainty. Management
  science 44, 879­895.

                                                32
Frieder, L., Subrahmanyam, A., 2005. Brand perceptions and the market for common stock. Jour-
  nal of financial and Quantitative Analysis 40, 57­85.
Ganong, P., Noel, P., 2019. How Does Unemployment Affect Consumer Spending? Technical
  Report. Working paper.
Gelman, M., Kariv, S., Shapiro, M.D., Silverman, D., Tadelis, S., 2015. How Individuals Smooth
  Spending: Evidence from the 2013 Government Shutdown Using Account Data. Working Pa-
  per 21025. National Bureau of Economic Research. URL: http://www.nber.org/papers/
  w21025, doi:10.3386/w21025.
Gilbert, D.T., Ebert, J.E., 2002. Decisions and revisions: The affective forecasting of changeable
  outcomes. Journal of personality and social psychology 82, 503.
Gilbert, D.T., Pinel, E.C., Wilson, T.D., Blumberg, S.J., Wheatley, T.P., 1998. Immune neglect: a
  source of durability bias in affective forecasting. Journal of personality and social psychology
  75, 617.
Goldstein, I., Jiang, W., Karolyi, G.A., 2019. To fintech and beyond. The Review of Financial
  Studies 32, 1647­1661.
Greenwald, A.G., Banaji, M.R., 1995. Implicit social cognition: attitudes, self-esteem, and stereo-
  types. Psychological review 102, 4.
Heath, C., Tversky, A., 1991. Preference and belief: Ambiguity and competence in choice under
  uncertainty. Journal of risk and uncertainty 4, 5­28.
Hochberg, Y.V., Lindsey, L., 2010. Incentives, targeting, and firm performance: An analysis of
  non-executive stock options. The Review of Financial Studies 23, 4148­4186.
Huberman, G., 2001. Familiarity breeds investment. The Review of Financial Studies 14, 659­680.
Keloharju, M., Knüpfer, S., Linnainmaa, J., 2012. Do investors buy what they know? product
  market choices and investment decisions. The Review of Financial Studies 25, 2921­2958.
Kessler, J.B., 2013. When will there be gift exchange? addressing the lab-field debate with labo-
  ratory gift exchange experiments .
Koustas, D., 2018. Consumption insurance and multiple jobs: Evidence from rideshare drivers.
  Unpublished working paper .
Kube, S., Maréchal, M.A., Puppe, C., 2012. The currency of reciprocity: Gift exchange in the
  workplace. American Economic Review 102, 1644­62.
Kuchler, T., Pagel, M., 2019. Sticking to Your Plan: Hyperbolic Discounting and Credit Card Debt
  Paydown. Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming .
Langer, E.J., 1975. The illusion of control. Journal of personality and social psychology 32, 311.
Larkin, Y., 2013. Brand perception, cash flow stability, and financial policy. Journal of Financial
  Economics 110, 232­253.
Li, X., Petrick, J.F., 2008. Examining the antecedents of brand loyalty from an investment model
  perspective. Journal of Travel Research 47, 25­34.
Lichtenstein, S., Slovic, P., Fischhoff, B., Layman, M., Combs, B., 1978. Judged frequency of
  lethal events. Journal of experimental psychology: Human learning and memory 4, 551.
Loos, B., Meyer, S., Pagel, M., 2018. The consumption effects of the disposition to sell winners
  and hold on to losers. Working Paper .
Lou, D., 2014. Attracting investor attention through advertising. The Review of Financial Studies


                                                33
  27, 1797­1829.
MacGregor, D.G., Slovic, P., Dreman, D., Berry, M., 2000. Imagery, affect, and financial judgment.
  The Journal of Psychology and Financial Markets 1, 104­110.
Medina, P.C., 2020. Side Effects of Nudging: Evidence from a Randomized Intervention in the
  Credit Card Market. Review of Financial Studies .
Meyer, S., Pagel, M., 2018. Fully closed: Individual responses to realized capital gains and losses.
  Working Paper .
Moreland, R.L., Zajonc, R.B., 1982. Exposure effects in person perception: Familiarity, similarity,
  and attraction. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 18, 395­415.
Olafsson, A., Pagel, M., 2018. The liquid hand-to-mouth: Evidence from personal finance man-
  agement software. Review of Financial Studies 31, 4398­4446.
Oyer, P., Schaefer, S., 2005. Why do some firms give stock options to all employees?: An empirical
  examination of alternative theories. Journal of financial Economics 76, 99­133.
Schoenbachler, D.D., Gordon, G.L., Aurand, T.W., 2004. Building brand loyalty through individ-
  ual stock ownership. Journal of Product & Brand Management 13, 488­497.
Slovic, P., Finucane, M.L., Peters, E., MacGregor, D.G., 2007. The affect heuristic. European
  journal of operational research 177, 1333­1352.
Turner, J.C., Tajfel, H., 1986. The social identity theory of intergroup behavior. Psychology of
  intergroup relations 5, 7­24.
Vallee, B., Zeng, Y., 2019. Marketplace lending: a new banking paradigm? The Review of
  Financial Studies 32, 1939­1982.
Vana, P., Lambrecht, A., Bertini, M., 2018. Cashback is cash forward: delaying a discount to
  entice future spending. Journal of Marketing Research 55, 852­868.
Zajonc, R.B., 1980. Feeling and thinking: Preferences need no inferences. American psychologist
  35, 151.




                                                34
Figures and tables




Figure 1: The Bumped app: screenshots of brand selection, switching brands, and linked card
screens




                                            35
Figure 2: The Bumped app: screenshots of transactions and portfolio screens




            Figure 3: Stock grant notification received by users




                                    36
Figure 4: Number of users in our data subsample who were waitlisted and received an account




         Figure 5: Number of users in our data subsample who received stock grants




                                            37
Figure 6: Users by 5-digit zip code in the US




                     38
     Figure 7: Ratio of eligible and ineligible spending by week relative to account opening




                Eligible spending                                 Ineligible spending

                                                       
Figure 8: This figure shows the coefficient estimates Bumped   in Specification 1 for both eligible
and ineligible spending (defined as the percentage deviation from the individual-level mean). We
control for individual and week-by-year fixed effects and consider 8 weeks before and after re-
ceiving the account. Standard errors are shown as the dotted lines and clustered at the individual
level.




                                                39
        Eligible spending for grant recipients              Eligible spending for grant non-recipients

                                                           
Figure 9: This figure shows the coefficient estimates Bumped     in Specification 1 separately for
individuals who received the grant and those who did not and eligible spending (defined as the
percentage deviation from the individual-level mean). We control for individual and week-by-year
fixed effects and consider 8 weeks before and after receiving the account. Standard errors are
shown as the dotted lines and clustered at the individual level.




                  Eligible spending                   Eligible spending at brands of which stock was granted

                                                          
Figure 10: This figure shows the coefficient estimates Grant    in Specification 2 for both eligible
overall spending and eligible spending at the brands of which users received stock grants (defined
as the percentage deviation from the individual-level mean). We control for individual and week-
by-year fixed effects and consider 8 weeks before and after individuals received the stock grant.
Standard errors are shown as the dotted lines and clustered at the individual level.




                                                 40
Incremental effect of grant receivers on eligible spending   Incremental effect of grant receivers on eligible spending
                                                                                  in grant brands

                                                          
Figure 11: This figure shows the coefficient estimates BG    in Specification 3, i.e., the incremen-
tal effect of grant receivers on all eligible and grant brand spending (defined as the percentage
deviation from the individual-level mean) post account opening. We control for individual and
week-by-year fixed effects and consider 8 weeks before and after individuals received the stock
grant. Standard errors are shown as the dotted lines and clustered at the individual level.




                                                         41
   Grocery ­ Eligible spending         Burgers ­ Eligible spending         Coffee ­ Eligible spending




   Grocery ­ Ineligible spending      Burgers ­ Ineligible spending       Coffee ­ Ineligible spending




  Superstores ­ Eligible spending    Ride Share ­ Eligible spending     Drug Stores ­ Eligible spending




 Superstores ­ Ineligible spending   Ride Share ­ Ineligible spending   Drug Stores ­ Ineligible spending

                                                       
Figure 12: This figure shows the coefficient estimates Bumped  in Specification 1 for the six most
popular rewarded categories, which are grocery, burgers, coffee, superstores, ride share, and drug
stores. We control for individual and week-by-year fixed effects and consider 8 weeks before and
after receiving the account. Standard errors are shown as the dotted lines and clustered at the
individual level.

                                                   42
   Eligible spending 3 months after account opening        Eligible spending 6 months after account opening

                                                         
Figure 13: This figure shows the coefficient estimates Bumped   in Specification 1 for eligible spend-
ing (defined as the percentage deviation from the individual-level mean). We control for individual
and week-by-year fixed effects and consider 3 and 6 months after receiving the account. Standard
errors are shown as the dotted lines and clustered at the individual level.




                  Eligible spending                                      Ineligible spending

                                                           
Figure 14: This figure shows the coefficient estimates waitlist  in Specification 4 for both eligible
and ineligible spending (defined as the percentage deviation from the individual-level mean). We
control for individual and week-by-year fixed effects and consider 8 weeks before and after indi-
viduals signed up for the waitlist. Standard errors are shown as the dotted lines and clustered at the
individual level.




                                                      43
        Waitlisted shortly                Medium waitlisted                 Waitlisted for long

                                                        
Figure 15: This figure shows the coefficient estimates Bumped   in Specification 1 for three terciles
of time spent being waitlisted and eligible spending (defined as the percentage deviation from the
individual-level mean). We control for individual and week-by-year fixed effects and consider 8
weeks before and after receiving the account. Standard errors are shown as the dotted lines and
clustered at the individual level.




     Small fraction rewarded           Medium fraction rewarded           Large fraction rewarded

                                                        
Figure 16: This figure shows the coefficient estimates Bumped  in Specification 1 for three terciles
of actually rewarded as a fraction of eligible spending (defined as the percentage deviation from
the individual-level mean). We control for individual and week-by-year fixed effects and consider
8 weeks before and after receiving the Bumped account. Standard errors are shown as the dotted
lines and clustered at the individual level.




                                                 44
       Low attention users              Medium attention users              High attention users

                                                         
Figure 17: This figure shows the coefficient estimates Bumped    in Specification 1 for three terciles
of user attention, defined by the login counts per user. We control for individual and week-by-
year fixed effects and consider 8 weeks before and after receiving the account. Standard errors are
shown as the dotted lines and clustered at the individual level.




                                                 45
Figure 18: This figure shows the responses to a survey of 1,160 users who were asked about
their investing experience, "Do you own stock outside of Bumped? If so, where? 1. Employer-
sponsored retirement funds (401k, IRA etc), 2. Traditional or managed investment account, 3.
Investments through other apps (Robinhood, Stash etc), 4. Something else". Since users were
allowed to select more than one category, the right panel shows the distribution of number of
different categories (or accounts) selected.




Figure 19: This figure shows responses of 1485 users who were asked to select all that applies for
the following question: "Since signing up for Bumped... 1. told my friends about companies I own
through Bumped, 2. shopped less with competitors of companies owned through Bumped, 3. paid
more for something because of owning a company through Bumped, 4. traveled farther or gone
our of my way to shop at companies owned through Bumped, 5. none of these".




                                               46
Figure 20: This figure shows responses of 1,160 users who were asked the following question:
"Does owning stock through Bumped make you more likely to invest outside of Bumped in the
future? 1. No, 2. Maybe, 3. Yes".




Figure 21: This figure shows responses of 2,287 users who were asked: "In general, how excited do
you feel about ownership (stock) compared to traditional rewards (points, coupons, cash back, and
similar)? 1. Significantly less excited than traditional rewards, 2. Less excited than traditional re-
wards, 3. About the same as traditional rewards, 4. More than traditional rewards, 5. Significantly
more than traditional rewards.




                                                 47
 Table 1: Summary statistics of Bumped.com users who open their account on the same week in
                     which they came out of the waitlist, or a week after


                                 Mean     Std dev   25th percentile   50th percentile   75th percentile

           Age                36           9.5            29                34                41
           Male              .68           .47            0                  1                1
 Days from waitlist to open  137           99             71               116               164
   Monthly user logins       4.6           9.6           1.4               2.2               3.8
    Weekly user logins         2           2.9             1               1.3               1.8
  Number of transactions     730           748           263               561               996
  Number of cards linked     2.4           1.9             1                 2                 3
    Monthly spending        1,795         8,733          702              1,194             1,952
     Weekly spending         494          2,342          203               333               525
 Weekly eligible spending     71           268            17                42                86
 Weekly ineligible spending 423           2,321          165               273               439
       Total rewards          37            65           6.3                18                46
     Monthly rewards           2           2.9           .47               1.2               2.5
     Weekly rewards          .53           .72           .13               .32               .67
 Weekly rewarded/eligible    .67           .26           .47               .71                .9
        Observations             9378


Notes: This table includes users using Bumped.com who have account open week same as the offwaitlist
week or a week after, which are 9,378. The total number of transactions, and spending (in USD), calulated
per user include amounts before and after opening the app. Rewards are in USD.




                                                    48
Table 2: Summary statistics of Bumped.com users having account open week same as offwaitlist
                          week or a week after who received a grant


                                 Mean     Std dev   25th percentile   50th percentile   75th percentile

            Age               37           9.5            30                35                42
           Male              .69           .46            0                  1                1
 Days from waitlist to open  197           88            125               164               268
   Monthly user logins       4.9           9.2           1.7               2.7               4.5
    Weekly user logins       2.2           2.7             1               1.4                 2
  Number of transactions     595           603           177               432               847
  Number of cards linked     2.2           1.7             1                 2                 3
    Monthly spending        1,801         5,480          716              1,215             1,947
     Weekly spending         519          1,860          210               342               523
 Weekly eligible spending     70           165            18                42                84
 Weekly ineligible spending 449           1,846          169               287               442
       Total rewards          25            66            4                 11                29
     Monthly rewards         1.8           2.9           .39               1.1               2.2
     Weekly rewards          .48           .76           .11               .29               .58
 Weekly rewarded/eligible    .63            .3           .38                .7                .9
    Total grant amount        10           4.2            10                10                10
        Observations             1371


Notes: Out of the 9,378 users enrolled in Bumped.com for whom account open week is same as offwaitlist
week or a week after, 1,371 users were also part of the grant promotion program who received the grant in
the week of account opening. The total number of transactions, and spending (in USD), calulated per user
include amounts before and after opening the app. Rewards and grants are in USD.




                                                    49
 Table 3: Summary statistics of Bumped.com users who open their account on the same week in
           which they came out of the waitlist, or a week after post adjustments to data

                                                     Mean   Std dev   25th percentile   50th percentile   75th percentile

            Age                                          36   9.4           29                34                41
            Male                                        .68   .47            0                 1                1
            Days from waitlist to open                  135    98          70                115               162
            Monthly user logins                         4.6   9.7          1.4               2.2               3.8
            Weekly user logins                          2.1   2.9            1               1.3               1.8
            Monthly spending                           1,496 3,455        648               1,074             1,741
            Weekly spending                             350   805         153                252               409
            Monthly eligible spending                   237   910          55                138               285
            Weekly eligible spending                     56   211          13                 32                67
            Monthly ineligible spending                1,258 3,293        530                880              1,440
            Weekly ineligible spending                  295   767         124                206               339
            Grant weekly elgible spending                 1   7.2            0                 0                0
            Grant weekly inelgible spending              22   348           0                 0                 0
            Monthly eligible spending - grocery          49   130           0                 0                30
            Monthly ineligible spending - grocery        64   151          1.4                16                71
            Monthly eligible spending - superstores      31   102           0                 0                9.4
            Monthly ineligible spending - superstores    78   236          4.5                23                80
            Monthly eligible spending - ride sharing     14    46           0                 0                8.9
            Monthly ineligible spending - ride sharing   20    48           0                2.8               18
            Total rewards                                37    61          6.8                19                47
            Monthly rewards                             1.7   2.3          .44                 1               2.2
            Weekly rewards                               .4   .53           .1               .24               .51
            Total rewarded/eligible                     .69   .26           .5               .74               .92
            Monthly rewarded/eligible                   .61   .28          .39               .58               .89
            Weekly rewarded/eligible                    .65   .27          .43               .67               .91
            Monthly user brokerage transfers           2,001 10,264       200                545              1,561
            Weekly user brokerage transfers            1,424 9,697        134                340               974
            Monthly ATM withdrawals                    -465 4,027         -296                64               227
            Weekly ATM withdrawals                     -233 1,731         -163                44               132
            Observations                             9005


Notes: Bumped.com users in the final dataset that pass the following tests are 9,005: All linked cards have
more than 36 weeks of at least 2 transactions per week and 5 transactions per month around the waitlist,
account open, and grant dates. The week of account open equals the week when the user was off waitlisted
or a week after off waitlist. The week of grant receipt equals the week of account open or a week after
account open. If selections are made before account open, opening date of the account is shifted to the date
of selection by user. Total number of transactions, and spending (in USD), calculated per user include
amounts before and after opening the app. Rewards are in USD.




                                                             50
   Table 4: Comparison of summary statistics with the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX)

             Variable             Consumer Expenditure Survey 2018     Bumped users
                 Age                               51.1                         36
                Men                                 0.47                       0.68
         Monthly spending                          2,205                      1,496
     Monthly grocery Spending                       148                        114
    Monthly restaurant spending                    114.4                        32
  Monthly transportation spending                    27                         34
       Monthly drug spending                         16                        23.7
Notes: The Consumer Expenditure Survey 2018 is conducted at the household level. Figures in Column (1)
are obtained by dividing those numbers by the average household size of 2.52 for comparison with
individual level Bumped data in Column (2).




                                                 51
Table 5: Estimation results of brand spending by Bumped users on Safegraph card spending of that
brand

                                      Daily spending in brands            Weekly spending in brands
                                      relative to total spending           relative to total spending
                                            Bumped users                         Bumped users
    Daily spending in brand         0.476       0.243       0.240
    relative to total spending      (0.007)     (0.016)     (0.016)
          Safegraph data

                                                                         0.442       0.705       0.705
   Weekly spending in brand
                                                                         (0.015)     (0.040)     (0.041)
   relative to total spending
         Safegraph data
              Brand
          fixed effects
      Date or week-by-year
          fixed effects
          Observations               19396       19396       19396        3528        3430         3430
         Adj. R squared              0.212       0.886       0.883        0.195       0.938        0.936


Robust standard errors in parentheses *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Notes: In this specification we regress the total daily (weekly) spending in all publicly traded brands of all
Bumped users on spending in those brands from the Safegraph card spending data. Date (week-by-year)
fixed effects refer to any day (week) of the sample period and brand fixed effects for any publicly traded
brand. The time period and selection of brands/tickers is constrained by the Bumped data, however, not all
tickers could be matched to the brand spending information in the Safegraph data and we only kept
unambiguous matches of the top 200 spending brands in the Safegraph data. The relative Bumped and
Safegraph spending data are normalized by their respective standard deviations.




                                                      52
Table 6: Covariate balance check between grant and non-grant receivers before getting off the
waitlist

               Variable                  Non-Grant Receivers        Grant Receivers      Difference
             Age (Years)                          35.88                   36.73              0.85
                                                                                           (0.280)
  Number of transactions per user                328.70                  301.28            -27.41
                                                                                           (8.259)
         Monthly spending                       1,095.36                1,076.83           -18.52
                                                                                          (78.864)
          Weekly spending                        285.52                  304.83            19.30
                                                                                          (20.217)
     Eligible monthly spending                   141.23                  132.93             -8.30
                                                                                          (23.685)
     Eligible weekly spending                     36.05                   37.91              1.85
                                                                                           (5.521)
    Ineligible monthly spending                  954.12                  943.90            -10.21
                                                                                          (74.191)
    Ineligible weekly spending                   249.47                  266.92             17.45
                                                                                          (19.244)
Notes: We test for covariate balance using a difference in means t-test by estimating equation,
y =  +  · GR + , where y takes on different variables as above, and GR takes on value 1 if a user is a
grant receiver and takes on 0 if the user did not receive a grant. Data is at the user-level. There are 1,295
users who received a grant and 7,710 users who did not receive a grant. Column 1 and 2 present the
average values of each dependent variable for non-grant and grant recipients respectively before getting off
the waitlist. Column 3 shows the coefficient of the grant indicator, i.e.,  and standard errors in parenthesis.




                                                      53
 Table 7: Estimation results of Bumped users on log spending amounts post account opening or
                                     receiving the grant

                                          All spending         Spending on grant brands

                                      Eligible    Ineligible    Eligible       Ineligible

                   Post 8 weeks      0.711        0.157        0.041           0.029
                                     (0.017)      (0.016)      (0.003)         (0.007)

                 Post more than
                                     0.669        0.083        0.021            -0.008
                    8 weeks
                                      (0.025)      (0.024)      (0.004)         (0.008)

                     Constant        2.067        4.671        0.031           0.362
                                     (0.017)      (0.016)      (0.002)         (0.004)

                      User
                  fixed effects
                  Week-by-year
                  fixed effects
                  Observations        236639       236639       840908          840908
                 Adj. R squared        0.407        0.371        0.356           0.734


Standard errors clustered at the user level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Notes: In this specification we regress log eligible and ineligible spending overall and specifically in grant
brands on a post 8 weeks dummy, which takes value 1 for transactions during or within 8 weeks of
receiving grant, and on a post more than 8 weeks dummy, which takes value 1 for transactions more than 8
weeks post account opening or receiving grant and 0 otherwise. User fixed effects and week fixed effects
are included.




                                                     54
    Table 8: Estimation results of spending ratios post account opening or receiving the grant

                                         All spending          Spending on grant brands

                                     Eligible    Ineligible    Eligible       Ineligible

                  Post 8 weeks       0.384        -0.036       0.934           -0.303
                                     (0.068)      (0.023)      (0.311)         (0.197)

                 Post more than
                                     0.695         -0.059      1.432          0.376
                    8 weeks
                                      (0.147)     (0.056)      (0.516)         (0.135)

                     Constant        1.071        1.157        0.782          1.275
                                     (0.088)      (0.033)      (0.165)        (0.054)

                      User
                  fixed effects
                  Week-by-year
                  fixed effects
                  Observations        229204      235683        44417           96775
                 Adj. R squared        0.167       0.121        0.026           0.084


Standard errors clustered at the user level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Notes: In this specification we regress ratio of eligible and ineligible spending overall and specifically in
grant brands on a post 8 weeks dummy, which takes value 1 for transactions during or within 8 weeks of
receiving grant, and on a post more than 8 weeks dummy, which takes value 1 for transactions more than 8
weeks post account opening or receiving grant and 0 otherwise. User fixed effects and week-by-year fixed
effects are included.




                                                     55
   Table 9: Estimation results of Bumped users on spending amounts post account opening or
                                      receiving the grant

                                        All spending          Spending on grant brands

                                    Eligible     Ineligible    Eligible      Ineligible

                Post 8 weeks       19.092          8.450      0.822           -3.410
                                    (1.618)      (14.172)     (0.157)         (4.238)

               Post more than
                                   22.467         -2.779      0.917            -0.619
                  8 weeks
                                    (3.012)      (17.009)      (0.230)        (2.826)

                   Constant        52.278       330.700       0.323          19.675
                                    (1.907)      (12.089)     (0.105)         (0.867)

                    User
                fixed effects
                Week-by-year
                fixed effects
                Observations        236639        236639       840908         840908
               Adj. R squared        0.783         0.272        0.053          0.194


Standard errors clustered at the user level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Notes: In this specification we regress eligible and ineligible spending overall and specifically in grant
brands on a post 8 weeks dummy, which takes value 1 for transactions during or within 8 weeks of
receiving grant, and on a post more than 8 weeks dummy, which takes value 1 for transactions more than 8
weeks post account opening or receiving grant and 0 otherwise. User fixed effects and week fixed effects
are included.




                                                   56
Table 10: Estimation results of Bumped users brand spending on Robinhood clients weekly hold-
ings of that brand

                                     Daily spending in brands            Weekly spending in brands
                                     relative to total spending           relative to total spending
                                           Bumped users                         Bumped users
        Daily number of        0.176          0.133        0.119
        holdings in brand      (0.007)        (0.009)      (0.010)
    relative to total holdings
       Robinhood clients
       Weekly number of                                                0.213       0.152       0.136
        holdings in brand                                              (0.018)     (0.015)     (0.016)
    relative to total holdings
       Robinhood clients
              Brand
           fixed effects
     Date or week-by-year
           fixed effects
          Observations             26958        26958       26958        4155        4155        4155
         Adj. R squared            0.022        0.891       0.889        0.032       0.951       0.950


Robust standard errors in parentheses *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Notes: In this specification we regress the total daily (weekly) spending in all publicly traded brands of all
Bumped users on the daily (weekly) holdings of that company by Robinhood brokerage clients data
obtained from robintrack.com. Date (week-by-year) fixed effects refer to any day (week) of the sample
period and brand fixed effects for any publicly traded brand. The sample time period is May 2018 to March
2020.




                                                     57
Table 11: Estimation results of Safegraph brand spending on Robinhood clients weekly holdings
of that brand

                                     Daily spending in brands            Weekly spending in brands
                                     relative to total spending           relative to total spending
                                     Safegraph card spending              Safegraph card spending
        Daily number of        0.270           0.052       0.043
        holdings in brand      (0.014)         (0.008)     (0.009)
    relative to total holdings
       Robinhood clients
       Weekly number of                                                0.160       0.074        0.074
        holdings in brand                                              (0.029)     (0.008)      (0.009)
    relative to total holdings
       Robinhood clients
              Brand
           fixed effects
     Date or week-by-year
           fixed effects
          Observations             19396        19396       19396        3528        3430        3430
         Adj. R squared            0.019        0.975       0.974        0.008       0.990       0.990


Robust standard errors in parentheses *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Notes: In this specification we regress the total daily (weekly) spending in all publicly traded brands of all
Safegraph card spending data on the daily (weekly) holdings of that company by Robinhood brokerage
clients data obtained from robintrack.com. Date (week-by-year) fixed effects refer to any day (week) of the
sample period and brand fixed effects for any publicly traded brand. The time period and selection of
brands/tickers is the same as in Table 10, however, not all tickers could be matched to the brand spending
information in the Safegraph data and we only kept unambiguous matches of the top 200 spending brands
in the Safegraph data.




                                                     58
      Table 12: Estimation results of transfers to brokerage accounts post account opening

                            Brokerage transfers               Likelihood of transfer

                                Log transfer          Any       Robinhood Non robinhood
                                  amount            account      account     account

          Post 8 weeks             0.017            0.012        0.002            0.010
                                   (0.009)          (0.002)      (0.001)          (0.002)

         Post more than
                                    0.018           0.028        0.002            0.025
            8 weeks
                                   (0.012)          (0.003)       (0.001)         (0.003)

             Constant             0.251             0.249        0.003            0.246
                                  (0.005)           (0.001)      (0.000)          (0.001)

              User
          fixed effects
          Week-by-year
          fixed effects
          Observations             958207           958207       958207           958207
         Adj. R squared             0.425            0.566        0.155            0.562


Standard errors clustered at the user level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Notes: In column (1), we regress log of brokerage account transfers on a post 8 weeks after account
opening dummy, which takes value 1 for transactions during or within 8 weeks of account opening, and on
a post more than 8 weeks dummy, which takes value 1 for transactions more than 8 weeks post account
opening and 0 otherwise. Column (1) has the log USD amount in transfers to brokerage accounts and
Columns (2) to (4) have the likelihood to transfer to a brokerage account as the outcome variables. User
fixed effects and week-by-year fixed effects are included.




                                                  59
               Table 13: Estimation results of time on waitlist on user characteristics

                                   Days on waitlist           Days on waitlist     Days on waitlist
                  Age                  -0.106                     -0.114               -0.068
                                      (0.120)                    (0.119)              (0.108)
                 Female                -2.084                     -2.608                0.225
                                      (2.893)                    (2.879)              (2.478)
            Weekly spending             0.004                     -0.000               -0.034
                                      (0.032)                    (0.032)              (0.030)
        Weekly ineligible spending      0.014                      0.014               0.054
                                      (0.033)                    (0.032)              (0.030)
        Weekly eligible spending       -0.070                     -0.036               -0.029
                                      (0.045)                    (0.045)              (0.041)

           Mean of Dep. Var.                  135.06               135.06               135.06
          Deciles of transaction-
              history-lenght
               fixed effects
              Week-by-year
           of account opening
               fixed effects
               Observations                  8477.000             8477.000             8470.000
              Adj. R squared                  0.002                0.038                0.263


Robust standard errors in parentheses *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Notes: In this specification we regress the number of days a user was waitlisted on user characteristics. All
variables are measured before account opening. Users only indicate their email address and names upon
being waitlisted so none of the characteristics are observable to the company at the time of being waitlisted.




                                                     60
             Table 14: Estimation results of ATM withdrawals post account opening

                                                   ATM withdrawals

                                              Net withdrawal Percentage
                                                  amount      deviation

                            Post 8 weeks          16.828           -3.086
                                                 (13.625)         (6.864)

                           Post more than
                                                  23.419          -22.271
                              8 weeks
                                                 (19.149)         (15.355)

                              Constant          -81.902           12.995
                                                  (8.451)         (6.838)

                               User
                           fixed effects
                           Week-by-year
                           fixed effects
                            Observations          958207          418108
                           Adj. R squared          0.124           0.024


Standard errors clustered at the user level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Notes: In column (1), we regress net ATM withdrawal amounts on a post 8 weeks after account opening
dummy, which takes value 1 for transactions during or within 8 weeks of account opening, and on a post
more than 8 weeks dummy, which takes value 1 for transactions more than 8 weeks post account opening
and 0 otherwise. Column (1) has the USD amounts in net ATM withdrawals and Column (2) has the
percentage deviation in net ATM withdrawals as the outcome variables. User fixed effects and
week-by-year fixed effects are included.




                                                  61
Table 15: Correlation between self-reported preference for stock rewards, loyalty and increases in
                         the likelihood of investing outside of Bumped

                                                                                       More Likely More Likely
                                               Paid More   Travel Further
                                Shop Less                                               to Invest   to Invest
                                                 Because     to Shop at
                             with Competitors                                          Outside of  Outside of
                                              of Ownership  Companies
                                   (Q2)                                                 Bumped      Bumped
                                                  (Q2)      Owned (Q2)
                                                                                          (Q3)        (Q3)

      Excited about
      stock rewards                0.083               -0.009            0.139             0.105
         (Same)
                                   (0.082)            (0.053)           (0.080)           (0.093)
      Excited about
      stock rewards               0.207                0.029            0.211             0.213
         (More)
                                   (0.074)            (0.049)           (0.071)           (0.084)
      Excited about
      stock rewards               0.254               0.131             0.348            0.388
   (Significantly more)
                                   (0.072)            (0.049)           (0.069)           (0.082)
      Excited about
      stock rewards                                                                                       0.096
         (Likert)
                                                                                                          (0.046)
 Number of instruments                                                                                    -0.030
                                                                                                          (0.096)
     Excited about
     stock rewards
                                                                                                              0.015
   (Likert) * Number
     of instruments
                                                                                                          (0.021)
                                                                                               
         Constant                 0.222               0.083             0.194            0.222             0.022
                                  (0.069)             (0.046)           (0.066)          (0.080)          (0.203)
    Mean of dep. var                0.46                0.20              0.48             0.52             0.52

      Observations                 1115                1115              1115              1160               1160
     Adj. R squared                0.014               0.021             0.031             0.046              0.046


For columns 1 to 4, the explanatory variables consists of a set of mutually exclusive dummy variables for
each value of the likert scale of question 4: "In general, how excited do you feel about ownership (stock)
compared to traditional rewards (points, coupons, cash back, and similar)?" The omitted category are the
two lowest levels of the likert scale (pooled). In columns 1,2 and 3 the dependent variable is binary, and
takes the value of 1 when a user reports shopping less with competitors since receiving stock rewards,
paying more because of ownership through Bumped62      or traveling further to shop at companies owned
through Bumped. In columns 4 and 5 the dependent variable is binary, and takes the value of 1 when a user
reports being more likely to invest outside of Bumped as a result of owning stock through Bumped. For
column 5, the set of explanatory variables consist of the continuous likert scale of question 4, the number
of financial instruments held by each user according to question 1, and their interaction. In columns.
Robust standard errors in parenthesis. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Appendix

Survey Questions
    Q1. We'd love to hear more about your experience in investing. Do you have any
    of the following? (Select all that apply)

         A1.1 Stock (in addition to what's in my Bumped account).
         A1.2 Retirement fund, such as a 401k or IRA.
         A1.3 Investment fund, such as mutual funds or exchange-traded funds (ETFs).
         A1.4 Bonds.
         A1.5 Education savings or 529 plan.
         A1.6 Something else. content...

    Q2. In general, how informed do you feel about investing?

    Q3. Since signing up for Bumped... (select all that apply)

         A3.1 I have told my friends about companies I own through Bumped
         A3.2 I have shopped less with competitors of companies I own through Bumped
         A3.3 I have paid more for something because I am an owner of the company
         through Bumped
         A3.4 I have traveled farther or gone out of my way to shop at companies I own
         through Bumped
         A3.5 I haven't done any of these

    Q4. As a reward for shopping with a company, would you rather receive 1. Stock
    in that company or 2. Air miles

    Q5. As a reward for shopping with a company, would you rather receive 1. Stock
    in that company or 2. Coupons

    Q6. As a reward for shopping with a company, would you rather receive 1. Stock
    in that company or 2. Cashback

    Q7. As a reward for shopping with a company, would you rather receive 1. Stock
    in that company or 2. Points

    Q8. How do you feel when you get a new stock reward through the Bumped app?

    Q9. In general, how excited do you feel about ownership (stock) compared to
    traditional rewards (points, coupons, cash back, and similar)?

                                            63
     A9.1 About the same
     A9.2 Less excited than traditional rewards
     A9.3 More excited than traditional rewards
     A9.4 Significantly less excited than traditional rewards
     A9.5 Significantly more excited than traditional rewards
     A9.6 Why?

Q10. Anything else you'd like to tell us?




                                         64
 Told friends about companies owned through Bumped        Shopped less with competitors of companies owned
                                                                          through Bumped




 Paid more because user is owner of company through        User traveled farther to shop at companies owned
                      Bumped                                                through Bumped




                                                                            None of these




Figure 22: This figure shows users' informedness of investing according to the survey responses of 358
users during the Fall of 2019. Users were asked "In general, how informed do you feel about investing?"
and had to rate from 1 to 10. Additionally, they were also asked to select all that applies for the following
question: "Since signing up for Bumped... 1. told my friends about companies I own through Bumped, 2.
shopped less with competitors of companies owned 65 through Bumped, 3. paid more for something because
of owning a company through Bumped, 4. traveled farther or gone our of my way to shop at companies
owned through Bumped, 5. none of these".
        Stock (in addition to Bumped account)                            Retirement Fund




                  Investment Fund                                            Bonds




                 Education Savings                                       Something Else


Figure 23: This figure shows responses to a survey sent to 358 users during the Fall of 2019. Users were
asked about their investing experience, "We'd love to hear more about your experience in investing. Do you
have any of the following? 1. stock (in addition to what's in my Bumped account), 2. retirement fund,
such as 401k or IRA, 3. investment fund, such as mutual funds or exchange-traded funds (ETFs), 4. bonds,
5. education savings or 529 plan, 6. something else". Additionally, they were also asked to select all that
                                                    66
applies for the following question: "Since signing up for Bumped... 1. told my friends about companies
I own through Bumped, 2. shopped less with competitors of companies owned through Bumped, 3. paid
more for something because of owning a company through Bumped, 4. traveled farther or gone our of my
way to shop at companies owned through Bumped, 5. none of these".
