                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                WAGE INEQUALITY AND LABOR RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

                                       Ioana Marinescu
                                           Yue Qiu
                                       Aaron Sojourner

                                      Working Paper 28475
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28475


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   February 2021




Thanks to Philip Mattera of Good Jobs First for leading construction of the Violation Tracker
database. For helpful comments and discussions, we thank Alexander Hertel-Fernandez, Suresh
Naidu, David Weil and participants at 2021 ASSA. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Ioana Marinescu, Yue Qiu, and Aaron Sojourner. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Wage Inequality and Labor Rights Violations
Ioana Marinescu, Yue Qiu, and Aaron Sojourner
NBER Working Paper No. 28475
February 2021
JEL No. J28,J31,J32,J33,J83,K31,K42

                                          ABSTRACT

Wage inequality does not fully capture differences in job quality. Jobs also differ along other key
dimensions, including the prevalence of labor rights violations. We construct novel measures of
labor violation rates using data from federal agencies. Within local industries over time, a 10%
increase in the average wage is associated with a 0.15% decrease in the number of violations per
employee and a 4% decrease in fines per dollar of pay. Reduced labor market concentration and
increased union coverage rate are also associated with reductions in labor violations. Overall,
labor violations are regressive: they increase inequality in job quality.


Ioana Marinescu                                  Aaron Sojourner
University of Pennsylvania                       University of Minnesota
School of Social Policy & Practice               Carlson School of Management
3701 Locust Walk                                 321 19th Ave S, 3-300
Philadelphia PA, 19104-6214                      Minneapolis, MN 55455
and IZA                                          and IZA
and also NBER                                    asojourn@umn.edu
ioma@upenn.edu

Yue Qiu
Temple University
Fox School of Business
1801 Liacouras Walk, Alter 430
Philadelphia, PA 19122
yue.qiu@temple.edu
    Wage inequality in the U.S. is considerable, and has been growing since the 1980s (e.g. Kopczuk,
Saez and Song, 2010). But the difference between better and worse jobs is not just about pay. Em-
ployers violate workers' legal rights (Anderson, 2019) by requiring work under unsafe conditions
(Weil, 2001; Levine, Toffel and Johnson, 2012; Pouliakas and Theodossiou, 2013), failing to pay
them fully (Bobo, 2014; Galvin, 2016), and more. To what extent does inequality in job qual-
ity deepen wage inequality? Scholars, activists, and public officials lack systematic data on the
prevalence of worker rights violations. Cross-sectional worker survey evidence on labor violations
exists for a few cities in low-wage industries (Bernhardt et al., 2013) and there is a cross-sectional
nationally-representative survey of working conditions (Maestas et al., 2017). Measures based on
administrative data offer a relatively inexpensive way to measure variation in labor violations at
a fine geographic level and over time, but there is little evidence on the properties and relevance
of such measures. Labor violations data is also not commonly put in context with complementary
data on workforce or by combining information across multiple enforcement agencies.
    The present study works towards improving systematic, quantitative view of labor-rights viola-
tions in the U.S. and understanding how such violations can reinforce wage inequality. Do wages
serve as a compensating differential for illegal working conditions (wages positively correlated
with illegal working conditions)? Or are illegal working conditions and lower wages simply two
aspects of bad jobs (wages negatively correlated with illegal working conditions)? Sorkin (2018)
refers to these two mechanisms as the Rosen and Mortensen motives, respectively. Using panel
regressions, we show that local industry wage increases are associated with decreases in the preva-
lence and severity of labor-rights violations caught by federal agencies. Therefore, our results
suggest that wage inequality understates the inequality in job quality in the U.S. They are not con-
sistent with a simple compensating differentials model, but are consistent with the "Mortensen"
view that low wages and illegal working conditions are two aspects of bad jobs.
    To reach this conclusion, this study leverages a unique, relatively-new database that merges
and harmonizes data on enforcement actions against companies across agencies.1 A nonprofit,
    1 Gaining
            a view of firm activities across regulatory agencies' domains is challenging. In recognition of this, the
U.S. Commission on Evidence-Based Policymaking's final report pushed for greater integration of administrative data-




                                                         2
Good Jobs First, constructed the Violation Tracker (VT) database precisely to facilitate research
into corporate behavior across multiple domains. Each record is a case with at least one violation
citation by an enforcement agency, a date, a cited establishment or firm at a location, a type of
primary violation, and a penalty amount. We focus on labor rights enforced by federal agencies
that report violating establishments' industry: the Occupational Safety and Health Administration
(OSHA), the U.S. Department of Labor's Wage and Hours Division (WHD), and the National
Labor Relations Board (NLRB).2 In most analysis, we sum violations across OSHA, WHD, and
NLRB to build a holistic measure of labor-rights violations.
    Labor-violation citations must be understood as resulting from a combination of firm, worker,
and enforcement agency behavior: this means that actual violations can easily differ from legally-
sanctioned violations. Cited violations depend on both the true intensity of violations and the
likelihood that real violations convert into citations (Marinescu, 2011; Sojourner and Yang, 2020),
which depends on workers' willingness to report violations to enforcement agencies and to co-
operate with investigators. Enforcement policy can change with each presidential administration
(Weil, 2010), and we will check whether our key relationships of interest hold within an enforce-
ment regime. Grittner and Johnson (2020) find evidence that, on average, local industries where
workplace injury rates are higher are also those where workers are more likely to file complaints,
suggesting that cited violation rates will proxy well for underlying true violation rates.
    Consider two workers who are identical in productivity but one worker has less bargaining
power in her employment relationship than the other. An employer might claim greater value
from the employment relationship both by paying lower wages and by violating the worker's labor
rights, such as requiring work in unsafe or unhealthy conditions (OSHA), shorting on overtime
pay (WHD), or discouraging union organizing by threatening to fire union sympathizers (NLRB).
sets and need for stable, reliable firm identifiers across agencies and within agency over time (U.S. Commission on
Evidence-Based Policymaking's Employer Data Matching Workgroup, 2017; U.S. Commission on Evidence-Based
Policymaking, 2017).
     2 The records of another federal agency, the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC), do not report

violating companies' industry, so we cannot include their enforcement actions in the analysis. In the VT data na-
tionally, OSHA, WHD, and NLRB cite 124 times as many violations and 4.6 times larger aggregate penalties as the
EEOC.




                                                        3
The lower-power worker would have both lower wage and more violations of her labor rights.
However, workers with less power may be less likely to to report these violations to enforce-
ment agencies, leading to measurement error in cited violations that's negatively correlated with
true violations. This echoes another Grittner and Johnson (2020) finding, true violation inten-
sity is negatively correlated with complaint rates among Hispanic workers in low-wage industries.
Echoing this, Hertel-Fernandez (2020) shows that lower-income workers and workers with fewer
outside options are less comfortable discussing workplace problems with their coworkers. Thus,
even if the relationship between wages and true violations is negative, the relationship between
wages and legally-sanctioned violations might appear positive if the reporting channel dominates.
This reporting channel would create positive bias in the estimated relationship between wages and
cited-violations, pushing against finding a negative relationship between wages and violations.
   Our new measures of labor-violation intensity put violation records in the context of their la-
bor markets. We measure the number of workers in each industry-year or industry-locale-year,
their pay, and their characteristics using standard data sources such as the Quarterly Census of
Employment and Wages (QCEW), Quarterly Workforce Indicators (QWI), and the Current Popu-
lation Survey (CPS). Violation measures become the numerators and the workforce measures the
denominators, yielding labor-violation rates. We compute two measures: the prevalence of vio-
lations measured as the number of violation citations per employee, and the severity of violations
measured by the dollar value of penalties assessed per million dollars of payroll. Loosely, the for-
mer focuses on the extensive margin of violation prevalence and the latter on the intensive margin
of severity. The severity measure allows us to quantify violations in dollar terms, and express them
as a kind of tax on wages levied by employers. Harnessing these new measures, we make three
primary empirical contributions.
   First, we contribute by providing new measures of labor violation intensity and testing their
validity. To validate these measures, we assess whether cited violations predict employee reports of
abuse and working conditions across industries in the 2015 American Working Conditions Survey
(Maestas, Mullen, Powell, Von Wachter and Wenger, 2017). This analysis is motivated by the




                                                 4
theory that the two kinds of measures share a common factor: underlying job quality. We find
that higher levels of labor-rights violations from administrative records correlate positively with
worker survey reports of abuse on the job, bad bosses, bad workplaces, exposure to physical risks,
and being forced into last-minute schedule changes. Thus, violations are not merely a regulation
and reporting outcome but reflect employees' experience.
   Second, we contribute to the measurement of inter-industry wage inequality by examining a
new dimension of job quality: labor-rights violations. Using a panel regression with industry by
commuting zone (CZ) and year fixed effects, we find that a 10% increase in the average industry-
CZ pay is associated with an average 0.15% decrease in the number of violations per employee
and a 4% decrease in fines per dollar of payroll. In OSHA data, we find that violations resulting
from worker complaints have a similar relationship with wages as violations resulting from the
agency's programmed inspections, evidence that any bias from workers' complaint decisions does
not change our qualitative conclusions. The relationship between local industry wages and viola-
tions is stronger conditional on the industry having some labor violations: among local industries
that do have labor violations, a 10% increase in wages is associated with an equal decrease in
violations. Overall, we conclude that the labor violations wage "tax" is regressive and contributes
to increasing inequality. This contributes to a literature showing that higher paying jobs also tend
to have other desirable amenities, that the Mortensen pattern tends to dominate the Rosen pattern
(Bonhomme and Jolivet, 2009; Maestas et al., 2018; Sorkin, 2018).
   Our third contribution is to examine how other aspects of worker bargaining power relate to vi-
olation intensity. We study how violation intensity relates to worker educational attainment, union
density, and the concentration of employment in local industries across employers. Increases in
the share of workers with a bachelors' degree do not systematically relate to violations. Increased
unionization decreases the prevalence of labor rights violations, consistent with unions increasing
worker bargaining power (Freeman and Medoff, 1984; Breda, 2015; Knepper, 2018) and protect-
ing workers' legal rights (Weil, 1991; Fine, 2017). Increased labor market concentration ­ which
should reduce worker bargaining power ­ may increase labor violations. While we do not find




                                                 5
evidence for this using OLS, we do find a positive effect of labor market concentration on labor
violations when using an instrumental variables estimator (Azar et al., 2020; Qiu and Sojourner,
2019). Overall, there is some evidence that higher worker power decreases labor violations.
    The paper is organized as follows. In section 1, we discuss our data, focusing on the labor
rights violations dataset. In section 2, we validate our measures of labor rights violations against
survey measures of working conditions. In section 3, we present our analysis of the relationship
between industry wages and labor violations, and we examine the relationship between worker
power and labor violations. Section 4 concludes.



1    Measuring Violation Intensity

Our primary analysis focuses on variation in labor conditions in local industries by year. Using the
Violation Tracker (VT) database allows us to build systematic, quantitative measures of the extent
of labor-rights violations at fine levels of detail. The primary concept we want to understand is the
intensity of labor-rights violations among firms in an industry-locale-year, which we measure with
cited violations.
    Labor-rights violations intensity: To measure violation prevalence, we compute violation
rates by dividing total violation counts across agencies by the number of thousands of employees
at risk. To measure violation severity, we add up total associated penalties and divide by the total
payroll of employees at risk in millions of dollars. This gives a violation rate (prevalence) per
thousand employees and a penalty rate (severity) per million dollars of payroll. Each of these rates
can be computed by year, by industry, by geography, or by any combination of these. Keeping
the industry (NAICS4) and calendar year definitions fixed, we use multiple, different levels of
geography ­ national, state, and commuting zone (CZ) ­ to match different supplemental data
sources at various points in this study.
    The underlying data on cases with cited violations comes from the Violation Tracker (VT)
Database, produced by the nonprofit Good Jobs First. The VT data runs from the years 2000 to




                                                 6
2019. Although we don't use it all, the database collects and partially harmonizes violation case
records from more than 40 federal, state, and local agencies. It focuses on cases that brought at
least a $5,000 penalty.3 For each case, the record contains company name, location (often but
not always state, city, street address, and zip code), description of primary offense, penalty date,
penalty amount4 , and enforcement agency name.
    To measure labor-rights violations, we focus on violations enforced by federal agencies with a
primary-offense type implying harm centered on workers. We ignore agencies with harm centered
on investors (e.g. Securities and Exchange Commission), on consumers (e.g. Consumer Product
Safety Commission), or neighbors (e.g. Environmental Protection Agency). State attorney gen-
erals do not always have jurisdiction over labor regulation and do very limited labor enforcement
(Strong, 2014). Restricting attention to federal agencies ensures relatively-uniform measurement
properties across states and prevents confounding a state's vigorous enforcement action with higher
violation intensity. Appendix Table A.1 shows all agencies present in VT involved in labor viola-
tions and what share of violations each represents. Among all cited violations in VT, 71 percent
are labor-related. However, they account for only 5 percent of monetary penalties paid by firms,
reflecting labor-violations' relatively low average penalty per citation compared to other agencies.
    To enable study of variation across industries, we focus on agencies that report each violat-
ing company's industry. The U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), U.S.
Department of Labor's Wage and Hour Division (WHD), and the National Labor Relations Board
(NLRB) do report company detailed NAICS industry codes. These three agencies account for
244,876 cases, which are 84 percent of all cited labor-rights violations across all state and federal
agencies in VT.5
    In much of our analysis, the unit of observation is the industry by commuting zone by year,
    3 For actions enforced by Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), only penalties designated as

willful, repeat or serious are included in the database.
    4 We inflate penalty amount to 2019 dollars.
    5 Two main federal labor enforcement agencies are excluded because their records do not classify cited companies

by industry: the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) with 1,977 cases and the Mining Safety and
Health Administration (MSHA) with 27,573 cases. Though we know all MSHA violations are labor violations in
the mining sector, classification into detailed industry (NAICS4) comparable with OSHA, WHD, and NLRB is not
available.




                                                         7
defined as the interaction between a 4-digit 2012 NAICS (NAICS4) code, 2000 commuting zone
(CZ), and calendar year. For each observed violation, we map the 5-digit zip code of the violating
company to its CZ, through county.6 To identify the 2012 4-digit NAICS associated with each
observation, we use the reported NAICS codes in the VT database. 94% of OSHA, WHD, and
NLRB records have a NAICS code. To harmonize different versions of NAICS codes, we use the
crosswalks among different versions of NAICS codes provided by the Census.7
    This process yields an analytic sample based on 214,364 labor-related violations in 348 in-
dustries, 698 CZs, 20 years, and which form 40,487 local industries (NAICS4-CZ), and 112,942
industry-CZ-years with any violations. Counts or sums of violations and penalties are not particu-
larly meaningful without scaling them for variation in the underlying workforce at risk. Otherwise,
one cannot tell if a high count comes from higher violation risk or more workers at risk. Scaling
the number of violations in a local industry by employment counts and scaling penalties by payroll
makes them more interpretable.
    Employment and Payroll: employment and payroll data come from the annual averages file
of Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW), the nation's most reliable measures of
these variables. The QCEW covers 98% of U.S. jobs and its pay data includes salaries, bonuses,
stock options, profit distributions and other benefits. We only use data for the private sector. We
measure employment and pay at the same unit, NAICS4×CZ×year, to match to the violations
data. Specifically, we first convert all other versions of NAICS4 codes to the 2012 version and map
each county to its associated CZ using the same procedures as before. We calculate total pay, total
employment, and average pay in each industry-locale-year.8
    6 Another   advantage of the OSHA, WHD, and NLRB agency data is that the zip code pertains to the
establishment where the violation occurred, not the corporate headquarters. The crosswalk between 5-digit
zip code and county is at https://anthonylouisdagostino.com/a-better-zip5-county-crosswalk/.
The crosswalk between county and 2000 CZ is at https://www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/
commuting-zones-and-labor-market-areas/.
     7 Crosswalks: https://www.census.gov/eos/www/naics/concordances/concordances.html.
     8 One assumption we make is that the version of NAICS used in each year in the VT database is the same as the one

in Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW) program from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Specifically,
the 2002 version for the years between 2000 and 2006, the 2007 version for the years between 2007 and 2010, the 2012
version for the years between 2011 and 2016, and the 2017 version for the years since 2017. Also, when a version of
NAICS4 crosswalks into multiple 2012 NAICS4 codes, we drop it from our sample because we cannot reliably map it
into a specific 2012 NAICS4 for our analysis. Around 4.9% of labor-related violations are dropped from our sample




                                                          8
    We merge variables from QCEW with those from the VT database at the industry-locale-year
level. If an industry-locale-year is observed to have employment in the QCEW but no violations in
VT, we assign zeros as the values for violation variables because no agencies cited companies for
labor-rights violations there. Our QCEW-VT sample has 102,204 unique observed local industries
(NAICS4-CZ) and 1,465,807 observed local industry-years.
    Our data allows for a novel description of the variation in labor-violation intensity in many
dimensions. Adjusting for industry composition and times effects, the most-intense violations of
labor rights in the last decade appear clustered in commuting zones of the Great Plains and the
South with low intensities in the mid-Atlantic and the West (Figure 1)9 . Figures in the appendix
describe national trends in violation intensity across time (Figure A.2), the states (Figure A.3)
and industries (Figure A.4) with the highest and lowest violation intensities. Construction has the
highest violation intensity while management has the lowest intensity. This pattern foreshadows
our main result that higher wages are associated with lower violations.



2     Validation: Relationship between Labor-Violation Intensity

      and Worker Self-Reported Working Conditions

Before moving into the analysis of the relationship between local industry violation intensity and
wages, we generate evidence on the validity of this novel labor-violation intensity measure by relat-
ing it to individual worker's self-reports of their working conditions in a nationally-representative
survey10 . This analysis is motivated by the theory that the two kinds of measures share a common
for this reason. Another 1.3% of labor-related violations are further dropped because the NAICS4 codes reported in
VT database do not belong to either 2002, 2007, 2012 nor 2017 version of NAICS4 codes.
     9 The Figure legend shows negative values because it plots regression residuals rather than raw violation intensities.

Figure A.1 in the appendix shows the raw violation intensity by commuting zone, without adjusting for industry
composition and year. The map is fairly similar to Figure 1, except that the North-East has a lower violation intensity.
    10 When comparing social-benefit use reports between surveys and administrative data (Meyer et al., 2015), the

administrative dataset can be credibly understood as accurate because the question of interest is about the adminis-
tered program. However, our situation is closer to the challenge of understanding crime broadly, where survey and
administrative data might provide two imperfect measures of a hard-to-observe phenomenon. For instance, the F.B.I.'s
Uniform Crime Report (U.C.R.) system harmonizes data from state and local agencies on victim reports to agencies
and their arrests. This gives one partial view of differences over geographies and time in crime rates. The Bureau of




                                                            9
factor: underlying job quality. The survey is the 2015 American Working Conditions Survey and
includes information on worker demographics and various aspects of working conditions reported
by workers as well as their industry (NAICS4) (Maestas et al., 2018). Based on each surveyed
worker's industry, we assign them the measured violation intensity for that industry (NAICS4) in
that year.11 Do workers in industries measured as having with more-intense labor violations tend
to report worse working conditions, controlling for other differences between workers?
    We define variables to capture aspects of working conditions that we would expect to be cor-
related with labor-rights violation citations: violations of workers' rights to earned pay, safe and
healthy working conditions, and freedom from discrimination and harassment. After doing the
procedures described below, we standardize each measure, except for the indicator variable for
last-minute change of work schedule, to zero mean and unit standard deviation in the national
population.


    · Abuse index: We use 2 group of questions. One group asks, "Over the last month, during the
       course of your work have you been subjected to...?" where ... is "verbal abuse," "unwanted
       sexual attention," "threats," and "humiliating behavior." The other group asks about rarer
       events with a longer time window: "And over the past 12 months, during the course of your
       work have you been subjected to...?" where ... is "physical violence," "bullying/harassment,"
       and "sexual harassment." These groups yield seven indicators of yes responses. For each
       individual, we average across them. A higher value implies more abuse at work.

    · Last-minute change of work schedule indicator: We use responses to the question, "Do
       changes to your work schedule occur often?" We define someone as experiencing last-
       minute scheduling changes if and only if they answer "Yes, the same day" or "Yes, the day
Justice Statistics also runs a separate survey of the U.S. population and asks about victimization. This gives an alter-
native view that does not depend on official complaints or successful investigation and enforcement. Unfortunately,
official surveys of workers provide little insight into the worst aspects of jobs and little fine-grained power to under-
stand sub-group variation. This is analogous to asking if places with higher crime rates reported to police in U.C.R.
are also the places with higher crime rates reported in population surveys about victimization. A small difference is
that our administrative measure is not based on complaints to enforcement agencies but on findings of wrong-doing,
so more like criminal convictions rather than crime reports.
    11 The survey lacks geographic detail that would enable matching more locally.




                                                          10
  before." If they get more notice or report schedule changes not often, the indicator takes the
  value zero.

· Physical exposure index: We use responses to a group of 9 variables asking how much the
  worker is exposed to the following at work in their main job: "vibrations (hand tools/machinery),"
  "loud noise," "high temperatures," "low temperatures," "breathe smoke/fumes/powder/dust,"
  "breathe vapors," "handling chemical products," "breathe tobacco smoke," and "handling in-
  fectious materials." Each response is a Likert scale from 1 to 7 where higher values indicate
  less exposure. We standardize each variable across individuals, then take the simple average
  across the variables for each individual. We put a minus sign before the index so that a higher
  value implies more exposure to physical risks.

· Stress index: We use responses to seven questions of the form, "For each of the follow-
  ing statements, please select the response which best describes your work situation." The
  statements are: "enough time to finish work," "know expectations," "motivated to do your
  best," "treated fairly," "receive contradictory instructions," "experience stress in your work,"
  "required to hide feelings." Responses range from 1 ("always") to 5 ("never"). For the first
  four statements, higher responses indicate more stress, with the opposite for the last three
  statements. We standardize each variable across the sample. We put minus signs before the
  last three variables so each variable's value rises in stress. We take the simple average across
  variables for each individual. A higher index implies more stress at work.

· Good-boss index: We use responses to seven questions, each a statement following this
  preamble, "Do you agree or disagree with the following statements? Your immediate boss..."
  The seven statements are, "trusts you," "respects you," "gives praise/recognition," "gets peo-
  ple to work together," "is helpful," "provides useful feedback," "encourages & supports your
  development." Agreement with each is captured by a indicator. We take the simple average
  across these variables for each individual. Higher index values imply better bosses.

· Workplace-quality index: We use responses to seven questions, each a statement following




                                             11
      this preamble, "The next question is not about your own job but about your workplace. To
      what extent do you agree or disagree with the following:" The seven statements are: "em-
      ployees are appreciated when done a good job," "management trusts employees to do work
      well," "conflicts are resolved fairly," "work is distributed fairly," "there is good cooperation
      between you & colleagues," "generally, employees trust management," "you like & respect
      your colleagues." Each response varies from 1 (strongly agree) to 5 (strongly disagree), so
      higher values indicate lower workplace quality. We first standardize each variable across the
      sample and then average across variables for each individual. We put a minus sign before
      the index such that a higher value implies better workplace quality.


   This gives a measure of each of these aspects of working conditions for each worker in the
AWCS. To estimate the correlation between labor-violation intensities and workers' reports of
their working conditions, we run the following regression:



           Working_Conditioni j =  +  × Log(1 + Violation_Intensity) j +  Xi + i j                (1)

with i indexing an individual and j indexing an industry (4-digit NAICS). Xi is a vector of indi-
vidual characteristics including gender, age, earnings, race, and ethnicity. We use two measures
for Violation Intensity: the count of violations cited normalized by the number of employees (a
prevalence measure), and the penalties levied normalized by the employee wage bill (a severity
measure). We cluster the standard errors at the industry level.
   Our estimates show that workers in industries where enforcement agencies issue more citations
and levy more penalties against companies for labor-rights violations also tend to report worse
working conditions (Table 3). A higher rate of labor violations per employee in an industry pre-
dicts a higher probability of last-minute schedule change, higher indexes for abuse- and physical
exposure-related issues, and worse assessments of bosses and workplace quality (Table 3: Panel
A). The relationship is most statistically significant for the index for physical exposure-related
issues (Table 3: Panel A). We do not find that the industry-level violation intensity is correlated




                                                 12
with stress in workplaces. Similarly (Table 3: Panel B), workers in industries where authorities
levy greater penalties for labor violations per dollar of pay report worse working conditions of all
kinds, except stress.
    We then condition on worker demographics, so that rather than simply comparing across indus-
tries, we compare workers who are observably-similar in terms of gender, age, race and ethnicity,
and earnings but who work in different industries. Conditional on worker characteristics, the vi-
olation penalty per dollar of pay remains a strong predictor of self-reported working conditions,
except for stress (Table 3: Panel D). When the outcome is violation counts per employee, control-
ling for worker demographics makes the relationship between self-reported working conditions
and violations insignificant, except in the case of physical exposure (Panel C), but all coefficients
keep their signs.
    Further, we find that, even when controlling for labor violation intensity, higher individual
worker earnings ("Log (earnings)") tend to predict lower prevalence of adverse working conditions
on all measures other than stress (Table 3: Panel C and D). Thus, an individual worker with higher
pay has a lower chance of experiencing adverse working conditions, even after we account for
demographic characteristics and for the overall propensity of an industry to violate workers rights.
    Next, we turn to an analysis that focuses on the relationship between wages and labor-violation
intensity using a different analytic design, moving from examining a cross-section of workers to a
panel of local industries across years.



3    Relationship Between Changes in Local Industry Average

     Pay and Labor-Violation Intensity

To estimate the relationship between changes in average wage per employee and average violation
intensity in a local industry over time, we estimate the following regression:



              Log(1 + Violation_Intensity)it =  +  × Log(Wage)it + µi + t + it                   (2)




                                                 13
with i indexing a local industry (NAICS4×CZ) and t indexing year, respectively. We use two
measures for Violation Intensity: the natural logarithm of one plus the count of violations cited
normalized by the number of employees in thousand, and the natural logarithm of one plus penal-
ties levied normalized by the employee wage bill in millions. µi and t are sets of local industry
and year fixed effects, respectively. Observations are weighted by total employment at the local
industry-year level. We cluster the standard errors at the local industry level. The coefficient of
primary interest is  , the elasticity of labor-violation intensity with respect to the average wage
in the local industry. Giving this model a causal interpretation requires assuming that changes in
unobservable determinants of violation intensity are independent of changes in the average wage
at the local industry-year level.


3.1    Main results

Across local industries and controlling for year fixed effects, average pay per employee is positively
correlated with labor violations counts per 1,000 employees (Table 4, panel A, col. 1) but is
negatively correlated with labor violations penalty amount per million pay (Table 4, panel B, col.
1). Both estimated coefficients are statistically significant at the 1% level.
   We then use a panel specification in Table 4, column (2), controlling for both local industry
and year fixed effects. The average pay per employee is negatively correlated with both measures
of labor violation intensity (Table 4, Panels A and B). The positive cross-sectional association
between wages and violation intensity as measured by counts in column 1 of Panel A can be
explained by industry heterogeneity, and in particular the fact that secondary sector industries tend
to both pay higher wages and have higher violation intensity. Within the same local industry over
time, labor violation intensity becomes lower when the average pay per employee becomes higher.
In terms of magnitudes, the estimates from Table 4, column (2) suggest that a 10% increase in the
average pay is associated with a 0.15% decrease in the number of labor-violations cited per 1,000
employee and a 4.22% decrease in the labor-violations penalty per million of wage bill. The second
measure can be interpreted as a kind of regressive wage tax: when wages increase, a smaller share




                                                  14
of wages is taken away in the form of labor violations.
   Finally, in column (3), we restrict the sample to local industry-year observations in which there
are labor violations and re-estimate equation (3) with both local industry and year fixed effects.
The magnitudes of the estimated effects of average pay per employee on labor violation intensity
become much larger than the ones in column (2) of Panels A and B: a 10% increase in the wage is
associated with a 5.5% decline in violation prevalence and a 10.2% decline in violation severity.


3.2     Heterogeneity in the Relationship

Here we replicate the analysis of the relationship between changes in wages and changes in vio-
lation intensity within local industry across years but allowing for different relationships by eco-
nomic sector and by enforcement agency.


3.2.1   Secondary sector industries versus others

Secondary sector industries (mining, utilities, construction, and manufacturing) tend to have rel-
atively high average pay but also higher violation intensity in terms of counts. This is why the
cross-sectional relationship between counts violation intensity and wages is positive in Table 4,
Panel A, column (1). Here, we further investigate how the relationship between violation intensity
and wages differs across sectors.
   In Table 5, Panel A, the dependent variable is the count-based intensity measure. The mag-
nitude of the estimated coefficient on Log(Wage) is larger for secondary sector industries. In
particular, the elasticity of violations counts per 1,000 employee with respect to average annual
pay is -0.069 for industries in the secondary sector and is only -0.01 for other industries (Table
5: Columns (2) and (4) of Panel A). The difference between these two estimated coefficients is
statistically significant at the 1% level. In Panel B, we use the penalty-based intensity measure as
the dependent variable. The estimated effects of wages on the penalty-based violation intensity are
similar across these two types of industries.




                                                15
3.2.2   Enforcement Agencies

In this subsection, we examine the relation between labor violation intensity and employee wages
for various agencies that enforce the violations: (1) OSHA, (2) WHD, and (3) NLRB.
   Our results in Table 6 show that the effect of employee average wages on violation intensity in
a local industry is heterogeneous across agencies. For violations enforced by OSHA and WHD, the
estimated effect is qualitatively similar to the effect across all agencies in column (2) of Table 4:
violation intensity becomes lower when employees are paid higher wages. However, for violations
enforced by NLRB, we find that the estimated coefficient on Log(Wage) is positive and statistically
significant at 1% level in both panels. This result implies that when wages increase in a local
industry, violations related to labor organizing tend to increase.
   The negative association between wages and violations enforced by OSHA and WHD drives
the estimates when all types of violations are lumped together in Table 4. This makes sense because
these types of violations are by far the most frequent (Table 1).
   Why might we see a different, positive association between wages and violations of workers'
rights to organize? Organizing-rights violations can occur both in new organizing campaigns in
nonunion firms, and in disputes over contracts and rights in unionized firms. For new organizing,
unionization efforts are more likely among workers in newer and more-productive firms Dinlersoz
et al. (2017). Local industries with rising wages might be more likely to have organizing drives, to
which employers may react by violating workers' rights.


3.3     Robustness to changes in enforcement regime

The choices of enforcement agencies to pursue specific cases can affect our measure of violations.
For example, within the Bush administration, enforcement policies were relatively stable. How-
ever, under Director David Weil during the Obama administration, the Wage and Hour Division
(WHD) shifted enforcement resources to strategically focus on priority industries defined by a
both high risk of violations and limited worker complaints (Weil, 2010). These industries include
fast-food, hotels, and residential construction.




                                                   16
   To understand whether changes in enforcement regime affect the relationship between wages
and underlying violations as proxied by measured violations, we re-run our main analysis sepa-
rately for the Bush and Obama administrations (Table A.3), and by agency. Within administration
and agency, the influence of complaints and enforcement strategies on the relationship between
wages and underlying violations should be relatively stable. Overall, the relationship between
wages and measured violations is fairly similar across presidential administrations, though the
negative relationship between wages and violations is stronger and more significant during the
Bush administration.
   The difference between the Bush and the Obama administrations could relate to the change in
enforcement regime at WHD, with the new focus on priority industries. We thus investigate the
relationship between wages and WHD violations within the Bush vs. Obama administration and
in priority vs. non-priority industries (Table A.4). The relationship between wages and violations
is basically always negative but is stronger in priority industries during the Obama administration
when strategic enforcement was strengthened. In non-priority industries, the relationship between
wages and violations is negative and of similar magnitude in both the Bush and the Obama admin-
istrations. In priority industries, the within-industry relationship between wages and violations is
more negative during the Obama administration. This might be explained by the targeting of prior-
ity industries with vulnerable workers. If wages in a local industry increase, WHD might perceive
workers as less vulnerable, leading to a softening of enforcement relative to the beefed up baseline
enforcement in these priority industries.


3.4   Robustness Tests

In this subsection, we perform several robustness tests to our main results in Table 4.
   We begin by examining the role of worker complaints in driving labor rights violations. As
we explained above, measured violations are the result of employer behavior, worker complaints
and agency behavior. Worker complaints may be endogeneous with respect to wages, so it is
useful to distinguish those violations that were discovered through worker complaint driven in-




                                                 17
spections versus those found during agency-driven, programmed inspections. With OSHA data
on what triggered each inspection, we can compare the estimated effect of wages on violations
found in complaint-driven inspections with the estimated effect of wages on violations found in
programmed inspections.12 The effect of wages on all violation counts or penalties is essentially
the same as in our main sample (Table 7 col. 1 vs. col. 2). Higher wages decrease the count of vio-
lations by the same magnitude for agency-driven or worker-driven complaints (col. 3 and 4, Panel
A). Higher wages decrease penalties more for worker-driven than for agency-driven complaints
(col. 3 and 4, Panel B), but both effects are highly statistically significant. Overall, we conclude
that higher wages are associated with lower labor violation intensity for both agency-driven and
worker-driven complaints. This strengthens our confidence that the relationship between wages
and violations is not just driven by workers' differential propensity to complain.
    We then look at how weighting affects the results. In column (1) of Table 8, we report esti-
mations of equation (3) without weighting by employment so each industry-CZ-year observation
contributes equally to the estimation. The magnitude of the correlation between labor violations
counts per 1,000 employees and average pay per employee is similar to the weighted estimates in
column (2), Panel A of Table 4; however, the magnitude of the correlation between labor violations
penalty amount per million pay and average pay per employee is smaller than the one in column
(2), Panel B of Table 4.
    Next, we assess robustness to controlling for any common shock at the industry level or CZ
level in each year. In column (2) of Table 8, we report the weighted estimations and replace the
year fixed effects with industry×year and CZ×year fixed effects. Our results suggest that, within
the same local industry, labor-violation intensity falls when the average pay per employee rises
even after absorbing any shock at the industry or the CZ level in a year (Table 8, column (2),
Panels A and B). Compared to the results in Table 4, the magnitude of the correlation between
labor violations penalty amount per million pay and average pay per employee becomes smaller
   12 VT does not distinguish whether OSHA inspections were complaint- or agency-driven. For each OSHA violation

in VT, we merged this information in from OSHA administrative data through 2013 from Sojourner and Yang (2020),
classifying inspection types H, I, and K as programmed.




                                                      18
but is still statistically significant at the 1% level.
    In appendix Table A.2, we present more robustness tests for Table 4. We show that results are
very similar when a local industry is defined at the state level rather than at the CZ level. Results
are also similar when adding in MSHA mining violations13 at the state level, though the coefficient
on violation prevalence is no longer significant. Finally, dropping data from the NLRB or data after
2011 ­ when NLRB industry codes are missing so NLRB observations are dropped ­ also yields
similar results.


3.5     Alternative Measures of Worker Bargaining Power

Rather than focusing on the relationship between changes in wages and changes in violation inten-
sity, in this section we replace average wage with alternative proxies of worker bargaining power:
educational attainment, labor market concentration among employers, and worker union density.


3.5.1   Education

We measure the fraction of workers in each industry-locale-year who have any college educa-
tion using the Census's Quarterly Workforce Indicators (QWI). QWI derives from the Longitu-
dinal Employer-Household Dynamics, which harmonizes linked employer-employee data based
on states' unemployment insurance records. QWI provides statistics on worker demographics by
industry-county-quarter. We use counts of all workers and those with at least a bachelors degree
for each industry-CZ-quarter, and calculate the fraction of workers who are college-educated in
each industry-CZ-quarter. For each industry-CZ-year, we take the simple average of the fraction
of college-educated workers across all quarters.
    In column (3) of Table 8, we use, instead of wages, the fraction of employees that have at least
bachelor degrees in a local industry as a proxy for employees' human capital and bargaining power.
The estimations are weighted by the total employment in the local industry and year. Increasing
education is associated with a higher labor violation count, but is not associated with a higher
   13 Charles   et al. (2019) show that MSHA violations increase when mines experience a positive demand shock.




                                                         19
violation intensity. Thus, education does not have a consistent impact on labor violation intensity.


3.5.2    Labor Market Concentration

In this subsection, we use local industry employment concentration as an alternative measure of
employees' bargaining power. A local industry is still defined as the interaction between a 4-digit
NAICS code and a CZ. If concentration is higher in a local industry, then the local employers would
have a larger monopsony power, lowering employees' outside options and bargaining power.
   In each local industry, employment concentration is defined as the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index
(HHI) calculated based on the observed firm-level employment. We use the establishment-level
data from InfoGroup Historical Business File to measure local industry HHI. For each covered
establishment, InfoGroup provides data on the employment, sales, NAICS code, geographic infor-
mation, and the linked parent company. Specifically, the formula for HHI in a local industry m and
year t is as follow:

                                                        n
                                          HHIm,t =  s2
                                                     i,m,t                                           (3)
                                                       i=1

   where si,m,t is the employment share of firm i in local industry m in year t . In each local industry,
we aggregate the establishment-level employment to the parent company and then calculate si,m,t .
   To estimate the effect of local industry HHI on violation intensity, we run the same regression as
in equation (3) except that we replace Log(Wage) with Log(EmploymentHHI ). In addition to the
OLS estimations, we also instrument Log(Employment HHI) with the average of the log(1/Number
of Firms) in other CZs for the same 4-digit NAICS industry (Azar, Marinescu and Steinbaum,
2020).
   Table 9 reports the results. The dependent variables in Panels A and B are the natural logarithm
of one plus labor violation counts per 1,000 employees and the natural logarithm of one plus labor
violation penalty per million pay, respectively. In each panel, columns (1) and (2) report the OLS
estimations and column (3) reports the 2SLS estimation.
   In column (1) of each panel, we control for year fixed effects. The results show that, across




                                                  20
local industries, local industry HHI is negatively correlated with both measures of labor viola-
tion intensity. Both estimated coefficients are statistically significant at the 1% level. We control
for both local industry and year fixed effects in column (2) of each panel. The magnitudes and
statistical significance of the measured relationship become much smaller.
   Column (3) of each panel reports the 2SLS estimation. The estimated coefficients are positive
and statistically significant at the 1% level. The IV is not weak as the Kleibergen-Paap F-stat is 345
(see col. 4 for the first stage). The results show that, within the same local industry over time, labor
violation intensity becomes higher when the local industry HHI becomes higher. The estimates
suggest that a 10% increase in local industry HHI is associated with a 0.38% increase in the number
of labor-violations cited per 1,000 employee and a 2.85% increase in the labor-violations penalty
per million of wage bill. Therefore, the IV results show an increase in labor violations when
workers' employment opportunities and bargaining power decrease due to an increase in labor
market concentration.


3.5.3   Union coverage

To incorporate union status into our analysis of the relationship between violation intensity and
average wages, we shift our analysis from changes within industry-CZ across years to changes
within industry-state across years.
   We perform our analysis on an alternative sample constructed from the Current Population
Survey (CPS). The main advantage of CPS over QCEW is that union coverage information for
individuals is available in the outgoing rotation groups (ORG) and it allows us to examine whether
labor unions play a role in affecting the violations of labor rights by employers. In this sample, the
unit of observation is an interaction between a census code-based industry and a state. the measure
of the dependent variable stays the same as in our main analysis.
   To measure the share of workers covered by union contracts, we draw on the Current Population
Survey (CPS) from IPUMS (Flood et al., 2018). We can measure coverage share by industry and
year. The finest geographic cut we use is state. To look at the relationship between union coverage




                                                  21
and labor-violations intensity, we construct an alternative version of the labor-violations intensity
measures from VT that defines locale as state, rather than commuting zone. In the matched CPS-
VT sample, the unit of observation is an interaction between a census code-based industry and a
state in a year. A census code-based industry is one or a group of 1990 census industry codes in
CPS. We construct the crosswalk between different versions of NAICS codes in VT and the census
code-based industry code from IPUMS using the crosswalk provided by the Census.14 To assure
alignment between all predictors in our CPS sample, we construct measures of average wage,
fraction of workers who have a bachelors degree, and total employment by industry-state-year as
well. If an industry-state-year observation in CPS is not covered in VT, we measure the values of
violation-related measures as zeros. We observe 10,334 industry-states in 167,384 industry-state-
years. The average pay in the CPS-VT sample is $42,576 and 13.1% of employees are covered by
union contracts. The measured violation count is 0.4 per 100,000 and penalties average $6.27 per
million dollars in pay. Table 2, Panel B reports the summary statistics of several variables in the
CPS-VT sample.
   We re-estimate equation (3) using the CPS sample and the results are reported in Table 10. The
estimations in column (1) are consistent with the ones in Table 4. Our estimations show that a 10%
increase in the average pay per employee ($4,258) is associated with a 0.006% decrease in the
violations counts per 1,000 employees (column (1), Panel A) and a 3.0% decrease in the violations
penalty amount per million pay (column (1), Panel B).
   In column (2) of each panel in Table 10, we examine the relation between union coverage rate
and labor violations intensity in a unit-year cell. Our estimations show that, within an industry-
state, violation rates become lower when union coverage becomes greater. Specifically, a one-
standard-deviation increase in union coverage rate (17.8%) is associated with a 0.04% decrease
in violations counts per 1,000 employees and a 0.5% decrease in violations penalty amount per
million pay, though the latter effect is not statistically significant. Finally, in column (3), we
include both the wage and union coverage as dependent variables. Union coverage is associated
  14 Thecrosswalk is available at https://www.census.gov/topics/employment/industry-occupation/
guidance/code-lists.html.




                                                 22
with a lower prevalence of violations, even conditional on the wage (Panel A), but there is no effect
of union coverage on the severity of violations conditional on the wage (Panel B).
     This result is important because the equilibrium relationship between union coverage rate and
labor violations intensity is likely to be the net effect of two opposing forces, which could lead
to a positive or negative relationship between unionization and labor violations. On the one hand,
unions could exercise power to provide more protections for workers and decrease violations of
labor rights ("protective effect"). On the other hand, unions could force the disclosure of a larger
share of committed violations ("reporting effect"). The estimated negative relationship between
union coverage rate and labor violations intensity suggests that the "protective effect" of unions
outweighs any "reporting effect."



4     Conclusion

In this paper, we investigated the prevalence and correlates of labor rights violations. First, labor
rights violations predict worse self-reported job quality across industries. Second, a 10% increase
in average wages in an industry and commuting zone is associated with a 0.15% decline in viola-
tions per employee and a 4% decline in penalty fines per dollar of worker pay. Furthermore, we find
that unions decrease the prevalence of labor rights violations. Our results suggest that job quality is
positively correlated with the wage and is boosted by unionization. In contrast to the predictions of
a simple compensating wage differentials model, labor rights violations decrease with worker pay.
Thus, inequality in job quality as measured by labor-rights violations exacerbates wage inequality
in the U.S.



References

Anderson E. 2019. Private Government: How Employers Rule Our Lives. Princeton University
    Press, reprint edition edition. ISBN 978-0-691-19224-6.




                                                  23
Azar J, Marinescu I, Steinbaum MI. 2020. Labor market concentration. Journal of Human Re-
  sources : forthcoming.
  URL https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=3088767

Bernhardt A, Spiller MW, Theodore N. 2013. Employers gone rogue: Explaining industry variation
  in violations of workplace laws. ILR Review 66: 808­832.

Bobo K. 2014. Wage Theft in America: Why Millions of Americans Are Not Getting Paid--And
  What We Can Do about It. The New Press.

Bonhomme S, Jolivet G. 2009. The pervasive absence of compensating differentials. Journal of
  Applied Econometrics 24: 763­795. ISSN 1099-1255.
  URL http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jae.1074/abstract

Breda T. 2015. Firms' rents, workers' bargaining power and the union wage premium. The Eco-
  nomic Journal 125: 1616­1652.

Charles KK, Johnson MS, Stephens J Melvin, Lee DQ. 2019. Demand Conditions and Worker
  Safety: Evidence from Price Shocks in Mining. Working Paper 26401, National Bureau of
  Economic Research. Series: Working Paper Series.
  URL http://www.nber.org/papers/w26401

Dinlersoz E, Greenwood J, Hyatt H. 2017. What businesses attract unions? unionization over the
  life cycle of us establishments. ILR Review 70: 733­766.

Fine J. 2017. Enforcing labor standards in partnership with civil society: Can co-enforcement
  succeed where the state alone has failed? Politics & Society 45: 359­388.

Flood S, King M, Rodgers R, Ruggles S, Warren JR. 2018. Integrated public use microdata series,
  current population survey: Version 6.0.[machine-readable database]. Minneapolis: University
  of Minnesota .

Freeman RB, Medoff JL. 1984. What do unions do. Industrial & Labor Relations Review 38: 244.




                                              24
Galvin DJ. 2016. Deterring wage theft: Alt-labor, state politics, and the policy determinants of
  minimum wage compliance. Perspectives on Politics 14: 324­350.

Grittner AM, Johnson MS. 2020. Complaint-driven enforcement of labor regulation .

Hertel-Fernandez A. 2020. American Workers' Experiences with Power, Information, and Rights
  on the Job: a Roadmap for Reform. Roosevelt Institute : 42.

Knepper M. 2018. From the fringe to the fore: Labor unions and employee compensation. Review
  of Economics and Statistics .

Kopczuk W, Saez E, Song J. 2010. Earnings Inequality and Mobility in the United States: Evidence
  from Social Security Data Since 1937. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 125: 91­128. ISSN
  0033-5533.
  URL https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/125/1/91/1880381

Levine DI, Toffel MW, Johnson MS. 2012. Randomized government safety inspections reduce
  worker injuries with no detectable job loss. Science 336: 907­911.

Maestas N, Mullen KJ, Powell D, Von Wachter T, Wenger JB. 2017. Working conditions in the
  united states results of the 2015 american working conditions survey. Maestas, Nicole, Kathleen
  J. Mullen, David Powell, Till von Wachter, and Jeffrey B. Wenger, Working Conditions in the
  United States: Results of the 2015 American Working Conditions Survey. Santa Monica, CA:
  RAND Corporation .

Maestas N, Mullen KJ, Powell D, von Wachter T, Wenger JB. 2018. The value of working condi-
  tions in the united states and implications for the structure of wages. Technical report, National
  Bureau of Economic Research.

Marinescu I. 2011. Are Judges Sensitive to Economic Conditions? Evidence from UK Employ-
  ment Tribunals. Industrial and Labor Relations Review 64: 673­698. ISSN 0019-7939.
  URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/41343679




                                                25
Meyer BD, Mok WK, Sullivan JX. 2015. Household surveys in crisis. Journal of Economic
  Perspectives 29: 199­226.

Pouliakas K, Theodossiou I. 2013. The economics of health and safety at work: an interdiciplinary
  review of the theory and policy. Journal of Economic Surveys 27: 167­208.

Qiu Y, Sojourner A. 2019. Labor-market concentration and labor compensation. Available at SSRN
  3312197 .

Sojourner A, Yang J. 2020. Effects of unionization on workplace-safety enforcement: Regression-
  discontinuity evidence. ILR Review .

Sorkin I. 2018. Ranking firms using revealed preference. The quarterly journal of economics 133:
  1331­1393.

Strong SM. 2014. Jurisdiction of State Attorneys General Offices over White-Collar Crime, 2014
  : 18.

US Commission on Evidence-Based Policymaking. 2017. The promise of evidence-based pol-
  icymaking: Report of the Commission on Evidence-Based Policymaking.           Commission on
  Evidence-Based Policymaking.
  URL https://www.cep.gov/report/cep-final-report.pdf

US Commission on Evidence-Based Policymaking's Employer Data Matching Workgroup. 2017.
  Employer data matching workgroup white paper.         Technical report, U.S. Commission on
  Evidence-Based Policymaking.
  URL            https://www.cep.gov/comments/Employer-Data-Matching-Workgroup_
  White-Paper.pdf

Weil D. 1991. Enforcing osha: The role of labor unions. Industrial Relations: A Journal of
  Economy and Society 30: 20­36.




                                               26
Weil D. 2001. Valuing the economic consequences of work injury and illness: a comparison of
  methods and findings. American journal of industrial medicine 40: 418­437.

Weil D. 2010. Improving Workplace Conditions Through Strategic Enforcement. SSRN Scholarly
  Paper ID 1623390, Social Science Research Network, Rochester, NY.
  URL https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=1623390




                                             27
                     Figure 1: Labor-violation intensity by commuting zone

This figure reports violations intensities adjusted for industry composition and time effects across
2000 commuting zones (CZ). For each measure of violations intensity, we first regress the vio-
lation intensity on 4-digit NAICS industry and year fixed effects and then calculate the industry
employment-weighted average of the residuals within a CZ. We finally calculate the simple average
residual in a CZ over the most-recent decade, 2010-2019.

                                       Violation Counts




                                                                                    -0.05 - 1.76
                                                                                    -0.11 - -0.05
                                                                                    -0.15 - -0.11
                                                                                    -0.19 - -0.15
                                                                                    -0.25 - -0.19
                                                                                    -0.85 - -0.25
                                                                                    No data

                                      Violation Penalties




                                                                                 -28.2 - 519.1
                                                                                 -68.3 - -28.2
                                                                                 -91.8 - -68.3
                                                                                 -116.8 - -91.8
                                                                                 -154.0 - -116.8
                                                                                 -911.0 - -154.0
                                                                                 No data


                                                28
                             Table 1: Summary Statistics by Agencies

This table reports summary statistics by agencies. The statistics are based on the data in the sample
for estimation. Avg. Count is the average of total violations counts in a year across all the years.
Avg. Penalty is the average of the penalty per violation in a year across all the years and is expressed
in thousands of dollars. Avg. Fraction of Counts is the average of the fraction of total labor
violations counts in a year across all the years. Avg. Fraction of Penalties is the average of the
fraction of total labor violations penalties in a year across all the years.
    Agency Code   Avg. Count   Avg. Penalty ($000)    Avg. Fraction of Counts   Avg. Fraction of Penalties
                      (1)              (2)                      (3)                        (4)
    NLRB              858             141.5                   0.251                       0.427
    OSHA             6602             20.61                   0.534                       0.306
    WHD              3601             56.64                   0.316                       0.437




                                                     29
                                     Table 2: Summary Statistics

This table reports the summary statistics of variables in the empirical analysis, weighted by total
employment. All variables are at the local industry-year level. In the QCEW-VT sample, a local
industry is defined as the interaction between a 4-digit 2012 NAICS code and a 2000 CZ code.
In the CPS-VT sample, a local industry is defined by the interaction between a census code-based
industry and a state.

                                                            Panel A: QCEW-VT Sample
                                                N         Mean      Std.Dev.     P10       P50       P90
 Labor Violation Dummy                       1,465,807     0.305      0.461      0.000    0.000       1.000
 Labor Violation Count per 1,000 Employees   1,465,807     0.101      0.682      0.000    0.000       0.197
 OSHA Violation Count per 1,000 Employees    1,465,807     0.063      0.601      0.000    0.000       0.061
 WHD Violation Count per 1,000 Employees     1,465,807     0.033      0.287      0.000    0.000       0.069
 NLRB Violation Count per 1,000 Employees    1,465,807     0.005      0.109      0.000    0.000       0.000
 Labor Violation Penalty per Million Pay     1,465,807    70.024    2825.002     0.000    0.000     114.616
 OSHA Violation Penalty per Million Pay      1,465,807    19.690     423.222     0.000    0.000      15.637
 WHD Violation Penalty per Million Pay       1,465,807    39.357    1103.714     0.000    0.000      48.042
 NLRB Violation Penalty per Million Pay      1,465,807    10.977    2564.881    0.000     0.000      0.000
 Average Pay per Employee ($000)             1,465,807    53.411     38.018     19.292    44.418    97.245
 Fraction of College-educated Employees      1,211,616     0.273      0.141      0.131    0.236       0.479
                                                                 Panel B: CPS-VT Sample
                                                    N      Mean      Std.Dev.     P10       P50       P90
 Labor Violation Count per 1,000 Employees      167,384     0.004      0.013      0.000     0.000     0.012
 Labor Violation Penalty per Million Pay        167,384     6.784    4287.826    0.000     0.061      8.551
 Average Pay per Employee ($000)                167,384    42.576     16.592     22.630    41.119    63.722
 Union Coverage                                 167,384     0.131     0.178      0.000     0.052      0.382




                                                    30
                             Table 3: Working Conditions and Labor Violations

This table reports the relation between working conditions reported by workers and labor violation intensity
at the 4-digit NAICS level in the year 2015. In Panels A and C, the labor violation intensity measure is
the natural logarithm of one plus labor violation counts per 1,000 employees. In Panels B and D, the labor
violation intensity measure is the natural logarithm of one plus labor violation penalty amount per million
pay. In Panels A and B, we do not control for individual characteristics. In Panels C and D, we control for
individual characteristics. Standard errors are clustered at the 4-digit NAICS level.

                                                          Panel A: Counts per 1000 Employees
                                        Abuse     Last-min.         Physical          Stress     Good Boss        Good
                                                   Change          Exposure                                   Workplace
                                           (1)          (2)              (3)             (4)            (5)         (6))
 Log(1+Count per 1,000 Employees)      0.118*       0.043*         0.357***            0.001         -0.046      -0.091
                                       [0.066]      [0.023]          [0.066]         [0.051]        [0.062]     [0.072]
 Adjusted R2                             0.004        0.003            0.052          -0.001         -0.000       0.002
 N                                       1103           510            1104             1103           1104        1104

                                                              Panel B: Penalty per Million Pay
                                        Abuse     Last-min.         Physical           Stress    Good Boss        Good
                                                   Change          Exposure                                   Workplace
                                            (1)         (2)              (3)              (4)           (5)         (6))
 Log(1+Penalty per One Million Pay)   0.066***     0.024**         0.150***           -0.019     -0.065***    -0.063***
                                        [0.023]     [0.010]          [0.024]         [0.020]        [0.023]      [0.022]
 Adjusted R2                              0.009       0.009            0.065          -0.000          0.008        0.007
 N                                         1103         510             1104           1103           1104         1104




                                                        31
                            Working Conditions and Labor Violations (Cont'd)

                                                         Panel C: Counts per 1000 Employees
                                      Abuse     Last-min.          Physical          Stress     Good Boss         Good
                                                 Change           Exposure                                    Workplace
                                         (1)          (2)               (3)             (4)            (5)          (6))
Log(1+Count per 1,000 Employees)       0.103        0.029         0.332***            0.003         -0.059       -0.114
                                     [0.065]      [0.026]           [0.065]         [0.052]        [0.064]      [0.076]
Male                                   0.014        0.038         0.262***           -0.054          0.093       -0.017
                                     [0.063]      [0.032]           [0.050]         [0.060]        [0.065]      [0.059]
Log(Age)                              -0.095       -0.075            -0.081           0.049      -0.257**        -0.079
                                     [0.117]      [0.081]           [0.084]         [0.112]        [0.105]      [0.124]
Log(Earnings)                         -0.044     -0.032*         -0.095***            0.006         -0.027       -0.015
                                     [0.027]      [0.018]           [0.028]         [0.024]        [0.020]      [0.028]
White                                  0.006        0.042             0.006           0.046         -0.066       -0.139
                                     [0.079]      [0.045]           [0.083]         [0.102]        [0.085]      [0.094]
Black                                  0.270        0.046         0.347***           -0.057          0.037       -0.138
                                     [0.174]      [0.054]           [0.131]         [0.114]        [0.115]      [0.131]
Hispanic                               0.092       -0.033             0.100          -0.002         -0.092        0.010
                                     [0.105]      [0.037]           [0.061]         [0.074]        [0.084]      [0.085]
Adjusted R2                            0.012        0.009             0.106          -0.004          0.004        0.001
N                                       1081          494              1081            1081           1081         1081

                                                             Panel D: Penalty per Million Pay
                                      Abuse     Last-min.          Physical          Stress     Good Boss         Good
                                                 Change           Exposure                                    Workplace
                                          (1)         (2)               (3)             (4)            (5)          (6))
Log(1+Penalty per One Million Pay)   0.057**       0.020*         0.138***           -0.016     -0.072***     -0.070***
                                      [0.023]      [0.010]          [0.025]         [0.021]         [0.023]      [0.023]
Male                                   -0.001        0.032        0.229***           -0.048         0.117*         0.003
                                      [0.063]      [0.031]          [0.051]         [0.060]         [0.066]      [0.059]
Log(Age)                               -0.096       -0.074           -0.081           0.051      -0.253**         -0.077
                                      [0.117]      [0.081]          [0.086]         [0.111]         [0.104]      [0.123]
Log(Earnings)                          -0.040     -0.031*        -0.091***            0.002        -0.038*        -0.021
                                      [0.027]      [0.017]          [0.028]         [0.024]         [0.021]      [0.027]
White                                   0.016        0.050            0.029           0.043          -0.078       -0.151
                                      [0.078]      [0.046]          [0.083]         [0.102]         [0.083]      [0.092]
Black                                   0.273        0.057        0.354***           -0.057           0.034       -0.142
                                      [0.173]      [0.055]          [0.133]         [0.114]         [0.115]      [0.130]
Hispanic                                0.092       -0.032           0.104*          -0.000          -0.089        0.011
                                      [0.104]      [0.037]          [0.060]         [0.074]         [0.084]      [0.084]
Adjusted R2                             0.015        0.014            0.115          -0.004           0.013        0.007
N                                        1081          494             1081           1081             1081         1081




                                                       32
                          Table 4: Average Pay and Labor Violations

This table reports the relation between average pay per employee and labor violation intensity. The
dependent variables in Panels A and B are the natural logarithm of one plus violation counts per
1,000 employees and the natural logarithm of one plus violation penalty per million pay, respec-
tively. A local industry is defined as the interaction between a 4-digit 2012 NAICS code and a
2000 CZ code. Estimations are weighted by total employment in a local industry-year. In column
3, we restrict the sample to local industry-year observations in which there are labor violations.
Standard errors are clustered at the local industry level.

                                         Panel A: Labor Violation Counts per 1000 Employees
                                                   (1)                     (2)                       (3)
 Log(Average Annual Pay-QCEW)               0.008***                -0.015***                 -0.055***
                                              [0.002]                  [0.003]                   [0.015]
 Local Industry FEs                                                          Y                         Y
 Year FEs                                           Y                        Y                         Y
 Adjusted R2                                    0.016                    0.409                     0.805
 N                                          1,465,807               1,465,807                     93,082
                                           Panel B: Labor Violation Penalty per Million Pay
                                                   (1)                     (2)                       (3)
 Log(Average Annual Pay-QCEW)               -0.169***               -0.422***                 -1.186***
                                               [0.030]                 [0.060]                   [0.203]
 Local Industry FEs                                                          Y                         Y
 Year FEs                                           Y                        Y                         Y
 Adjusted R2                                    0.036                    0.359                     0.466
 N                                          1,465,807               1,465,807                     93,082




                                                33
                             Table 5: Different Types of Industries

This table reports the results for secondary sector industries and all other industries. Industries
in the secondary sector are mining, utilities, construction, and manufacturing industries. A local
industry is defined as the interaction between a 4-digit 2012 NAICS code and a 2000 CZ code.
The dependent variables in Panels A and B are the natural logarithm of one plus violation counts
per 1,000 employees and the natural logarithm of one plus violation penalty per million pay, re-
spectively. Columns (1) and (2) of each panel reports the results for secondary sector industries
and columns (3) and (4) of each panel reports the results for all other industries. Estimations are
weighted by total employment in a local industry-year. Standard errors are clustered at the local
industry level.

                                         Panel A: Labor Violation Counts per 1000 Employees
                                       Secondary Sector Ind.                    Other Ind.
                                             (1)                (2)              (3)                 (4)
 Log(Average Annual Pay-QCEW)         -0.135***          -0.069***        -0.009***           -0.010***
                                         [0.011]            [0.013]          [0.001]             [0.003]
 Local Industry FEs                                               Y                                    Y
 Year FEs                                     Y                   Y               Y                    Y
 Adjusted R2                              0.089               0.479           0.017                0.144
 N                                      280,195            280,195        1,185,612           1,185,612
                                           Panel B: Labor Violation Penalty per Million Pay
                                       Secondary Sector Ind.                    Other Ind.
                                             (1)                (2)              (3)                 (4)
 Log(Average Annual Pay-QCEW)         -0.537***          -0.340***        -0.331***           -0.456***
                                         [0.108]            [0.103]          [0.030]             [0.068]
 Local Industry FEs                                               Y                                    Y
 Year FEs                                     Y                   Y               Y                    Y
 Adjusted R2                              0.086               0.430           0.047                0.310
 N                                      280,195            280,195        1,185,612           1,185,612




                                                   34
                                   Table 6: Different Agencies

This table reports the relation between average pay per employee and labor violation intensity by
agencies. The dependent variables in Panels A and B are the natural logarithm of one plus violation
counts per 1,000 employees and the natural logarithm of one plus violation penalty per million pay,
respectively. A local industry is defined as the interaction between a 4-digit 2012 NAICS code and
a 2000 CZ code. Estimations are weighted by total employment in a local industry-year. Standard
errors are clustered at the local industry level.

                                                 Panel A: Counts per 1000 Employees
                                               OSHA                     WHD                 NLRB
                                                   (1)                     (2)                  (3)
 Log(Average Annual Pay-QCEW)               -0.010***               -0.009***             0.003***
                                               [0.003]                 [0.002]              [0.001]
 Local Industry FEs                                  Y                       Y                    Y
 Year FEs                                            Y                       Y                    Y
 Adjusted R2                                     0.484                   0.134                0.046
 N                                          1,465,807               1,465,807            1,465,807
                                                   Panel B: Penalty per Million Pay
                                               OSHA                     WHD                 NLRB
                                                   (1)                     (2)                  (3)
 Log(Average Annual Pay-QCEW)               -0.210***               -0.326***              0.077**
                                               [0.041]                 [0.056]              [0.031]
 Local Industry FEs                                  Y                       Y                    Y
 Year FEs                                            Y                       Y                    Y
 Adjusted R2                                     0.436                   0.286                0.147
 N                                          1,465,807               1,465,807            1,465,807




                                                35
                Table 7: Programmed vs. Non-Programmed OSHA Inspections

This table reports the relation between average pay per employee and labor violation intensity for
programmed (agency-driven) and non-programmed (worker-driven) OSHA inspections. Columns
(1) of Panels A and B repeat the results in columns (1) of Panels A and B in Table 6. The sample
period for columns (2)-(4) of Panels A and B are from 2000 to 2013. The dependent variables in
Panels A and B are the natural logarithm of one plus violation counts per 1,000 employees and the
natural logarithm of one plus violation penalty per million pay, respectively. A local industry is
defined as the interaction between a 4-digit 2012 NAICS code and a 2000 CZ code. Estimations
are weighted by total employment in a local industry-year. Standard errors are clustered at the
local industry level.

                                                   Panel A: Counts per 1000 Employees
                                    OSHA (Full          All Inspections   Programmed            Non-
                                      Sample)                                            Programmed
                                             (1)                    (2)            (3)            (4)
 Log(Average Annual Pay-QCEW)         -0.010***             -0.011***       -0.006***      -0.006***
                                         [0.003]               [0.002]         [0.001]        [0.001]
 Local Industry FEs                            Y                     Y               Y              Y
 Year FEs                                      Y                     Y               Y              Y
 Adjusted R2                               0.484                 0.299           0.282          0.205
 N                                    1,465,807             1,005,299       1,005,299      1,005,299
                                                    Panel B: Penalty per Million Pay
                                    OSHA (Full          All Inspections   Programmed            Non-
                                      Sample)                                            Programmed
                                             (1)                    (2)            (3)            (4)
 Log(Average Annual Pay-QCEW)         -0.210***             -0.186***       -0.062***      -0.130***
                                         [0.041]               [0.031]         [0.018]        [0.029]
 Local Industry FEs                            Y                     Y               Y              Y
 Year FEs                                      Y                     Y               Y              Y
 Adjusted R2                               0.436                 0.353           0.282          0.306
 N                                    1,465,807             1,005,299       1,005,299      1,005,299




                                                   36
                                          Table 8: Robustness Tests

This table reports the robustness tests to our main results. The dependent variables in Panels A
and B are the natural logarithm of one plus violation counts per 1,000 employees and the natural
logarithm of one plus violation penalty per million pay, respectively. A local industry is defined
as the interaction between a 4-digit 2012 NAICS code and a 2000 CZ code. Except for column
(1), all estimations are weighted by total employment in a local industry-year. Standard errors are
clustered at the local industry level.

                                                          Panel A: Counts per 1000 Employees
                                                   No weights             Flexible FE          Education
                                                            (1)                   (2)                (3)
 Log(Average Annual Pay-QCEW)                       -0.011***              -0.008***
                                                       [0.002]                [0.002]
 Fraction of College-educated Employees                                                        0.223***
                                                                                                 [0.022]
 Local Industry FE                                           Y                     Y                  Y
 Year FE                                                     Y                                        Y
 Industry×Year FE                                                                  Y
 CZ×Year FE                                                                        Y
 Adjusted R2                                             0.148                 0.457               0.422
 N                                                   1,465,807             1,465,807           1,328,768
                                                           Panel B: Penalty per Million Pay
                                                   No weights             Flexible FE          Education
                                                            (1)                   (2)                (3)
 Log(Average Annual Pay-QCEW)                       -0.048***              -0.146***
                                                       [0.006]                [0.046]
 Fraction of College-educated Employees                                                           -0.618
                                                                                                 [0.586]
 Local Industry FE                                           Y                     Y                   Y
 Year FE                                                     Y                                         Y
 Industry×Year FE                                                                  Y
 CZ×Year FE                                                                        Y
 Adjusted R2                                             0.211                 0.460               0.401
 N                                                   1,465,807             1,465,807           1,328,768




                                                     37
                          Table 9: Concentration and Labor Violations

This table reports the relation between labor market concentration and labor violation intensity.
The dependent variables in Panels A and B are the natural logarithm of one plus violation counts
per 1,000 employees and the natural logarithm of one plus violation penalty per million pay, re-
spectively. A local industry is defined as the interaction between a 4-digit 2012 NAICS code and a
2000 CZ code. Log(Employment HHI) is the logarithm of the Herfindahl Hirschman Index, using
shares of employment in the local industry. The instrument for Log(Employment HHI) in a local
industry is the average of the log(1/Number of Firms) in other CZs for the same industry. Estima-
tions are weighted by total employment in a local industry-year. Standard errors are clustered at
the local industry level.

                                         Panel A: Labor Violation Counts per 1000 Employees
                                           OLS                OLS                  2SLS       First Stage
                                             (1)                (2)                 (3)               (4)
 Log(Employment HHI-InfoGroup)        -0.006***               0.000          0.038***
                                         [0.001]            [0.001]            [0.003]
 IV                                                                                           0.620***
                                                                                                 [0.033]
 Local Industry FEs                                               Y                 Y                  Y
 Year FEs                                     Y                   Y                 Y                  Y
 Adjusted R2                              0.019               0.405            -0.018              0.873
 N                                    1,326,444           1,326,444         1,326,444         1,326,444
 Kleibergen-Paap F-stat                                                                              345
                                           Panel B: Labor Violation Penalty per Million Pay
                                                   OLS                     OLS                     2SLS
                                                    (1)                      (2)                      (3)
 Log(Employment HHI-InfoGroup)              -0.251***                     -0.013               0.285***
                                               [0.015]                   [0.010]                 [0.048]
 Local Industry FEs                                                            Y                       Y
 Year FEs                                           Y                          Y                       Y
 Adjusted R2                                    0.063                      0.359                  -0.009
 N                                          1,326,444                 1,326,444               1,326,444




                                                   38
                                     Table 10: CPS Sample

This table reports the relations between average pay per employee or union coverage rate and la-
bor violation intensity using the merged sample between CPS and Violation Tracker database. The
dependent variables in Panels A and B are the natural logarithm of one plus violation counts per
1,000 employees and the natural logarithm of one plus violation penalty per million pay, respec-
tively. "Average Pay-CPS" is calculated as the average weekly earnings in a labor market times 52.
A local industry is defined as an interaction between a census code-based industry and a state in a
year. A census code-based industry is one or a group of 1990 census industry codes in CPS. The
estimations are weighted by total employment in a local industry. Standard errors are clustered at
the local industry level.

                                       Panel A: Violation Counts per 1000 Employees
                                             (1)                         (2)                    (3)
 Log(Average Pay-CPS)              -0.00057***                                         -0.00054***
                                        [0.000]                                             [0.000]
 Union Coverage Rate                                           -0.00239***             -0.00233***
                                                                    [0.001]                 [0.001]
 Local Industry FE                            Y                           Y                       Y
 Year FE                                      Y                           Y                       Y
 Adjusted R2                              0.366                       0.366                   0.366
 N                                      167,384                    167,384                 167,384
                                          Panel B: Violation Penalty per Million Pay
                                             (1)                         (2)                    (3)
 Log(Average Pay-CPS)                 -0.299***                                          -0.300***
                                         [0.015]                                            [0.015]
 Union Coverage Rate                                                  -0.028                  0.005
                                                                     [0.045]                [0.045]
 Local Industry FE                            Y                            Y                      Y
 Year FE                                      Y                            Y                      Y
 Adjusted R2                              0.517                        0.514                  0.517
 N                                      167,384                     167,384                167,384




                                                   39
Appendix A   Additional Results




                             40
                 Figure A.1: Raw labor-violation intensity by commuting zone

This figure reports the raw violations intensities across 2000 commuting zones (CZ). For each
measure of violations intensity, we calculate the average value in a CZ pooling over the most-
recent decade, 2010-2019.

                      Violation Counts per 1,000 Employees




                                                                                0.07 - 0.25
                                                                                0.06 - 0.07
                                                                                0.05 - 0.06
                                                                                0.04 - 0.05
                                                                                0.03 - 0.04
                                                                                0.00 - 0.03

                         Violation Penalties per Million Pay




                                                                               40.8 - 381.3
                                                                               29.1 - 40.8
                                                                               23.1 - 29.1
                                                                               17.8 - 23.1
                                                                               12.8 - 17.8
                                                                               0.0 - 12.8




                                             41
                                      Figure A.2: Trends of Violations Intensity Nationally

This figure reports the trend of violation intensity between 2000 and 2019. Total Penalties/Payroll
is the total violations penalties in a year per Million pay. Total Counts/Emp is the total violations
counts in a year per 1,000 employees.
                100




                                                                                                     .2               .15
                          80
    Total Penalties/Payroll




                                                                                                     Total Counts/Emp
              60




                                                                                                             .1
   40




                                                                                                     .05
                20




                                                                                                     0

                               2000             2006                    2012                  2018

                                                Total Penalty                 Total Counts




                                                               42
   Figure A.3: States with highest and lowest labor-violation intensities in total and by agency

This figure reports the top and bottom ten states in terms of violations intensities in total and for
each agency. For each measure of violations intensity, we calculate the average value in a state
across the most recent ten years, i.e., 2010-2019.

                                                                                                    Top Ten States
                                 Violations Counts per 1,000 Employees                                                                                  Violations Penalties per Million Pay

                                      OSHA                                                     WHD                                                          OSHA                                                    WHD
                  WY




                                                                    .075
                                                                                                                                                                                                HI




                                                                                                                                  65




                                                                                                                                                                                          65
                                                                           HI                                                                                                                        VT
          .19




                       AL
                                                                                                                                        WY
                            HI
                                 NE NJ                              .07         OK




                                                                                                                                  60
          .18




                                                                                                                                             AL




                                                                                                                                                                                          60
                                                                                                                                                  NE
                                                                                     TX
                                                                                          AR
                                           CT
          .17




                                                                                               RI
                                                                    .065




                                                                                                                                  55
                                                                                                    NM                                                                                                    MS




                                                                                                                                                                                          55
                                                AK                                                                                                     HI ME                                                   NM AZ
          .16




                                                                                                         KS                                                                                                              LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              OK




                                                                                                                                  50
                                                                    .06




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   RI
                                                                                                              MS




                                                                                                                                                                                          50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        UT
          .15




                                                     ME                                                                                                          OH                                                                          TX
                                                       GA                                                          VT
                                                                    .055




                                                                                                                                  45
                                                                                                                                                                   NH NJ WI
                                                               WV                                                       FL                                                           AK
          .14




                                                                                                                                                                                          45
                  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10                                     1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10                                         1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10                                    1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10


                                      NLRB                                                     ALL                                                          NLRB                                                    ALL
                  AK                                                       HI                                                     200




                                                                                                                                                                                          300
                                                                                                                                        MS
                                                                    .26




                                                                                                                                                                                                MS
          .016




                                                                                WY




                                                                                                                                                                                          250
                                                                                                                                  150
                                                                    .24




                       DC                                                            NJ
                                                                                          AL
          .014




                            CT                                                                 NE




                                                                                                                                                                                          200
                                                                                                                                  100
                                                                    .22
          .012




                                                                                                    CT




                                                                                                                                                                                          150
                                                                                                         AK
                                                                                                                                  50




                                 NV
                                                                    .2
          .01




                                                                                                                                             IL KY
                                      AZ MD                                                                                                                                                          HI
                                           MT DE                                                              GA                                       AK MECT NHOR
                                                          OH                                                       RI WV                                                        RI NY                     AL

                                                                                                                                                                                          100
                                                               NY                                                                                                                                              NE RI WY IL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ME AK KY
          .008




                                                                    .18




                                                                                                                                  0




                  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10                                     1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10                                         1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10                                    1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10



                                                                                          Bottom Ten States
                                 Violations Counts per 1,000 Employees                                                                                  Violations Penalties per Million Pay

                                      OSHA                                                     WHD                                                          OSHA                                                    WHD
                                                                                                                                                                                     LA                                                      IL
                                                                    .026




                                                                                                                                                                                MI
          .05




                                                                                                                        OR
                                                                                                                                  12




                                                                                                                   DE
                                                                                                                                                                                          18




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   AKMA
                                                               MI                                             AK
                                                          LA                                             ND                                                                OR                                                 CT
                                                                    .024




                                                                                                                                  10
          .04




                                                  OR
                                                                                                                                                                                          16




                                                MD
                                                                    .022




                                      MNUT                                                                                                                       IN MN
                                                                                                                                  8




                                                                                                                                                            MD
          .03




                                                                                                                                                       UT
                                                                                                                                                                                          14




                                                                                               WA                                                                                                           MNME IN
                                 IN                                                                                                                                                                       DC
                                                                    .02




                                                                                          IN DC
                                                                                                                                  6




                                                                                     MT                                                           NM
                            NM                                                                                                                                                                       WI
          .02




                                                                                                                                                                                          12
                                                                    .018




                                                                                                                                  4




                       SC                                                                                                                    SC
                                                                                WI                                                                                                              DE
                  AZ                                                                                                                    AZ
                                                                           MN
                                                                    .016
          .01




                                                                                                                                                                                          10
                                                                                                                                  2




                  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10                                     1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10                                         1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10                                    1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10


                                      NLRB                                                     ALL                                                          NLRB                                                    ALL
                                                                                                                        VA
          .003




                                                                                                                                                                                          50
                                                                                                                                  2




                                                                                                              NM MI                                                                                                                     DEOR
                                                                    .09




                                                               AL                                                                                                                    SC                                            IA
                                                                                                         UT                                                                     TX
                                                          OK                                                                                                                                                                  MA
          .0025




                                                     SC
                                                                                                                                                                                          45




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         MI
                                                                    .08




                                                                                                                                                                           ND
                                                                                                                                  1.5




                                                NC                                                                                                                                                                  CO
                                                                                                    MD                                                                HI
                                           AR
                                      ID
          .002




                                                                                                                                                                                          40




                                                                                               AZ
                                                                    .07




                                 FL                                                                                                                              KS                                            SC
                                                                                          OR                                                                VT
                            TX
                                                                                                                                  1
          .0015




                                                                                                                                                                                          35




                                                                                                                                                       SD
                                                                    .06




                                                                                     SC                                                           GA
                       GA                                                       MN                                                                                                                        DC
                                                                           IN                                                                OK
                  UT
                                                                                                                                        UT                                                      MN IN
          .001




                                                                                                                                                                                          30
                                                                                                                                  .5
                                                                    .05




                  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10                                     1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10                                         1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10                                    1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10




                                                                                                                             43
 Figure A.4: Industries with highest and lowest labor-violation intensities in total and by agency

This figure reports the top and bottom five NAICS sectors in terms of violations intensities in total
and for each agency. For each measure of violations intensity, we calculate the average value in a
NAICS sector across the most recent ten years, i.e., 2010-2019.
                               Top Five NAICS Sectors-Violations Counts per 1,000 Employees                                                                                                                               Top Five NAICS Sectors-Violations Penalties per Million Pay

                                            OSHA                                                                                        WHD                                                                                      OSHA                                                                                    WHD
                                                                                                    Agriculture




                                                                                                                                                                                         200




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                200
  .8




          Construction
                                                                                             .15




                                                                                                                                                                                               Construction                                                                           Agriculture




                                                                                                                                                                                         150
  .6




                                                                                                                    Construction




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                150
                                                                                                                                                                                         100
  .4




                                                                                             .1




                              Mfg.                                                                                                                                                                                 Mfg.                                                                             Leisure&Hospitality
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Agriculture




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Construction
                                                                                                                                   Leisure&Hospitality

                                                                                                                                                                                         50
                                             Mining
  .2




                                                         Agriculture                                                                                       Mining
                                                                            Utilities                                                                                                                                                           Mining        Transport
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Mining
                                                                                             .05




                                                                                                                                                                       Transport                                                                                                                                                                           Transport




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                50
  0




                                                                                                                                                                                         0



               1               2               3             4                 5                         1               2                 3                 4             5                        1               2               3              4              5                        1                2               3                4                5


                                            NLRB                                                                                         ALL                                                                                     NLRB                                                                                     ALL
            Utilities
                                                                                                                                                                                         200




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                300
                                                                                             1
  .02




                                                                                                                                                                                                 Utilities                                                                            Construction
                                                                                                    Construction
                                                                                                                                                                                         150




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                250
                                                                                             .8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Agriculture
  .015




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Utilities
                                                                                                                                                                                         100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                200
                                                                                             .6




                          Construction
                                           Transport
                                                            Mfg.
  .01




                                                                                             .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                150
                                                                                                                                                                                         50




                                                                                                                     Agriculture          Mfg.
                                                                          Information                                                                                                                              Mfg.           Mining                                                                                             Leisure&Hospitality
                                                                                                                                                           Mining                                                                             ConstructionLeisure&Hospitality                                                                                Mfg.
                                                                                             .2




                                                                                                                                                                        Utilities
  .005




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                100
                                                                                                                                                                                         0




               1               2               3             4                 5                         1               2                 3                 4             5                        1               2               3              4              5                        1                2               3                4                5



                            Bottom Five NAICS Sectors-Violations Counts per 1,000 Employees                                                                                                                         Bottom Five NAICS Sectors-Violations Penalties per Million Pay

                                            OSHA                                                                                        WHD                                                                                      OSHA                                                                                    WHD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Mfg.
  .015




                                                                                             .025




                                                                                                                                                                                         6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                15




                                                                       Leisure&Hospitality                                                                              Utilities                                                                           Business Svcs                                                               Information
                                                                                             .02




                                                         Information                                                                                     Information
                                                                                                                                       Wholesale
  .01




                                                                                                                                                                                         4




                         Fin.&RealEstate Edu&Health
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Wholesale
                                                                                             .015




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Edu&Health
                                                                                                                   Fin.&RealEstate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Fin.&RealEstate
  .005




                                                                                             .01




                                                                                                                                                                                         2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                5




                                                                                                                                                                                                              Fin.&RealEstate Information
                                                                                             .005




             Mgmt                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Mgmt
                                                                                                       Mgmt                                                                                       Mgmt
  0




                                                                                                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0




               1               2               3             4                 5                         1               2                 3                 4             5                        1               2               3              4              5                        1                2               3                4                5


                                            NLRB                                                                                         ALL                                                                                     NLRB                                                                                     ALL
                                                                                                                                                                        Retail                                                                                                                                                                         Edu&Health
  .003




                                                                                             .05




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Wholesale
                                                                                                                                                                                         3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Information
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                30




                                                                           Wholesale                                                                 Edu&Health
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Retail
                                                                                             .04
  .0025




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Business Svcs
                                                                                                                                      Information
                                                                                                                                                                                         2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                20




                                           Agriculture     Retail                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Information
                                                                                             .03
  .002




                                                                                                                   Fin.&RealEstate
                                                                                             .02




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                10
                                                                                                                                                                                         1




                         Fin.&RealEstate
  .0015




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Fin.&RealEstate
                                                                                             .01




                                                                                                                                                                                                              Fin.&RealEstate
                                                                                                       Mgmt                                                                                       Mgmt
             Mgmt                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Mgmt
  .001




                                                                                             0




                                                                                                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0




               1               2               3             4                 5                         1               2                 3                 4             5                        1               2               3              4              5                        1                2               3                4                5




                                                                                                                                                                                    44
                       Table A.1: List of Agencies that Enforce Labor Violations

This table reports the list of agencies that enforce labor violations in the Violation Tracker database.
For each agency, Share of Violation Counts and Share of Penalties are the shares of total violations
and penalties across all years in the Violations Tracker database, respectively. The list is sorted in
a descending order by Share of Violation Counts. There are 290,696 violations and 12.66 million
(expressed in 2019 dollar) penalties across the years.
   Agency Code   Agency                                                                Share of Violation Counts (%)   Share of Penalties (%)
   OSHA          OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY & HEALTH ADMINISTRATION                                      53.138                      20.603
   WHD           LABOR DEPARTMENT WAGE AND HOUR DIVISION                                          26.760                      30.322
   MSHA          MINE SAFETY & HEALTH ADMINISTRATION                                               9.485                       5.377
   NLRB          NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS BOARD                                                    4.340                      15.269
   CA-LCO        CALIFORNIA LABOR COMMISSIONER'S OFFICE                                            2.588                       2.331
   EBSA          EMPLOYEE BENEFITS SECURITY ADMINISTRATION                                         0.950                       4.068
   EEOC          EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION                                           0.680                      14.374
   WA-DLI        WASHINGTON STATE DEPARTMENT OF LABOR & INDUSTRIES                                 0.577                       0.208
   PA-DLI        PENNSYLVANIA DEPARTMENT OF LABOR & INDUSTRY                                       0.390                       0.298
   MA-AG         MASSACHUSETTS ATTORNEY GENERAL                                                    0.361                       0.718
   KY-DWS        KENTUCKY DEPARTMENT OF WORKPLACE STANDARDS                                        0.226                       0.168
   IL-DOL        ILLINOIS DEPARTMENT OF LABOR                                                      0.146                       0.051
   OFCCP         OFFICE OF FEDERAL CONTRACT COMPLIANCE PROGRAMS                                    0.131                       1.366
   NY-AG         NEW YORK ATTORNEY GENERAL                                                         0.041                       1.101
   MO-DLIR       MISSOURI DEPARTMENT OF LABOR & INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS                               0.039                       0.013
   DOJ_RIGHTS    JUSTICE DEPARTMENT CIVIL RIGHTS DIVISION                                          0.031                       0.083
   MN-DLI        MINNESOTA DEPARTMENT OF LABOR & INDUSTRY                                          0.024                       0.006
   USAO          THE U.S. ATTORNEY'S OFFICE                                                        0.022                       1.780
   CA-SFCA       SAN FRANCISCO (CA) CITY ATTORNEY                                                  0.015                       0.103
   WI-AG         WISCONSIN ATTORNEY GENERAL                                                        0.008                       0.091
   NJ-AG         NEW JERSEY ATTORNEY GENERAL                                                       0.007                       0.010
   IL-AG         ILLINOIS ATTORNEY GENERAL                                                         0.004                       0.010
   WA-AG         WASHINGTON ATTORNEY GENERAL                                                       0.003                       0.015
   NY-BKLYNDA    BROOKLYN (NY) DISTRICT ATTORNEY                                                   0.002                       0.045
   NY-NYCCO      NEW YORK CITY COMPTROLLER'S OFFICE                                                0.002                       0.064
   MO-AG         MISSOURI ATTORNEY GENERAL                                                         0.002                       0.002
   NY-MANDA      MANHATTAN (NY) DISTRICT ATTORNEY                                                  0.002                       0.061
   CA-AG         CALIFORNIA ATTORNEY GENERAL                                                       0.002                       0.065
   HI-AG         HAWAII ATTORNEY GENERAL                                                           0.002                       0.725
   CA-MULTI      CALIFORNIA MULTI-JURISDICTION CASE                                                0.001                       0.027
   DC-AG         DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA ATTORNEY GENERAL                                             0.001                       0.001
   ME-AG         MAINE ATTORNEY GENERAL                                                            0.001                       0.036
   PA-AG         PENNSYLVANIA ATTORNEY GENERAL                                                     0.001                       0.007
   AZ-AG         ARIZONA ATTORNEY GENERAL                                                          0.001                       0.027
   CA-LACA       LOS ANGELES (CA) CITY ATTORNEY                                                    0.001                       0.018
   CT-AG         CONNECTICUT ATTORNEY GENERAL                                                      0.001                       0.006
   DOJ_CIVIL     JUSTICE DEPARTMENT CIVIL DIVISION                                                 0.001                       0.053
   CA-CCCDA      CONTRA COSTA COUNTY (CA) DISTRICT ATTORNEY                                        0.001                       0.002
   CA-LACDA      LOS ANGELES COUNTY (CA) DISTRICT ATTORNEY                                         0.001                       0.059
   CA-OCDA       ORANGE COUNTY (CA) DISTRICT ATTORNEY                                              0.001                       0.021
   CA-SCCDA      SANTA CLARA COUNTY (CA) DISTRICT ATTORNEY                                         0.001                       0.015
   CFPB          CONSUMER FINANCIAL PROTECTION BUREAU                                              0.001                       0.178
   FTC           FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION                                                          0.001                       0.001
   MI-AG         MICHIGAN ATTORNEY GENERAL                                                         0.001                       0.001
   CA-LACDCBA    LOS ANGELES (CA) COUNTY DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AND BUSINESS AFFAIRS               0.000                       0.001
   CA-OCA        OAKLAND (CA) CITY ATTORNEY                                                        0.000                       0.000
   CA-SFDA       CITY AND COUNTY OF SAN FRANCISCO (CA) DISTRICT ATTORNEY                           0.000                       0.000
   CA-SONDA      SONOMA COUNTY (CA) DISTRICT ATTORNEY                                              0.000                       0.003
   DE-AG         DELAWARE ATTORNEY GENERAL                                                         0.000                       0.003
   DOE           ENERGY DEPARTMENT OFFICE OF ENFORCEMENT                                           0.000                       0.003
   EPA           JUSTICE DEPARTMENT ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES DIVISION                     0.000                       0.017
   FL-AG         FLORIDA ATTORNEY GENERAL                                                          0.000                       0.004
   FL-MDSA       MIAMI-DADE (FL) STATE ATTORNEY                                                    0.000                       0.001
   MT-AG         MONTANA ATTORNEY GENERAL                                                          0.000                       0.021
   NM-AG         NEW MEXICO ATTORNEY GENERAL                                                       0.000                       0.002
   NY-DFS        NEW YORK DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES                                         0.000                       0.121
   NY-NCDA       NASSAU COUNTY (NY) DISTRICT ATTORNEY                                              0.000                       0.003
   NY-NYCDCWP    NEW YORK CITY DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AND WORKER PROTECTION                        0.000                       0.001
   NY-QCDA       QUEENS COUNTY (NY) DISTRICT ATTORNEY                                              0.000                       0.010
   NY-SCDA       SUFFOLK COUNTY (NY) DISTRICT ATTORNEY                                             0.000                       0.010
   OH-AG         OHIO ATTORNEY GENERAL                                                             0.000                       0.011
   OWCP          DEPARTMENT OF LABOR OFFICE OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION PROGRAMS                      0.000                       0.001
   TX-TRAVISDA   TRAVIS COUNTY (TX) DISTRICT ATTORNEY                                              0.000                       0.004




                                                              45
                                Table A.2: More Robustness Tests

This table reports the robustness tests to our main results. The dependent variables in Panels A
and B are the natural logarithm of one plus violation counts per 1,000 employees and the natural
logarithm of one plus violation penalty per million pay, respectively. In column (1), we define
a local labor market as the interaction between a 4-digit 2012 NAICS code and a state code. In
column (2), we still use a state as the definition of a geographic area but we further fill in the
industry code as 21, the mining sector, if violations are enforced by MSHA. In columns (3) and
(4), we define a local industry as the interaction between a 4-digit 2012 NAICS code and a 2000
CZ code. We drop violations enforced by NLRB in column (3) and drop observations after 2011
in column (4). Estimations are weighted by total employment in a local industry-year. Standard
errors are clustered at the local industry level.

                                         Panel A: Labor Violation Counts per 1000 Employees
                                      State-level         State-level      CZ-level          CZ-level
                                                         With MSHA        No NLRB         Before 2011
                                             (1)                  (2)            (3)                 (4)
 Log(Average Annual Pay-QCEW)         -0.020***                -0.012     -0.017***           -0.015***
                                         [0.007]              [0.008]        [0.003]             [0.003]
 Local Industry FEs                            Y                    Y              Y                   Y
 Year FEs                                      Y                    Y              Y                   Y
 Adjusted R2                               0.610                0.644          0.415               0.409
 N                                      264,324              255,849      1,465,807           1,465,807
                                           Panel B: Labor Violation Penalty per Million Pay
                                      State-level         State-level      CZ-level          CZ-level
                                                         With MSHA        No NLRB         Before 2011
                                             (1)                  (2)            (3)                 (4)
 Log(Average Annual Pay-QCEW)         -0.888***            -0.906***      -0.479***           -0.422***
                                         [0.134]              [0.135]        [0.059]             [0.060]
 Local Industry FEs                            Y                    Y              Y                   Y
 Year FEs                                      Y                    Y              Y                   Y
 Adjusted R2                               0.449                0.451          0.359               0.359
 N                                      264,324              255,849      1,465,807           1,465,807




                                                    46
                Table A.3: Subsamples under Bush and Obama Administrations

This table reports the results for subsamples under Bush (2001-2008) and Obama (2009-2016)
administrations. Panel A reports the results for total labor violations intensity. The dependent
variable in columns (1) and (3) is the natural logarithm of one plus violation counts per 1,000
employees and the dependent variable in columns (2) and (4) is the natural logarithm of one plus
violation penalty per million pay. Panels B and C report the results for labor violations intensity
by enforcement agencies. Estimations are weighted by total employment in a local industry-year.
Standard errors are clustered at the local industry level.

                                                Panel A: Total Labor Violations Intensity
                                               Bush                                   Obama
                                 Counts per 1000           Penalty per   Counts per 1000          Penalty per
                                     Employees             Million Pay       Employees            Million Pay
                                              (1)                  (2)               (3)                  (4)
 Log(Average Annual Pay-QCEW)         -0.014***             -0.521***             -0.006               -0.224
                                         [0.005]               [0.099]           [0.005]              [0.144]
 Local Industry FEs                            Y                     Y                 Y                    Y
 Year FEs                                      Y                     Y                 Y                    Y
 Adjusted R2                               0.237                 0.394             0.478                0.402
 N                                      575,423               575,423           597,880              597,880
                                             Panel B: Counts per 1000 Employees By Agency
                                               Bush                                   Obama
                                   OSHA             WHD        NLRB        OSHA            WHD        NLRB
                                       (1)           (2)           (3)         (4)          (5)           (6)
 Log(Average Annual Pay-QCEW)       -0.001   -0.011***          -0.002      -0.001   -0.009***         0.002*
                                   [0.003]      [0.004]        [0.001]     [0.003]      [0.003]       [0.001]
 Local Industry FEs                      Y            Y              Y           Y            Y             Y
 Year FEs                                Y            Y              Y           Y            Y             Y
 Adjusted R2                         0.273        0.138          0.085       0.548        0.191         0.020
 N                                575,423      575,423        575,423     597,880      597,880       597,880
                                              Panel C: Penalty per Million Pay By Agency
                                               Bush                                   Obama
                                   OSHA             WHD        NLRB        OSHA            WHD        NLRB
                                       (1)           (2)           (3)         (4)          (5)           (6)
 Log(Average Annual Pay-QCEW)     -0.094*    -0.471***          -0.015      -0.092     -0.252*      0.109***
                                   [0.048]      [0.098]        [0.054]     [0.066]      [0.136]       [0.036]
 Local Industry FEs                      Y            Y              Y           Y            Y             Y
 Year FEs                                Y            Y              Y           Y            Y             Y
 Adjusted R2                         0.383        0.381          0.264       0.490        0.329         0.056
 N                                575,423      575,423        575,423     597,880      597,880       597,880




                                                    47
      Table A.4: Wage & Hour Division Violations: Priority vs. Non-priority Industries

This table reports the results for wage & hour division violations intensity by priority and non-
priority industries. The classification of priority and non-priority industries is from Weil (2010).
The dependent variables in Panels A and B are the natural logarithm of one plus violation counts
per 1,000 employees and the natural logarithm of one plus violation penalty per million pay, re-
spectively. In each panel, we report results for the full sample (2000-2019) in columns (1) and
(2), subsample under Bush administration (2001-2008) in columns (3) and (4), and subsample un-
der Obama administration (2009-2016) in columns (5) and (6). Estimations are weighted by total
employment in a local industry-year. Standard errors are clustered at the local industry level.

                                              Panel A: Violation Counts per 1,000 Employees
                                      Full Sample                 Bush                     Obama
                                   Priority       Non-      Priority       Non-       Priority       Non-
                                                priority                 priority                  priority
                                        (1)          (2)        (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)
 Log(Average Annual Pay-QCEW)    -0.054***    -0.005***       0.014      -0.007*    -0.120***    -0.006**
                                    [0.009]      [0.001]    [0.015]       [0.004]      [0.021]     [0.003]
 Local Industry FEs                       Y            Y          Y             Y            Y           Y
 Year FEs                                 Y            Y          Y             Y            Y           Y
 Adjusted R2                          0.164        0.130      0.222         0.117        0.218       0.184
 N                                 107,160    1,220,668     43,815       481,095        43,725    498,988
                                              Panel B: Violation Penalty per One Million Pay
                                      Full Sample                 Bush                     Obama
                                   Priority       Non-      Priority       Non-       Priority       Non-
                                                priority                 priority                  priority
                                        (1)          (2)        (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)
 Log(Average Annual Pay-QCEW)    -2.676***    -0.163***      -0.525      -0.149*    -4.787***        -0.215
                                    [0.400]      [0.045]    [0.476]       [0.080]      [0.715]      [0.136]
 Local Industry FEs                       Y            Y          Y             Y            Y            Y
 Year FEs                                 Y            Y          Y             Y            Y            Y
 Adjusted R2                          0.354        0.281      0.502         0.263        0.387        0.347
 N                                 107,160    1,220,668     43,815       481,095        43,725     498,988




                                                    48
