                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 STOCHASTIC EARNINGS GROWTH AND EQUILIBRIUM WEALTH DISTRIBUTIONS

                                        Thomas J. Sargent
                                          Neng Wang
                                         Jinqiang Yang

                                       Working Paper 28473
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28473


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2021




We thank Jess Benhabib, Alberto Bisin, Patrick Bolton, Mariacristina De Nardi, Xavier Gabaix,
Fatih Guvenen, Dirk Krueger, Ye Li, Erzo Luttmer, Benjamin Moll, Jonathan Payne, Alexis
Toda, and seminar participants at Columbia and Shanghai Finance Forum for helpful criticisms.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Thomas J. Sargent, Neng Wang, and Jinqiang Yang. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Stochastic Earnings Growth and Equilibrium Wealth Distributions
Thomas J. Sargent, Neng Wang, and Jinqiang Yang
NBER Working Paper No. 28473
March 2021
JEL No. D14,D31,E21

                                          ABSTRACT

The cross-section distribution of U.S. wealth is more skewed than the distribution of labor
earnings. Stachurski and Toda (2019) explain how plain vanilla Bewley-Aiyagari-Huggett (BAH)
models with infinitely lived agents can't generate that pattern because an equilibrium risk-free
rate is lower than the time rate of preference and each person's wealth process is stationary. We
provide two modifications of a BAH model that generate this pattern: (1) overlapping
generations of agents who have low wealth at birth and pass through N life-stage transitions of
stochastic lengths, and (2) labor-earnings processes that exhibit stochastic growth. With only a
few parameters such a model can well approximate mappings from the Lorenz curve and Gini
coefficient for cross-sections of labor earnings to their counterparts for cross sections of wealth.
Three forces amplify inequality in wealth relative to inequality in labor-earnings: stochastic life-
stage transitions; a precautionary savings motive for high wage earners that is especially strong
after they receive positive permanent earnings shocks; and an energetic life-cycle saving motive
for agents who have low wealth at birth. An equilibrium risk-free interest rate that exceeds a time
preference rate fosters a fat-tailed wealth distribution.

Thomas J. Sargent                                Jinqiang Yang
Department of Economics                          Shanghai University of Finance
New York University                              and Economics
19 W. 4th Street, 6th Floor                      Guoding Rd. 777
New York, NY 10012                               Shanghai, 200433
and NBER                                         China
thomas.sargent@nyu.edu                           yang.jinqiang@mail.sufe.edu.cn

Neng Wang
Columbia Business School
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 812
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
nw2128@columbia.edu
                                  I.   Introduction
We calibrate a sparsely parameterized continuous-time life-cycle model and use it to show
how responses to permanent labor-earning shocks by households with high labor earnings
widen its equilibrium distribution of wealth. Except for assuming a nonstationary labor
earnings process and a stochastic multiple life-stage overlapping generations demographic
structure, our model stays close to the discret- time Bewley-Aiyagari-Huggett (BAH) mod-
els with stationary labor earnings processes that have struggled to put sufficient mass at
upper quantiles of equilibrium wealth distribution. That feature of BAH models led re-
searchers to change assumptions in ways designed to make wealthier agents want to save
more. Examples of such alterations include the warm-glow bequest and human capital mo-
tives of De Nardi (2004), very large earnings risk for high-earning households of Casta~
                                                                                       neda,
D´
 iaz-Gim´
        enez, and R´
                   ios-Rull (2003), heterogenous preferences of Krusell and Smith (1998),
and the importance of entrepreneurship of Quadrini (2000) and Cagetti and De Nardi (2006,
2009).
   We purposefully exclude these additional motivations to save because we want to de-
termine how far nonstationary labor earnings processes and a stochastic life cycle by them-
selves go toward allowing a basic BAH's model to put enough mass in the upper end of an
equilibrium wealth distribution. We show that by themselves, they do most of the job.
   We use a pure counting process to model an agent's life cycle. At birth each agent has no
wealth, the same initial labor earnings, and the same fixed number N of sequentially ordered
life stages. Transition from life stage n to stage pn ` 1q occurs at an exogenous constant
probability per unit of time. At the final life stage N , the agent purchases an actuarially
fairly priced (reverse) life annuity and dies with zero wealth. Our life-stage model is a
continuous-time generalization of discrete-time life-cycle models used by Gertler (1999) and
Casta~
     neda, D´
            iaz-Gim´
                   enez, and R´
                              ios-Rull (2003) and nests the "perpetual youth" model of
Yaari (1965) and Blanchard (1985) as a special case. Agents are born owning little wealth.
Our model's equilibrium interest rate exceeds the agent's time preference rate by enough
to motivate sufficient savings to match the empirical aggregate capital-output ratio and
to activate a force that helps make the cross-section distribution of wealth fatter than the
distribution of labor earnings.


                                             1
    The exogenous labor-earnings process displays random growth within each life stage n,
a feature that generates a cross-section fat-tailed earnings distribution via a mechanism
similar to ones in Gabaix (1999), Luttmer (2007, 2011), Toda and Walsh (2015), and Jones
and Kim (2018). In our quantitative analysis, we economize on parameters by assuming
that the labor-earnings process remain unchanged over the agent's life cycle. Gabaix (1999)
shows that the distribution of city populations is well described by a Pareto distribution,
also known as Zipf's law. Luttmer (2007, 2011) constructs models that generate fat-tailed
firm size distributions. Toda and Walsh (2015) show that cross-section distributions of
US consumption and its growth rate obey the double power law.1 Jones and Kim (2018)
generate an endogenous cross-section fat-tailed earnings distribution in a Schumpeterian
creative-destruction model with heterogeneous entrepreneurs. We build on an insight of
Gabaix, Lasry, Lions, and Moll (2016) and Jones and Kim (2018) that a properly tweaked
random earnings growth model implies that earnings inequality is fractal.2
    In conjunction with discounted constant-relative-risk-averse (CRRA) preferences, the
random growth with drift labor-earnings process implies decision rules that induce wealthier
agents to save enough to generate an equilibrium wealth distribution whose upper quantiles
approximate US data well. Our model's analytic tractability allows us to unveil basic forces
that shape saving decision rules and equilibrium outcomes.
    De Nardi (2015) points out that the heart of the problem with BAH-style models is
that they predict that "rich people are not nearly rich enough, middle-class people are
too rich, and poor people are too poor, compared with the actual data." This is because
"the nature of precautionary savings implies that households save to self-insure against
earnings risk but that, as a result, the saving rate decreases and then turns negative when
a person's net worth is large enough relative to her labor earnings. Hence, the saving rate
    1. Gabaix (2009) and Luttmer (2010) survey these mechanisms. A key insight in the power-law literature
is that random growth (properly modified to account for stationarity) and ex ante heterogeneity naturally
generate Pareto distributions and that a parameter fixing the random growth rate governs the fatness of the
tail. For early classics on Pareto distributions, see Champernowne (1953), Simon (1955), and Mandelbrot
(1960).
    2. Here is an example of (constant) fractal inequality: Jones and Kim (2018) write, "What fraction of
the income going to the top 10 percent of earners accrues to the top 1 percent? What fraction of the income
going to the top 1 percent of earners accrues to the top 0.1 percent? What fraction of the income going
to the top 0.1 percent of earners accrues to the top 0.01 percent? The answer to each of these questions ­
which turns out to be around 40 percent in the United States today ­ is a simple function of the parameter
that characterizes the power law."


                                                    2
of the wealthy in these models is negative." She concludes that "basic Bewley models,
whether featuring infinitely-lived agents or life-cycle agents with more realistic patterns of
earnings and savings over the life cycle, are far from doing a good job of matching the
observed distribution of wealth . . . While in the data wealth is concentrated in the hands
of a small number of rich people and the saving rate of the rich is high, many models used
for quantitative policy evaluation fail to match these facts."
    In our model, permanent shocks to levels of their labor earnings make rich people
keep saving at high rates, as they do in U.S. data. This happens because precautionary
savings motives of those with high earnings stay strong even after a long sequence of positive
earnings shocks. Even though earnings are expected to grow and shocks are permanent, the
marginal propensity to consume (MPC) out of permanent shocks to earnings stays lower
than one except for very large wealth-earnings ratios.3 Because they have little wealth
at birth, young agents also have strong incentives to save. Strong saving motives are
promoted by an equilibrium interest rate that exceeds a representative agent's subjective
discount rate, something that does not occur in BAH models with infinitely-lived agents.
A combination of permanent earnings shocks and a high equilibrium interest rate makes
strong savings motives persist throughout even a wealthy person's life. That leads to big
wealth inequality.
    We capitalize on the tractability of continuous-time stochastic modeling techniques
that also underly mean field game theory. We solve Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equations
"almost by hand." We use optimal decision rules and Kolmogorov forward equations to
characterize a stationary joint distribution of labor earnings and wealth.4 Optimal saving
rules at different stages of life indicate how permanent earnings shocks ignite precautionary
savings motives that affect even wealthier people of all ages and that enable our model to
generate a cross-section wealth distribution that has a fatter tail than cross-section earnings.
    3. We describe an equilibrium in which an agent's MPC out of permanent earnings shocks approaches
zero as her wealth-earnings ratio x approaches zero, either because her financial wealth approaches zero or
because her earnings are extremely high.
    4. There is a recent surge of interest in using continuous-time models via Kolmogorov forward equations
(also knowns as Fokker-Planck equations) to analyze equilibrium distributions of economic objects including
city size, firm size, income, and wealth. An incomplete list includes Gabaix (1999), Wang (2002), Luttmer
(2007, 2011), Toda and Walsh (2015), Benhabib, Bisin, and Zhu (2016), Gabaix, Lasry, Lions, and Moll
(2016), Achdou, Han, Lasry, Lions, and Moll (2017), and Jones and Kim (2018).



                                                    3
We report both the Gini coefficient and Lorenz curve as Casta~
                                                             neda, D´
                                                                    iaz-Gim´
                                                                           enez, and
R´
 ios-Rull (2003) and De Nardi (2004) have also done.
    Concavity of optimal consumption decision in the wealth-earnings ratio x reflects an
agent's enduring precautionary saving motive and fosters wealth inequality. An agent with
high labor earnings can also have a low wealth-earnings ratio, x, making it optimal to
save a lot. Furthermore, when an agent with high labor earnings receives a sequence of
positive earnings shocks, its motive to save becomes even stronger, providing a force that
contributes to high equilibrium wealth inequality.
    A typical BAH model's joint cross-section distribution of wealth and labor earnings
also describes the fraction of time that each individual spends in each set of wealth, labor
earnings states. Equality between these two probability distributions in BAH models is
an essential ingredient of Stachurski and Toda (2019)'s finding that wealth cannot have
a fatter tail than labor earnings in BAH models with infinitely-lived agents. Our model
decouples those two joint distributions: an equilibrium cross section distribution of wealth
and labor earnings does not describe life-time fractions that each individual spends in
possible wealth, labor earnings pairs. That disarms the Stachurski-Toda mechanism and
makes the equilibrium joint cross-section distribution of wealth and earnings have fatter
tails for wealth than for labor earnings.5
    Research papers that generate endogenous Pareto distributions for wealth include Ben-
habib, Bisin, and Zhu (2011, 2015, 2016), Toda (2014), Hubmer, Krusell, and Smith (2016),
Nirei and Aoki (2016), and Moll et al. (2019). The mechanisms that produce those Pareto
distributions operate via either an asset accumulation equation (random growth models) or
a capital accumulation equation in a neoclassical growth model. In contrast, we start with
an empirically plausible fat-tailed cross-section earnings distribution and use the standard
BAH consumption-smoothing mechanism endogenously to generate a cross-section distri-
bution for wealth that has a fatter tail than earnings.
    Because they do not start with exogenous earnings and don't allow for endogenous
savings, most continuous-time wealth distribution models are not in the BAH tradition.
But there are notable exceptions. Achdou, Han, Lasry, Lions, and Moll (2017) formulate
   5. Stachurski and Toda (2019, sec. 4) describe modifications of canonical BAH models that disarm their
impossibility theorem.


                                                   4
BAH-style models in continuous time. Unlike our model, they retain the assumption that
labor earnings are governed by a stationary stochastic process.


                                        II.       Decisions
Time and an agent's age t P r0, `8q are both continuous. Equal measures of agents are
born and die over each small interval of time. Markets are incomplete. Agents are iden-
tical at birth but differentiated afterwards by their luck. Each agent receives statistically
independent realization of an exogenous stochastic labor earnings stream over a stochastic
life time that is almost surely finite.
    An agent's life stage tSt u is a non-decreasing integer-valued stochastic process that at
age t takes a value inside a set of integers t1, 2, . . . , N u, where N  1 is finite. An agent
begins life in stage n " 1 at age t " 0. Conditional on being in life stage n at age t, over
a small age interval pt, t ` dtq, an agent remains in life stage n with probability 1 ´ n dt
and advances to life stage pn ` 1q with probability n dt. This structure induces a sequence
tn uN
    n"1 of random ages at which an agent moves from life stage n to life stage pn ` 1q, so that

n " inf tt : St " n ` 1u. An agent is exposed to mortality risk only during life stage St " N .
Wang (2002) uses this stochastic life-cycle model to study equilibrium wealth distribution
with negative exponential utility and an affine labor-earnings process.6 Luttmer (2011)
uses a closely related stochastic process to model dynamics of firms' blueprints.


Interpretations of Life Stages. Two interpretations of St are plausible. One is that
life-stage St indexes a single person's age-t health status. Here we would calibrate stage-
dependent labor-earnings processes to make health-related productivity be correlated with
age t.
    An alternative interpretation is that the entity being modeled is a family dynasty with
parents who are altruistic. Parents in stage n want to leave bequests to heirs in stage pn ` 1q
and cannot fully hedge their own death risk until the dynasty reaches its terminal stage
N . A dynasty stochastically transitions from one generation to the next and eventually
  6. See Duffie (2010) for applications of affine processes to term structure of interest rates and credit risk
models.



                                                      5
                                         probability density function of lifetime:  (z;N)
                                                                                  1
                        0.025
                                                                                                  N=1
                                                                                                  N=2
                                                                                                  N=6
                                                                                                  N=12

                         0.02




                        0.015




                         0.01




                        0.005




                           0
                                0   20           40              60          80             100      120
                                                         total lifetime: z



                                                      Figure I

Probability densities of life lengths z at birth in four models with N " 1, 3, 6, 12 life stages.
Transition intensities n "  for all n in each of four models but N { " 60 across the four
models.



becomes extinct. By adopting this interpretation, we could account for accidental bequests.
Thus, there is a sense in which the mechanism of De Nardi (2004) and other bequest models
is also at work in our model.
   Benhabib, Bisin, and Luo (2019) quantified an equilibrium model of the U.S. wealth
distribution and social mobility. We can use a family dynasty instance of our model to study
inter-generational economic mobility together with a cross-section wealth distribution.
   Let z be the remaining length of life of an agent now in stage n who has pN ´ n ` 1q
remaining life stages. The random variable z is the sum of pN ´ n ` 1q independently and
identically distributed exponentially random variables each with the rate parameter  (and
hence a mean of 1{). It has the following probability density function:

                                                           e´z pz qN ´n
                                    n pz ; N q "                        .                                  (1)
                                                            pN ´ nq!

This instance of a Gamma function generates an Erlang distribution with two parameters:
the shape parameter k equals pN ´ n ` 1q, the number of remaining life stages, and the
rate parameter is . When n " 1, z is also the random length of life for a new born whose

                                                             6
distribution is given by equation (1) in a model with N life stages.
    Figure I plots density functions 1 pz ; N q of life lengths z and also of the remaining
lengths of life for an agent in stage 1 with N remaining life stages in models with N "
1, 2, 6, 12. To show how models with N  1 can provide more realistic mortality with few
parameters, we set transition intensities n "  for all n in each of four models and set
N { " 60 to deliver the same average life lengths of 60 years for each N . An N " 1
perpetual youth model generates too many very old people. Thus, if  is calibrated to
yield a realistic average (working) life span of  " 1{60 years,7 then the probability of
living longer than 120 years is e´120{60 " 13.5%. The probability of living longer than 120
years is 9.2%, 2.0%, and 0.3%, for N " 2, N " 6, and N " 12 models. Evidently, increasing
the number of life-stages N while holding average age fixed at N { delivers thinner and
thinner right tails for life lengths. In an N  1 model, an older agent is more likely to be
in a later than an early life-stage n.
                                                                                    8
    An agent ranks consumption processes tCt u8
                                              t"0 by discounted expected utilities:

                                           ,, N `1                    
                                                      ´t
                                       E             e       U pCt q dt ,                                 (2)
                                             0


where   0 is a discount rate and Er ¨ s is a mathematical expectation with respect to
probability distributions of the stage of life process tSt u and of the labor-earnings process
tYt u. We assume a constant relative-risk-aversion instantaneous utility function
                                             $
                                             & C 1´          if   0,   1
                                                 1´
                                  U pC q "
                                             %lnpC q if  " 1

    Although many BAH models assume a stationary labor-earnings process, econometric
studies have often estimated nonstationary processes that include permanent shocks.9 For
that reason, we assume that labor earnings tYt u follow diffusion processes with permanent
    7. We interpret an age of 0 in our model as the beginning of a living individual's age of 18 in real life.
    8. For the agent's objective function, without loss of generality, we set the agent's birth time 1 to 0.
    9. For example, see MaCurdy (1982), Abowd and Card (1989), and Meghir and Pistaferri (2004), and
Blundell, Pistaferri, and Preston (2008). Here we ignore important fixed effects such as education and
gender, as well as other life-cycle variations across agents. Our labor-earnings process could be extended
to also feature a transitory component. For example, see Section 10 in Wang, Wang, and Yang (2016) for
one such generalization.


                                                         7
shocks only. Thus, each agent has the following labor earnings process during life stage St :

                         dYt " µSt Yt dt ` St Yt dBt ,          0  t  N `1 ,                          (3)

where B is a standard Brownian motion, Y0  0 is initial labor earnings at birth, and
µSt and St are stage-St -dependent growth rates and volatilities of labor earnings, respec-
tively. Process (3) asserts that within each life stage St , the growth rate of labor earnings,
dYt {Yt , is independently and identically distributed. Therefore, shocks to labor earnings
are permanent in levels. Specification (3) lets labor earnings growth and volatility both
depend on stage of life St , a random variable that is correlated with age and that lets
us approximate plausible age-earnings profiles. Although details differ, our labor-earnings
process has both permanent shocks and some life-cycle features similar to those used by
Zeldes (1989), Deaton (1991), Carroll (1997), and Gourinchas and Parker (2002).
    Random earnings growth models with adjustments to ensure stationarity generate
Pareto distributions with fat tails as demonstrated by Gabaix (1999), Luttmer (2007),
Gabaix, Lasry, Lions, and Moll (2016), and Jones and Kim (2018).10 We recognize that
there is persuasive evidence that the earnings process has other interesting features such
as skewness (see Guvenen, Ozkan, and Song (2014) and De Nardi, Fella, and Paz-Pardo
(2020)). We choose a simple earnings model in order to focus on the channel through which
we generate a fatter tailed distribution for wealth than for earnings while acknowledging
that our simple random growth model neglects how labor earnings respond to transient
shocks.
    Applying Ito's formula to equation (3) verifies that the dynamics of ln Y during life
stage n are:
                                       d ln Yt " gn dt ` n dBt ,                                      (4)

where the expected change of log income during life stage n, i.e., the drift in (4), equals

                                                          2
                                                         n
                                            gn " µn ´       .                                         (5)
                                                         2
   10. We can generalize our earnings model to allow for jumps as in Gabaix, Lasry, Lions, and Moll (2016)
and Section 9 in Wang, Wang, and Yang (2016), but we omit jumps because our diffusion model is sufficient
to deliver our key results that cross-section wealth is more skewed and fat tailed than earnings.



                                                    8
      2
where n {2 is a Jensen's inequality correction term at stage n.
   The arithmetic Brownian motion (4) implies the following discrete-time process:

                                ln Yt`1 ´ ln Yt " gn ` n     t`1   ,                        (6)

where the time-t conditional distribution of       t`1   is a standard normal random variable.
Thus, during life stage n, ln Y , is a unit-root process whose first difference is independently
and normally distributed with mean gn and volatility n . The Ito correction term can
make the expected labor earnings growth rate in logarithms gn differ substantially from
the growth rate of labor earnings Y in levels, µn . For example, at an annual frequency,
with µn " 1.5% and n " 10%, we have gn " 1%, which is one third lower than the growth
                                                    2
rate µn " 1.5% due to the Jensen's inequality term, n {2 " 0.5%. Because labor earnings
growth shocks are i.i.d., shocks to levels of Y are permanent.
   Let X denote an agent's wealth process and set initial wealth X0 to zero. During each
stage of life, an agent can trade a risk-free financial asset that offers a constant rate of
return r. At age t and life stage St  N , over a small increment pt, t ` dtq, the agent faces
zero mortality risk. Therefore, whenever St  N , or equivalently when 0  t  N , where
N " inf tu : Su " N u, wealth evolves as:

                        dXt " prXt ` Yt ´ Ct qdt,        0  t  N .                          (7)

   During end-of-life stage N an agent purchases an actuarially fair "reverse-life-insurance"
contract that provides a flow of life-time payments in exchange for having agreed to transfer
end-of-life wealth XN `1 to the insurance company. Preferences of an agent in life stage
N are the same as those of a perpetual youth with a discount rate  that is augmented
by a mortality hazard rate N  0 to become an effective discount rate  ` N . When
N  t  N `1 , an agent is in life stage N and her wealth evolves as:

         dXt " prXt´ ` N Xt´ ` Yt´ ´ Ct´ qdt ´ Xt´ dSt ,               N  t  N `1 .         (8)

Thus, during life stage N two new terms augment the saving rates prXt´ ` Yt´ ´ Ct´ q
during life stages n  N : paq an actuarially fair payment rate N Xt´ from the insurance


                                               9
company to the agent; and pbq a one-time transfer of wealth XN `1 ´ from the agent to the
insurance company at the stochastic death moment t " N `1 when dSt " dSN `1 " 1.
   An agent cannot borrow against future labor earnings, i.e.,

                                 Xt  0,     for all t  0 ,                                (9)

but she can dissave when her assets are positive. Financial income consists of interest
income rXt and also, but only during end-of-life stage N , reverse life insurance payments
N Xt . Non-financial income equals labor earnings Yt .
   A representative firm operates a production function F pK, Lq " AK  L1´ , where A 
0,  P p0, 1q, K is the aggregate capital stock, and L is the aggregate labor stock. Physical
capital depreciates at a constant rate  . The firm rents capital and labor in competitive
markets.


                                   III.      Saving
We compute optimal decision rules and an object that we call "certainty equivalent wealth"
as functions of wealth, labor earnings, and life stage in closed forms up to some intercon-
nected ordinary differential equations with economically interpretable boundary conditions
for each life stage.


III.A       Recursions
We work backwards from stage N to stage 1. An agent in the final stage N acts as
a perpetual Yaari-Blanchard youth so her value function satisfies the Hamilton-Jacobi-
Bellman (HJB) equation:

           p ` N q VN pX, Y q " max U pC q ` ppr ` N qX ` Y ´ C qVN,X pX, Y q
                                   C 0
                                                                2
                                                                N  Y2
                                         `µN Y VN,Y pX, Y q `         VN,Y Y pX, Y q .   (10)
                                                                  2

The left side of HJB equation (10) multiplies value function by the rate of p ` N q in
order to account for the probability of death per unit of time. The coefficient on VN,X on


                                             10
the right side of (10) sets the rate of return on savings at r ` N ; r is contributed by the
risk-free rate while N is a revenue flow from reverse life insurance. The insurance company
collects an agent's entire wealth X at the instance of death. The agent optimally sets C to
equate the two sides of (10).
   Value functions for life stages n P p1, N ´ 1q satisfy HJB equations:

                                                                                    2 2
                                                                                    n Y
 Vn " max U pC q ` prX ` Y ´ C qVn,X pX, Y q ` µn Y Vn,Y pX, Y q `                      Vn,Y Y pX, Y q
             C 0                                                                     2
                   `n pVn`1 pX, Y q ´ Vn pX, Y qq .                                                (11)

When life-stage St " n  N ´ 1, an agent's death probability is zero over every infinitesimal
time interval.11 A reverse annuity is purchased only in life stage N , so the rate of return
on savings X equals the risk-free rate r in stages n  N . The last term in (11) comes from
the stochastic transition from stage n to stage pn ` 1q.
    Value functions have a homogeneity property that lets us write them as

                                     pbn Pn pX, Y qq1´
                      Vn pX, Y q "                               1nN,                                 (12)
                                           1´

where Pn pX, Y q is an agent's "certainty equivalent wealth" at life stage n, an object inter-
pretable as a welfare measure expressed in units of the consumption good. Thus, imagine
that at some stage of life, an agent has two options: either (1) adhering to the saving
plan prescribed by the model; or (2) surrendering both her savings X and her continuation
life-stage-dependent labor earnings processes Y in exchange for retiring immediately with
wealth level , from which she can either consume or else save and earn the risk-free rate
r for the rest of life. Wealth  " Pn pX, Y q makes the agent indifferent between these two
options. From knowing Pn pX, Y q, we can uniquely pin down bn .
   The coefficient bn in the value function (12) is

                                            bn " mn
                                                   {p ´1q
                                                          .                                           (13)

To compute the tmn ; 1  n  N u sequence, start from the following formula for the
  11. The probability attached to two consecutive jumps over an infinitesimal time interval dt is zero.




                                                   11
coefficient mN at stage N ,

                                           1
                               mN " r `      p ´ rq ` N ,                                (14)
                                           

and work backwards to compute the coefficient mn for stage n via the recursion:
                                          «   ^      ´ ff
                              1         n       mn`1
                      mn " r ` p ´ rq `    1´             .                              (15)
                                                 mn

We restrict parameters to make economic sense. For example, we impose parameter re-
strictions that make the right side of equation (14) be positive.
   The Pn pX, Y q functions allow us to characterize optimal consumption rules.          The
homogeneity property of Vn pX, Y q depicted in equation (12) generates policy functions
and other important objects that scale by labor earnings.           The wealth-earnings ratio
x " X {Y becomes a state variable that lets us express optimized utility in terms of a
function pn pxq " Pn pX, Y q{Y and the optimal consumption rule in terms of a function
cn pxq " Cn pX, Y q{Y .
   First-order conditions for consumption associated with HJB equations (10) and (11)
imply

                              cn pxq " mn pn pxq pp1n pxqq´1{ .                          (16)

An important result is that incomplete markets make p1 pxq  1 for all finite values of x,
which means that financial wealth is valuable beyond its pure purchasing value. Certainty-
equivalent wealth scaled by labor earnings Y for life stage n " N , pn pxq, satisfies the
ODE:
                  ^                                  
                mN p1N pxq1´1{ ´ p ` N q         N 2
           0 "                           ` µN ´        pN pxq ` p1N pxq
                          1´                     2
                                             2 2
                                                 ^                       
                                  2  1      N  x     2        pp1N pxqq2
               `pr ` N ´ µN ` N qxpN pxq `         pN pxq ´               .              (17)
                                              2                pN pxq




                                               12
For earlier life stages St " n  N ´ 1, pn pxq satisfies the ODE:
            ^                                   
           mn p1n pxq1´1{ ´                n  2
                                                                                      2
     0 "                         ` µn ´            pn pxq ` p1n pxq ` pr ´ µn ` n       qxp1n pxq
                 1´                         2
                                                            «                     1´     ff
           2 2
               ^                1       2
                                                                ´ ^
           n x              p p n p x qq        n p n p x q   m n`1 p n ` 1 p x q
         `        p2
                   n pxq ´                 `                                         ´1 .         (18)
           2                  pn pxq            1´            m´n    pn pxq

   When wealth X " 0, the no-borrowing constraint (9) implies that consumption C
cannot exceed labor earnings pC  Y q. We can express (9) in terms of scaled variables as:

                              cn p0q  1 ,        for 1  n  N ,                                   (19)

a constraint that may or may not bind. If cn p0q  1, the agent's saving motive is strong
enough to keep wealth X always strictly positive. In this case, relaxing constraint (19) has
no value, so a Lagrange multiplier on constraint X  0 is zero.
   If cn p0q " 1 and constraint (19) binds, then zero wealth X " 0 is an absorbing state.
Campbell and Mankiw (1990) and Kaplan and Violante (2014) refer to consumers with zero
wealth who set C " Y as hand-to-mouth consumers and document that they constitute a
sizable proportion of consumers. For such consumers, cn p0q " 1. This condition and the
optimal consumption rule (16) jointly imply that certainty equivalent wealth pn p0q and its
first derivative p1n p0q are linked via mn pn p0q pp1n p0qq´1{ " 1, a boundary condition on the
function pn at x " 0.
   To find another boundary condition for pn pxq, we note that as x approaches infinity
the agent uses holdings of the single risk-free asset completely to buffer all idiosyncratic
labor-earnings shocks, but stage-of-life shocks remain uninsurable. We can show that as
x Ñ 8, pn pxq satisfies the condition:

                         lim pn pxq " x ` qn ,         for 1  n  N ,                             (20)
                        xÑ8


where scaled certainty-equivalent values of labor earnings defined as tqn : 1  n  N u
satisfy

                                         ´
                             m´n ` n mn`1 qn`1
                        qn " ´                   ,          1nN,                                 (21)
                            mn pr ´ µn q ` n m´
                                              n`1


                                                  13
and
                                                   1
                                     qN "                .                             (22)
                                            r ` N ´ µN
Having computed the sequence of tmn : 1  n  N u from the recursion defined by (14)
and (15), we can solve (21) recursively for tqn } by starting from (22) at stage N .
   We have thus established that an agent's optimal consumption rule is (16) and that the
scaled certainty equivalent wealth pn pxq satisfies (18) at life stages n  N ´ 1 and (17) at
life stage N , subject to boundary conditions (19) and (20).


Dynamics of Scaled Wealth x. By using Ito's Lemma, we express the dynamics for
agent's scaled wealth xt when 0  t  N :

               "   `         2
                                             
          dxt " 1 ` r ´ µn ` n  xt ´ cn pxt q dt ´ n xt dBt ,     0  t  N .            (23)

During life's final stage N , scaled wealth evolves as

            "   `             2
                                                
       dxt " 1 ` r ` N ´ µN ` N  xt´ ´ cN pxt´ q dt ´ N xt´ dBt ´ xt´ dSt .            (24)


III.B      Optimal Value Functions and Decision Rules
For parameter values described in Section V., Figures II and III portray scaled certainty
equivalent wealth pn pxq and the optimal consumption-earnings ratios cn pxq at stages n for
our N " 1 and the N " 2 models.

III.B.1   The N " 1 Model

Figure II plots N " 1 objects. Panels A and B show that net scaled certainty-equivalent
wealth, ppxq´x, is increasing and concave in the wealth-earnings ratio x and that p1 pxq´1 
0. The dashed lines in Panels A and B depict ppxq ´ x " q " 15.24 and p1 pxq " 1,
the solution under a complete markets in which earnings and life-stage shocks are both
insurable. The wedge between ppxq ´ x and q " 15.24 captures the loss of the certainty
equivalent wealth that comes from incomplete markets. For a penniless agent, certainty
equivalent wealth pp0q " 13.37 of labor earnings is 12.3% lower than q " 15.24 under
complete markets. Thus, an agent values a marginal unit of wealth at a premium of about

                                              14
                         A. p(x)-x                                       B. p(x)-1
      16                                                 0.12
                   complete markets
    15.5           incomplete markets                     0.1

                                                         0.08
      15
                                                         0.06
    14.5
                                                         0.04
      14                                                 0.02

    13.5                                                   0
           0   2         4       6        8   10                0   2    4       6    8   10
                             x                                               x

                    C. consumption c(x)                                 D. MPC c(x)
     1.8                                                0.084

                                                        0.082
     1.6
                                                         0.08
     1.4                                                0.078

                                                        0.076
     1.2
                                                        0.074
       1
                                                        0.072

     0.8                                                 0.07
           0   2         4       6        8   10                0   2    4       6    8   10
                             x                                               x



                                              Figure II

Net scaled certainty-equivalent wealth ppxq ´ x, marginal certainty-equivalent value of
wealth p1 pxq ´ 1, consumption-earnings ratio cpxq, and MPC c1 pxq for the N " 1 model.
Dashed red and solid blue lines delineate outcomes for our complete and incomplete markets
models, respectively. Under complete markets, ppxq ´ x " q " 15.24 and cpxq " mppxq,
where the MPC is given by m " 7.2%. Parameter values are reported in Table I.


12%, i.e., p1 p0q " 1.12. Even when x " 10, pp10q ´ 10 " 14, which is still 8% lower than
q " 15.24. Thus, the wedge between ppxq ´ x and q remains substantial even for very large
values of x. Evidently, incomplete-markets have first-order effects on an agent's welfare as
measured by certainty equivalent wealth.
   Panels C and D of Figure II show that an agent's consumption-earnings ratio, cpxq, is
increasing and concave in the wealth-earnings ratio x. The MPC c1 pxq starts at c1 p0q " 8.4%
and slowly decreases towards the CM benchmark value, m " 7.2% as x Ñ 8, indicating
that the rich want to save much more than the poor, as they indeed do in US data. With


                                                   15
                          A. p(x)-x                                      B. p(x)-1

     17             1st stage
     16             2nd stage                             0.2

     15
                                                         0.15
     14
     13                                                   0.1

     12
                                                         0.05
     11
     10                                                    0
          0     2         4         6      8   10               0   2    4       6    8   10
                                x                                            x

                     C. consumption c(x)                                D. MPC c(x)
      2                                                  0.11

    1.8
                                                          0.1
    1.6
                                                         0.09
    1.4

    1.2                                                  0.08

      1                                                  0.07
    0.8
                                                         0.06
          0     2         4         6      8   10               0   2    4       6    8   10
                                x                                            x



                                               Figure III

Net scaled certainty-equivalent wealth ppxq ´ x, marginal certainty-
equivalent value of wealth p1 pxq ´ 1, consumption-earnings ratio cpxq, and
the MPC c1 pxq for the N " 2 model. Scaled certainty-equivalent values of labor
earnings are q1 " 18.70 and q2 " 12.35, for stages 1 and 2, respectively, while m1 " 6.31%
and m2 " 8.83%. Parameter values are reported in Table I.


complete markets, cpxq " mpx ` q q. As measured by reduced consumption, the wedge
between the two lines in Panel C describes the loss of utility that comes from markets
being incomplete.

III.B.2       The N " 2 Model

Figure III plots features of our N " 2 model. Panels A and B again show that net scaled
certainty-equivalent wealth, ppxq ´ x, is increasing and concave in the wealth-earnings ratio
x, as it also is in Figure II for the N " 1 model. Evidently, ppxq ´ x and its derivative


                                                    16
p1 pxq ´ 1 are both higher in life stage 1 than in life stage 2. This makes sense because an
agent with the same levels of X and Y in her earlier life stage is relatively wealthier in terms
of certainty equivalent wealth, p1 pxq  p2 pxq, and therefore is relatively poor in terms of
liquid financial wealth, i.e., is more "liquidity constrained", which leads to a higher marginal
valuation for a unit increase of wealth X , i.e., p11 pxq  p12 pxq. For example, a penniless agent
values a dollar windfall at a 14.4% premium in stage 2 (p12 p0q ´ 1 " 0.144), while she would
assign a 20.3% premium to the same windfall in life stage 1 (p11 p0q ´ 1 " 0.203).
   Panels C and D show that an agent's consumption is increasing and concave in the
wealth-earnings ratio x in both stages due to incomplete markets as also occurs for the
N " 1 model in Figure II. The results for consumption are less obvious than for ppxq. Why
does an agent consume more in stage 2 than in stage 1 at a given level of x, as Panel C
shows? This outcome might seem peculiar because certainty-equivalent wealth is lower in
stage 2 than in stage 1 for a fixed level of pX, Y q, i.e., p1 pxq  p2 pxq as depicted in Panel
A. We call this outcome a "certainty-equivalent wealth" effect and impute it to forces that
end up causing c2 pxq to exceed c1 pxq and that we now turn to explain.
   First, because there is no bequest motive, the consumption motive is stronger in later
life stages. Second, in our model the agent uses the reverse annuity market in the final
life stage, stage 2 in this case, to exchange her end-of-life wealth for higher consumption.
Indeed, that the MPC in stage 2 in the limit as x Ñ 8, m2 , exceeds the MPC m1 in
stage 1, i.e., m2 " 8.83%  m1 " 6.31%, reflects these two forces. Third, uninsurable
labor-earnings shocks induce smaller distortions to an agent's consumption in her last life
stage because her shorter expected life span weakens her precautionary saving motive. For
that reason, p1n pxq falls with advancing life stage n, as we see in Panel B. These three forces
encourage an agent to consume more in stage 2 than in stage 1. Together, these three
forces induce a (highly nonlinear) intertemporal substitution that, since both m2  m1 and
p12 pxq  p11 pxq, make c2 pxq exceed c1 pxq. Thus, the optimal consumption rule (16) teaches
us that the "intertemporal substitution" effect dominates the "certainty-equivalent wealth"
effect and causes an agent to consume more at a given x when in stage 2 than when in
stage 1.
   An agent's consumption increases as she moves into later stages of life, a force that
weakens our model's ability to generate high wealth accumulation for the rich. Nevertheless,

                                               17
our model can still generate a large wealth concentration, as we show in Section V..
    We note that the MPC increases with stage n. For example, the MPC for a penniless
(x " 0) agent is 10.63% in life stage 2, which is larger than 8.11%, her MPC in life stage 1.


MPC out of (permanent) earnings. Although earnings grow (µ  0) and earnings
shocks are permanent, a precautionary savings motive often causes CY pX, Y q, the MPC out
of earnings, to be below one (especially in an empirically plausible range). The homogeneity
property implies CY pX, Y q " cpxq ´ c1 pxqx and hence CY equals cp0q in all stages when x "
0. For the N " 1 model, when x " 0, CY " 0.91 and in the limit as x Ñ 8, CY approaches
the complete-markets level: mq " 1.1 (recall that m "  `  ` p1 ´ 1{ q pr ´ q " 7.2% is
q " 1{pr `  ´ µq " 15.24.) For the N " 2 model, when x " 0, CY " cp0q " 0.85 in stage
1 and 0.87 in stage 2, respectively.12


    In Figure IV, we plot the MPC CY " cpxq ´ xc1 pxq as a function of x for the N " 1
and N " 2 models (both stages for the latter.) We see that the MPC out of earnings
increases with x. This follows from CY x " xc2 pxqX {Y 2 " x2 c2 pxq{Y  0, as optimal
consumption cpxq is concave in x. An agent can self-insure better the higher is the value
of x. Accordingly, for a given level of wealth X , an agent who has a higher level of Y or
receives a positive earnings shock is less self-insured than desired, fostering higher saving.
This generates a force that contributes to fattening the tail of the distribution of wealth
relative to the distribution of earnings. Also, note that CY is higher in stage 2 than in
stage 1 since a stage-2 agent has a shorter life horizon and is able to hedge mortality risk.


                        IV.       Stationary Equilibrium
By assuming no aggregate shocks and a continuum of agents, we follow Aiyagari (1994)
and focus on steady-state equilibria. Agents have identical but statistically independent
labor-earnings processes.13
  12. That the MPC out of earnings is lower than one at x " 0 follows from CY p0, Y q " cp0q ´ c1 p0q ^ 0 "
cp0q  1, which follows from the no-borrowing constraint, cp0q  1. In equilibrium, cp0q  1. This is
because if cp0q " 1, there could be not be a positive aggregate capital stock.
  13. Krusell and Smith (1998) analyze how the joint distribution of income and wealth responds to ag-
gregate shocks.

                                                    18
                                                            N=1 Model
                                                     0.93   1st stage (N=2)
                                                            2nd stage (N=2)




                         MPC out of labor earnings
                                                     0.91



                                                     0.89



                                                     0.87



                                                     0.85


                                                        0      2        4            6   8   10
                                                                                 x



                                                                    Figure IV

MPCs out of permanent earnings CY pX, Y q for both the N " 1 model (black dotted line)
and the N " 2 model in stage 1 (blue solid line) and stage 2 (red dashed line). Parameter
values are reported in Table I.


Stationary demographics. Let n denote the measure of agents in life stage n and
normalize the measure of the living agents (in all stages) to unity so that N
                                                                           
                                                                            n"1 n " 1.

Stationarity requires that measures of agents in each stage are constant over time and that
flows into stage pn ` 1q from stage n occur at the same rates as flows into stage n from
stage pn ´ 1q, so that
                                                              n n " n´1 n´1 .                     (25)
          N
Because    n"1   n " 1 and equation (25) holds for n " 2, . . . , N , we obtain

                                                                        ´1
                                                                   n " N n    .                   (26)
                                                                           ´1
                                                                       n"1 n


Market clearing for capital and labor. Equality of aggregate demand and supply of
capital requires:
                                                                      8
                                                        K " EpX q "           XX pX qdX ,         (27)
                                                                        0



                                                                            19
where X pX q is the cross-section stationary probability density of wealth X .
    Let H denote an agent's endowed labor units (e.g., hours). Each agent supplies labor
inelastically. In equilibrium labor demand equals labor supply: L " H . Let w " EpY q{H
denote the average wage rate across all agents. Because aggregate labor cost for production
wL equals aggregate labor earnings for all agents, using a law of large numbers,14 we have
                                                     8
                            wL " wH " EpY q "               Y Y pY qdY ,                            (28)
                                                        0


where Y pY q is the cross-section stationary distribution of labor earnings across all ages:
Y pY q " N
        
          n"1 n n,Y pY q and n,Y pY q is the cross-section stationary distribution of labor

earnings Y for agents in life stage n. Therefore, an agent's labor earnings Yt exceeds the
average level EpY q if and only if her wage rate Yt {H at t exceeds w.
    The steady-state equilibrium interest rate r and average wage rate (which is also the
wage rate received by an agent with average labor efficiency) satisfy

                                              wH             EpY q
       r " FK pK, Lq ´  " ApK {Lq´1 ´  "            ´ "              ´,                             (29)
                                           1´ K           1 ´  EpX q
                                               ^       
                                                 EpX q
       w " FL pK, Lq " Ap1 ´ qpK {Lq " Ap1 ´ q          .                                           (30)
                                                  H

Stationary distribution of earnings and wealth. To calculate the cross-section sta-
tionary distribution of labor earnings, starting from stage 1, we recursively solve the fol-
lowing Kolmogorov Forward (Fokker-Planck) equations:

              Bpµn Y n,Y pY qq 1 B 2 pn
                                      2 2
                                        Y n,Y pY qq
      0"´                     `                     ´ n n,Y pY q ` n´1 n´1,Y pY q                   (31)
                    BY          2        BY 2

for stages 2  n  N and

                       Bpµ1 Y 1,Y pY qq 1 B 2 p1
                                               2 2
                                                 Y 1,Y pY qq
                   0"´                 `                     ´ 1 1,Y pY q                           (32)
                             BY          2        BY 2

for stage 1. For any stage n, computing n,Y pY q involves solving a one-dimensional ordinary
differential equation.
  14. See Sun (2006) for technical conditions under which we can construct the associated probability and
agent measures that allow invoking a law of large numbers.



                                                   20
   We can calculate the cross-section stationary distribution of wealth by first computing
the cross-section joint distribution of wealth and earnings. Let n,XY pX, Y q denote this
cross-section joint distribution in stage n. The following Kolmogorov Forward (Fokker-
Planck) equations hold:

               B pµ1,X pX, Y q1,XY q B pµ1 Y 1,XY q 1 B 2 p1
                                                           2 2
                                                             Y 1,XY q
 1 1,XY " ´                         ´              `                  ,               (33)
                        BX                 BY        2      BY 2

                                                       2 2
             Bpµn,X pX, Y qn,XY q Bpµn Y n,XY q 1 B 2 pn Y n,XY q
 n n,XY   "´                     ´             `                  ` n´1 n´1,XY ,
                     BX                BY        2       BY 2
                                                                               (34)

where µn,X pX, Y q is the drift of wealth X is given by

                µn,X pX, Y q " rX ` Y ´ Cn pX, Y q,       1  n  N ´ 1,                (35)

in stage n  N ´ 1 and by

                       µN,X pX, Y q " pr ` N qX ` Y ´ CN pX, Y q                      (36)

in stage N . After obtaining n,XY pX, Y q, we can compute the cross-section stationary
                                                         8
distribution of wealth by integrating over Y : n,X pX q " 0 n,XY pX, Y qdY .
   Our model's homogeneity property simplifies computing the cross-section equilibrium
wealth distribution. It can be accomplished as follows. First, we simulate a path of the
standard Brownian motion Bt starting with B0 " 0. Second, we obtain the corresponding
sample path for Y by substituting the simulated path of Bt into the dynamics (3) for Y
with the initial condition Y0 " 1. Third, we use the process for xt given in (23) for stage
n  N and (24) for stage N together with the optimal scaled-consumption rule cpxt q given
in (16) to obtain the paths for xt and ct starting with x0 " X0 {Y0 " 0. Finally, we obtain
Xt by multiplying the two paths xt and Yt at each t. When an agent dies, we bring in
a new agent with no wealth and Y0 . We continue this process until we reach a very high
number of years, e.g., t " 108 .
   Next, we introduce widely used measures of inequality.



                                             21
Lorenz curve, Gini coefficient, and fractal inequality. For a nonnegative random
variable W with cumulative distribution function GW p ¨ q, the Lorenz curve LW pz q is defined
on 0  z  1 as:
                                                 z      1
                                                     G´
                                                      W puqdu
                                 LW pz q " 0
                                           1           1
                                                                ,                        (37)
                                                  0
                                                    G´
                                                     W puqdu

         1
where G´
       W p ¨ q denotes the inverse of GW p ¨ q. Evidently, LW pz q is the proportion of total

W owned by the bottom z percent of people. The Gini coefficient for W is a widely used
measure of wealth inequality. It equals twice the area between the 45% line of equality and
the Lorenz curve LW pz q:                 1
                                 W " 2         pz ´ LW pz qqdz .                         (38)
                                           0

   To describe fat right tails, we use both power-law exponents and "fractal inequality"
(F I ) as in Jones and Kim (2018). For a given random variable W , fractal inequality F IW puq
is defined as the fraction of W that goes to the top p10 ^ uq percent of agents divided by
the fraction of W that goes to the top u percent:

                                          1 ´ LW p1 ´ 0.01 ^ uq
                             F IW puq "                         .                        (39)
                                           1 ´ LW p1 ´ 0.1 ^ uq

Stationary Equilibrium. A competitive equilibrium consists of value functions (or,
alternatively, certainty equivalent wealth functions) and optimal saving functions at all
stages n; the interest rate r, the wage rate w for an agent with average productivity,
stationary population demographics, and a stationary distribution for the cross-section
distribution for wealth and earnings pX, Y q that satisfy

  1. Given r and the stochastic labor-earnings process tYs : s  0u and X0 , value functions
     and optimal policies satisfy and attain, respectively, the HJB equations described in
     Section III..

  2. The interest rate r and w satisfy (29) and (30), respectively.

  3. Equations (27) and (28) hold so that markets for capital and labor clear.




                                                22
  4. The cross-section distribution of wealth and earnings pX, Y q is invariant over time
      and characterized by (33) and (34).


                                    V.      Quantities
After setting parameter values, we describe properties of an equilibrium cross-section wealth
distribution as manifested in Lorenz curves, Gini coefficients, and power-law exponents.


V.A       Imported and Newly Calibrated Parameters
Table I describes parameter values that we shall use to compute equilibria for N " 1 and
N " 2 instances of our model. Panel A.1 reports parameters that we intentionally import
from prominent BAH papers. Panel A.2 reports parameters that we set to hit expected
life length targets of 60 years for both the N " 1 and N " 2 models. Panel B reports
parameters calibrated specifically for this study, namely, drifts and volatilities governing
labor-earnings processes.
   Panel A.1 describes a suite of parameters set at consensus values in BAH papers. We
adopted these consensus values purposefully in order to help us isolate sources of new
findings about the equilibrium wealth distribution that our model brings. We set preference
and production function parameters to values used by Huggett (1996) and De Nardi (2004).
Following Prescott (1986) and Cooley and Prescott (1995), we set the capital share of
income, , to 0.36. We set an annual depreciation rate of capital,  , to 6% to match an
estimate of the US depreciation-output ratio reported by Stokey and Rebelo (1995). We
want an aggregate capital-output ratio to 3 as in Casta~
                                                       neda, D´
                                                              iaz-Gim´
                                                                     enez, and R´
                                                                                ios-
Rull (2003) and De Nardi (2004), which in light of equation (29) leads to an equilibrium
interest rate r equals 6% per annum as in Huggett (1996) and De Nardi (2004). We set
the productivity parameter A to 0.9, so that the wage rate w for an agent with the average
labor efficiency equals unity. We set the coefficient of relative risk aversion at  " 2, a
commonly used value.
   Panel A.2 of Table I reports how we set parameters that governing life-stage transitions
to make life expectancies under the N " 1 and N " 2 versions of the model be equal.15
  15. Our model with N " 2 corresponds to the discrete-time version of the stochastic life-cycle model

                                                 23
                                               TABLE I

                           Parameter settings and calibration



                                         Panel A.1       Assigned
          Parameters                       Symbol                          N " 1, 2
          Risk aversion                                                        2
          Subjective discount rate                                           5%
          Capital share                                                      0.36
          Capital depreciation rate                                          6%
          Productivty                          A                             0.9
                                        Panel A.2        Life-stage
          Parameters                       Symbol                     N "1             N "2
          Transition intensity                                        0.0167           0.033
                                        Panel B.     Calibration
          Parameters                       Symbol                     N "1             N "2
          Earnings growth volatility                                    9.9%           12.7%
          Expected earnings growth             µ                       1.11%           1.26%
          Targets: (labor-earnings Gini Y , capital-output ratio K {F pK, Lqq " p0.63, 3q



For our N " 1 model, we set the hazard parameter 1 " 0.0167 in order to target an
agent's expected lifetime at 1{N " 60 years, as in Casta~
                                                        neda, D´
                                                               iaz-Gim´
                                                                      enez, and R´
                                                                                 ios-
Rull (2003). For our N " 2 model, we set 2 " 1 and target expected durations of
1{1 " 30 years for both life-stages so that we obtain the same expected total lifetime of
60 " 30 ` 30 years as for our N " 1 model. In this way, we approximate a setting in which
mortality risk is lower for most younger people and higher for most older people.
    Panel B of Table I reports outcomes from jointly calibrating the expected labor earnings
growth µ and labor earnings growth volatility  by targeting a pair of quantities: a Gini
coefficient for the cross-section labor earnings of 0.63 and a capital-output ratio of 3, as
in Casta~
        neda, D´
               iaz-Gim´
                      enez, and R´
                                 ios-Rull (2003). Similarly, De Nardi (2004) uses labor
used by Casta~
             neda, D´iaz-Gim´
                            enez, and R´ios-Rull (2003). Gertler (1999) used a discrete-time version of an
N " 2 version of our model to study social security. Heathcote, Storesletten, and Violante (2017) use an
N " 1 model in their study of optimal tax progressivity.


                                                    24
                                              TABLE II

Cross-Section Distributions of Earnings and Wealth. The Parameter Val-
ues for Both the N " 1 and N " 2 Models Are Reported in Table I


                                 Panel A. Percentage earnings in the top
                             Gini       1%       5%      20%        40%         60%
            U.S. data        0.63        15      31        61        84          97
             N "1            0.63        33      49        69        81          89
             N "2            0.63        29      46        67        81          90

                                    Panel B. Percentage wealth in the top
                             Gini       1%       5%      20%        40%         60%
            U.S. data        0.78        30      54        79        93          98
             N "1            0.77        39      58        79        91          96
             N "2            0.72        34      53        75        88          95



earnings growth volatility to match the Gini coefficient of labor earnings. The calibrated
values are µ " 1.11% and  " 9.9% for the N " 1 model and are µ " 1.26% and
 " 12.7% for the N " 2 model. While we have calibrated earnings expected growth
rate µ and growth volatility  to target two macro moments, these values are broadly in
line with micro estimates reported in the literature (see Meghir and Pistaferri (2011) for a
survey.)


V.B        Implications for Cross-Section Earnings and Wealth Dis-
           tributions
Table II reports the model-implied Lorenz curves for exogenous labor earnings and en-
dogenous wealth in Panels A and B, respectively, for both the N " 1 and N " 2 models
in addition to the empirical distributions of earnings and wealth in the U.S.16 For the
N " 1 and N " 2 models separately, we calibrate  to a Gini coefficient target of 0.63 for
  16. Data for distributions of earnings and wealth in the U.S. Economy are borrowed from Casta~
                                                                                               neda,
D´
 iaz-Gim´enez, and R´ ios-Rull (2003).



                                                 25
cross-section earnings that characterizes the data.
    Let's look at exogenous labor earnings first. In Appendix B, we report that the cross-
section labor earnings Y follows a double Pareto distribution, also used in Luttmer (2007),
Gabaix (2009), and Toda and Walsh (2015).


The N " 1 model. Although our simple model of labor earnings model neglects re-
sponses to transient shocks, the implied earnings distribution is able to capture key fea-
tures of the empirical Lorenz curve. In the N " 1 model, the top 1% receive 33% of the
total earnings while in the data they receive 15% of the total earnings. This aspect of our
model contrasts with properties of classic BAH models that generate too little earnings
concentration at the top. For example, the model-implied Gini coefficient for cross-section
earnings in Aiyagari (1994) is 0.1 and the top 1% earnings-rich receive only 6.8% of total
earnings.
    Next, we turn to the endogenous wealth distribution reported in Panel B for our N " 1
model. Our N " 1 model delivers a Gini coefficient for cross-section wealth of 0.77 that
closely approximates the wealth Gini coefficient 0.78 in the US data.17
    A successful feature of our model is that it predicts that the Gini coefficient for wealth is
larger than that for earnings (0.63). The model generates an endogenous wealth distribution
that has a fatter tail than exogenous earnings distribution, something that classic BAH with
stationary exogenous labor earnings processes don't do.
    Our model is too stingy with free parameters to approximate the entire wealth Lorenz
curve well. Compared with observed wealth concentration, our model generates more
concentrated wealth holdings for the rich. For example, the top 1% wealth-rich owns
about 39% of the total wealth, while the top 1% earnings-rich makes about 33% of the
total earnings in the model. As they were also for the earnings distribution, our models
predictions here differ qualitatively from those of classic BAH models with stationary labor
earning processes in which model-implied wealth concentration at the top is much lower
  17. Sargent, Wang, and Yang (2020) analyze a special N " 1,  " 0 model with nonrandom labor
earnings. That simplified setting lets us derive explicit formulas for Lorenz curves, Gini coefficients, fractal
inequalities, and power law exponents for equilibrium distributions of wealth and earnings. But the strong
precautionary savings motives and resulting concave consumption functions that play such important roles
here are absent, as is the more realistic life/dynasty cycle structure that we include here when N  1.



                                                      26
than what is observed. For example, in Aiyagari (1994), the Gini coefficient for cross-section
wealth is 0.38 and the top 1% only owns about 3.2% of the aggregate wealth as opposed
to about 30% in the data. Thus, relative to the data, our model with non-stationary labor
earnings generates too much wealth concentration at the top, reversing a salient finding
from BAH models with stationary labor earnings. To help our model match the observed
upper tail of the wealth distribution, we would somehow have to attenuate forces that push
wealth toward the wealthiest, not strengthen them as has been done in BAH models with
stationary labor earnings processes.
   What happens when we move from the N " 1 model to the N " 2 model? We shall see
that qualitative features of key predictions (e.g., fatter tailed distribution for wealth than
earnings) continue to hold while fits improve.


The N " 2 model. Evidently, calibrating our N " 2 earnings model by setting the
model-implied Gini coefficient at 0.63 as we do for the N " 1 model yields a better fit
with the empirical Lorenz curve. While the N " 2 model still generates too much earnings
concentration at the top, it gets closer to the observations than does the N " 1 model.
   The Gini coefficient for cross-section wealth equals 0.72, which is further away from the
0.78 in the data than is the N " 1 model. But the Lorenz curve for the N " 2 model is
closer to the data than is the N " 1 model. For example, the top 1% wealth-rich owns
about 34% of total wealth compared to 30% in the data, and the top 5% wealth-rich owns
53% of aggregate wealth, which agrees with the data. Overall, our N " 2 model generates
a cross-section wealth distribution that is reasonably close to the empirical distribution.
   In summary, with the caveat that our earnings model generates too much concentration
of earnings at the top, our N " 1 and N " 2 models both generate cross-section wealth
distributions with large wealth concentrations at the top, broadly consistent with U.S data.


                       VI.      Concluding Remarks
Putting multi-stage stochastic life cycles and permanent labor-earnings shocks into an
otherwise standard BAH model unleashes forces that create substantial wealth inequality
as measured by Lorenz curves, Gini coefficients, fat tail (power law) exponents, and fractal


                                             27
inequality. We have kept our model ruthlessly parsimonious in terms of parameters because
we want to isolate what drives our results. We could extend the model to do more by being
less stingy with parameters. We anticipate that we can apply similar analytical techniques
to the ones we have deployed here to capture features that we have ignored, for example,
transients shocks to labor earnings.
   Our model generates a distribution of marginal propensities to consume (MPCs), an
object of interest for a number of topics.18 To take an example of substantial contempo-
rary interest, in our model taxing wealth and transferring it to the very young can have
substantial effects on social welfare as measured by a utilitarian welfare criterion as well as
on wealth and the interest rate. A subsection III.B concave consumption function would
activate such effects. We anticipate using our model soon to study this and other policy
experiments in future research.
   We have excluded aggregate shocks and focused on a stochastic steady state. By deploy-
ing techniques from mean field game theory, we hope to adapt the model to incorporate
aggregate shocks and follow in the steps of Gabaix, Lasry, Lions, and Moll (2016) who
use mean field games to analyze the dynamics of inequality. They show that standard
random-growth-based models generate transition dynamics that are too slow relative to
those observed in the data. Guvenen, Karahan, Ozkan, and Song (2015) and De Nardi,
Fella, and Paz-Pardo (2020) document that logarithmic earnings innovations are very fat-
tailed. We aspire to include richer earnings processes and aggregate transition dynamics in
future work.




  18. Kaplan and Violante (2014) study consequences of fiscal stimuli. Other papers study transition
mechanisms of monetary policy (Kaplan, Moll, and Violante (2018), Auclert (2019)), effects of a credit
crunch or house price movements on consumer spending (e.g. Guerrieri and Lorenzoni (2017); and how
inequality affects aggregate demand, e.g., Auclert and Rognlie (2018).


                                                 28
                                   References

Abowd, John M and David Card. 1989. On the covariance structure of earnings and hours
changes. Econometrica 57 (2):411­445.
Achdou, Yves, Jiequn Han, Jean-Michel Lasry, Pierre-Louis Lions, and Benjamin Moll.
2017. Income and Wealth Distribution in Macroeconomics: A Continuous-Time Approach.
NBER Working Papers 23732, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Aiyagari, S. Rao. 1994. Uninsured Idiosyncratic Risk and Aggregate Saving. The Quarterly
Journal of Economics 109 (3):659­684.
Auclert, Adrien. 2019. Monetary policy and the redistribution channel. American Eco-
nomic Review 109 (6):2333­67.
Auclert, Adrien and Matthew Rognlie. 2018. Inequality and aggregate demand. Tech.
rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
Benhabib, Jess, Alberto Bisin, and Shenghao Zhu. 2011. The Distribution of Wealth and
Fiscal Policy in Economies With Finitely Lived Agents. Econometrica 79 (1):123­157.
------. 2015. The wealth distribution in Bewley economies with capital income risk.
Journal of Economic Theory 159 (PA):489­515.
------. 2016. The distribution of wealth in the Blanchard-Yaari model. Macroeconomic
Dynamics 20 (2):466­481.
Benhabib, Jess, Alberto Bisin, and Mi Luo. 2019. Wealth distribution and social mobility
in the US: A quantitative approach. American Economic Review 109 (5):1623­47.
Blanchard, Olivier J. 1985. Debt, deficits, and finite horizons. Journal of political economy
93 (2):223­247.
Blundell, Richard, Luigi Pistaferri, and Ian Preston. 2008. Consumption Inequality and
Partial Insurance. American Economic Review 98 (5):1887­1921.
Cagetti, Marco and Mariacristina De Nardi. 2006. Entrepreneurship, Frictions, and
Wealth. Journal of Political Economy 114 (5):835­870.
------. 2009. Estate Taxation, Entrepreneurship, and Wealth. American Economic Re-
view 99 (1):85­111.
Campbell, John and N. Gregory Mankiw. 1990. Permanent Income, Current Income, and
Consumption. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 8 (3):265­79.
Carroll, Christopher D. 1997. Buffer-stock saving and the life cycle/permanent income
hypothesis. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 112 (1):1­55.
Casta~
     neda, Ana, Javier D´
                        iaz-Gim´enez, and Jos´e-V´
                                                 ictor R´ios-Rull. 2003. Accounting for
the U.S. Earnings and Wealth Inequality. Journal of Political Economy 111 (4):818­857.



                                            29
Champernowne, David G. 1953. A model of income distribution. The Economic Journal
63 (250):318­351.
Cooley, Thomas F and Edward C Prescott. 1995. Economic Growth and Business Cycles.
In Frontiers of Business Cycle Research, edited by Thomas F. Cooley. Princeton University
Press .
De Nardi, Mariacristina. 2004. Wealth Inequality and Intergenerational Links. Review of
Economic Studies 71 (3):743­768.
------. 2015. Quantitative Models of Wealth Inequality: A Survey. NBER Working
Papers 21106, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
De Nardi, Mariacristina, Giulio Fella, and Gonzalo Paz-Pardo. 2020. Nonlinear house-
hold earnings dynamics, self-insurance, and welfare. Journal of the European Economic
Association 18 (2):890­926.
Deaton, Angus. 1991. Saving and Liquidity Constraints. Econometrica 59 (5):1221­48.
Duffie, Darrell. 2010. Dynamic asset pricing theory. Princeton University Press.
Gabaix, Xavier. 1999. Zipf's Law for Cities: An Explanation. The Quarterly Journal of
Economics 114 (3):739­767.
------. 2009. Power Laws in Economics and Finance. Annual Review of Economics
1 (1):255­294.
Gabaix, Xavier, Jean-Michel Lasry, Pierre-Louis Lions, and Benjamin Moll. 2016. The
dynamics of inequality. Econometrica 84 (6):2071­2111.
Gertler, Mark. 1999. Government debt and social security in a life-cycle economy.
Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 50 (1):61­110.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier and Jonathan Parker. 2002. Consumption Over the Life Cycle.
Econometrica 70 (1):47­89.
Guerrieri, Veronica and Guido Lorenzoni. 2017. Credit crises, precautionary savings, and
the liquidity trap. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 132 (3):1427­1467.
Guvenen, Fatih, Serdar Ozkan, and Jae Song. 2014. The Nature of Countercyclical Income
Risk. Journal of Political Economy 122 (3):621 ­ 660.
Guvenen, Fatih, Fatih Karahan, Serdar Ozkan, and Jae Song. 2015. What do data on
millions of US workers reveal about life-cycle earnings risk? Tech. rep., National Bureau
of Economic Research.
Heathcote, Jonathan, Kjetil Storesletten, and Giovanni L Violante. 2017. Optimal tax pro-
gressivity: An analytical framework. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 132 (4):1693­
1754.
Hubmer, Joachim, Per Krusell, and Anthony A Smith. 2016. The historical evolution
of the wealth distribution: A quantitative-theoretic investigation. Tech. rep., National
Bureau of Economic Research.

                                          30
Huggett, Mark. 1996. Wealth distribution in life-cycle economies. Journal of Monetary
Economics 38 (3):469­494.
Jones, Charles and Jihee Kim. 2018. A Schumpeterian Model of Top Income Inequality.
Journal of Political Economy 126 (5):1785­1826.
Kaplan, Greg and Giovanni L Violante. 2014. A model of the consumption response to
fiscal stimulus payments. Econometrica 82 (4):1199­1239.
Kaplan, Greg, Benjamin Moll, and Giovanni L. Violante. 2018. Monetary Policy According
to HANK. American Economic Review 108 (3):697­743.
Krusell, Per and Anthony Jr. Smith. 1998. Income and Wealth Heterogeneity in the
Macroeconomy. Journal of Political Economy 106 (5):867­896.
Luttmer, Erzo GJ. 2007. Selection, growth, and the size distribution of firms. The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 (3):1103­1144.
------. 2010. Models of Growth and Firm Heterogeneity. Annual Review of Economics
2 (1):547­576.
------. 2011. On the Mechanics of Firm Growth. Review of Economic Studies 78 (3):1042­
1068.
MaCurdy, Thomas E. 1982. The use of time series processes to model the error structure
of earnings in a longitudinal data analysis. Journal of Econometrics 18 (1):83­114.
Mandelbrot, Benoit. 1960. The Pareto-Levy law and the distribution of income. Interna-
tional Economic Review 1 (2):79­106.
Meghir, Costas and Luigi Pistaferri. 2004. Income Variance Dynamics and Heterogeneity.
Econometrica 72 (1):1­32.
Moll, Benjamin, Lukasz Rachel, and Pascual Restrepo. 2019. Uneven growth: automations
impact on income and wealth inequality. Tech. rep., Princeton University.
Nirei, Makoto and Shuhei Aoki. 2016. Pareto distribution of income in neoclassical growth
models. Review of Economic Dynamics 20:25­42.
Prescott, Edward C. 1986. Theory ahead of business-cycle measurement. Carnegie-
Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 25 (1):11­44.
Quadrini, Vincenzo. 2000. Entrepreneurship, Saving and Social Mobility. Review of Eco-
nomic Dynamics 3 (1):1­40.
Sargent, Thomas J., Neng Wang, and Jinqiang Yang. 2020. Earnings Growth and the
Wealth Distribution. Working paper.
Simon, Herbert A. 1955.      On a class of skew distribution functions.      Biometrika
42 (3/4):425­440.
Stachurski, John and Alexis Akira Toda. 2019. An impossibility theorem for wealth
in heterogeneous-agent models with limited heterogeneity. Journal of Economic Theory
182 (C):1­24.

                                          31
Stokey, Nancy L and Sergio Rebelo. 1995. Growth effects of flat-rate taxes. Journal of
Political Economy 103 (3):519­550.
Sun, Yeneng. 2006. The exact law of large numbers via Fubini extension and characteri-
zation of insurable risks. Journal of Economic Theory 126 (1):31­69.
Toda, Alexis Akira. 2014. Incomplete market dynamics and cross-sectional distributions.
Journal of Economic Theory 154 (C):310­348.
Toda, Alexis Akira and Kieran Walsh. 2015. The Double Power Law in Consumption and
Implications for Testing Euler Equations. Journal of Political Economy 123 (5):1177 ­
1200.
Wang, Chong, Neng Wang, and Jinqiang Yang. 2016. Optimal consumption and savings
with stochastic income and recursive utility. Journal of Economic Theory 165 (C):292­
331.
Wang, Neng. 2002. A Life-Cycle Model of Income and Wealth Distribution. Thesis,
Graduate School of Business, Stanford University.
Yaari, Menahem E. 1965. Uncertain lifetime, life insurance, and the theory of the con-
sumer. The Review of Economic Studies 32 (2):137­150.
Zeldes, Stephen. 1989. Optimal Consumption with Stochastic Income: Deviations from
Certainty Equivalence. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 104 (2):275­298.




                                         32
                                     Appendices

Appendix A sketches proofs of main results in Section III. Appendix B summarizes the
cross-section earnings distribution and provides proofs for the N " 1 model. Appendix C
provides additional details about how we calculate aggregate variables.


           A        Proofs for Solutions in Section III
First, by using the HJB equations given in (10) and (11), we obtain the following FOC for
consumption:

                                 U 1 pCn q " Vn,X pX, Y q ,                              (A.1)

which equates the marginal benefit of consumption U 1 pCn q with the marginal utility of
savings Vn,X pX, Y q. Using the value function given in (12) and the homogeneity property
Pn pX, Y q " pn pxqY , we obtain the optimal scaled consumption rule cn pxq given in (16).
Substituting (12), Pn pX, Y q " pn pxqY , and (16) into the HJB equations (10) and (11), we
obtain the ODE (17) for pN pxq and the ODE (18) for pn pxq where n  N ´ 1.
    Substituting pN pxq " x ` qN into (17), letting x Ñ 8, and using (13), we obtain
               ~                           ¸
                    1´1{
                   bN    ´ p ` N q
       0 "                         ` µN        px ` qN q ` 1 ` pr ` N ´ µN qx
                        1´
               ^                                     ^                       
                   mN ´ p ` N q                          mN ´ p ` N q
          "                     ` r ` N         x`                    ` µN      qN ` 1 . (A.2)
                      1´                                    1´

As (A.2) must hold for all x, we obtain the explicit formula (14) for mN . And then
substituting (14) into (A.2), we obtain (22) for qN . Similarly, substituting pn pxq " x ` qn
into (18) and letting x Ñ 8, we obtain
              ~              «^              ff   ¸
            1´1{                      1´
           bn     ´      n      bn`1
     0 "              `                  ´ 1 ` µn px ` qn q ` 1 ` pr ´ µn qx
             1´         1´       bn
              ^       1´
                 bn`1
           `n            pqn`1 ´ qn q
                  bn
         ~                «^       ´      ff    ¸
           mn ´        n      mn`1
       "           `                   ´1 `r x`1
            1´        1´       mn

                                               33
                     ^                          ^      ´
                         mn ´     n               mn`1
                 `             ´    ´ µn qn ` n          qn`1 .                                     (A.3)
                         1´      1´                mn

Since (A.3) must hold for all x, we obtain mn as given by (15). Finally, substituting (15)
into (A.3) gives (21) for qn .


   B       Cross-section Earnings Distribution for the
                                             N " 1 Model
Closed-Form Solutions
Proposition B.1. The cumulative distribution function of labor earnings Y is given by:
                                      $     ´ ¯1
                                         2   Y
                                      '
                                      '
                                      & 2 ´1 Y0  ,                 Y  Y0 ,
                           Y pY q "                 ´ ¯2                                            (B.1)
                                      '
                                      '
                                      %1 ´    1      Y
                                             1 ´2    Y0
                                                            ,      Y  Y0 .

where 1  0 and 2  ´1 are the two roots of following the quadratic equation for  :19
                                           ^         
                                        2                       2 2
                                 0"` µ´                   ´         .                               (B.2)
                                        2                       2

    The distribution function Y pY q in (B.1) is known as the double Pareto distribution
and has been studied in Luttmer (2007), Gabaix (2009), and Toda and Walsh (2015). The
                                                                      ´ ¯1{Y
right tail is governed by a power law: for large Y           p s " 1
                                                 p , ProbrY  Y         Y
                                                                       p
                                                                               where Y
                                                                              1 ´2     Y0
is the power-law exponent
                                          Y " ´2  1  0 ,                                            (B.3)

where 2  ´1 is the negative root for (B.2).
  The cross-section average of labor earnings is

                                           1 2            
                            EpY q "                  Y0 "    Y0 .                                   (B.4)
                                      p1 ` 1qp2 ` 1q      ´µ
  19. When   0, equation (B.2) has two roots, 1  0 and 2  ´1, as   0 and  ´ µ  0. When the
earnings process is deterministic ( " 0), an important special case, equation (B.2) is linear with only one
root: 2 " ´{µ.




                                                    34
The Lorenz curve LY p ¨ q of labor earnings Y is:
                      $     ´    ¯ 1 1 `1
                      ' 2 `1 2 ´1 1                                                                 2
                      '
                      '
                      & 2     2
                                    z 1 ,                                             0z           2 ´1
                                                                                                          ,
          LY pz q "                                                                                            (B.5)
                      '               ´          ¯ 1                  2 `1
                               1 `1       1 ´2                                         2
                      '                            2
                      %1 ´
                      '                                    p1 ´ z q   2
                                                                             ,                 z  1.
                               1           1                                          2 ´1


Using the definition of the Gini coefficient Y in (38), we find that the Gini coefficient of
labor earnings is
                                                2     2
                                              22  ` 21  ´ 1 2 ` 2 ` 1
                                Y         "                            .                                       (B.6)
                                              p2 ´ 1 qp21 ` 1qp22 ` 1q

The "fractal inequality" F IY pz q for earnings is

                                                                                  ^         2 `1
                                      1 ´ L1,Y p1 ´ z q                               1       2
                       F IY pz q "                        "                                        ,           (B.7)
                                   1 ´ L1,Y p1 ´ 10 ^ z q                             10

                       1
provided that z       1 ´2
                           .


Proofs
Using the Kolmogorov Forward equation (32) for the case with N " 1 we obtain

                                                                                 2Y 2 2
          0 " p 2 ´ µqY pY q ` p2 2 ´ µqY 1Y pY q `                                  Y pY q ´ Y pY q .         (B.8)
                                                                                  2

The density function Y pY q takes the form of a double Pareto (power law) distribution:
                                         $
                                         & Y 1 ´1 ,                          Y  Y0 ,
                                           1
                                Y pY q "                                                                       (B.9)
                                         % Y 2 ´1 ,                          Y  Y0 ,
                                                       2


where 1  1 and 2  ´1 are roots of the quadratic equation

                                                                                       2 p ´ 1qp ´ 2q
                0 " p ` µ ´  2 q ` pµ ´ 2 2 qp ´ 1q ´                                                 ,       (B.10)
                                                                                             2

which implies (B.2).




                                                               35
      Because Y pY q must be continuous at Y0 , we have

                                          1 Y01 ´1 " 2 Y02 ´1 .                          (B.11)

By integrating the density, we obtain:

                                                                         1 Y01 2 Y02
                     Y0                         8
                                 1 ´1
               1"         p1 Y          qdY `        p2 Y 2 ´1 qdY "          ´      .   (B.12)
                     0                          Y0                        1     2

Jointly solving (B.11) and (B.12), we obtain:

                         1 2                   
                    1 "        Y0´1 " a                Y0´1 ,                            (B.13)
                         2 ´ 1               2   2
                                       pµ ´  {2q ` 2 2

                          1 2                  
                     2 "       Y0´2 " a                 Y0´2 .                           (B.14)
                         2 ´ 1               2   2
                                        pµ ´  {2q ` 2 2



    Substituting (B.13) for 1 and (B.14) for 2 into (B.9), we obtain the cross-section
stationary distribution of earnings Y pY q
                                 $
                                                   ´1 1 ´1
                                   ?
                                 & pµ´2 {2q2 `22 Y0 Y      ,                Y  Y0 ,
                                 '
                                 '
                    Y pY q "                                                             (B.15)
                                 '
                                 %?           
                                                       Y ´2 Y 2 ´1   ,      Y  Y0 ,
                                 '
                                        pµ´ 2 {2q2 `2 2 0


                                                                     1
   By integrating Y pY q, we obtain Y pY q is given by (B.15). Let ´
                                                                   Y p¨q denote the
inverse distribution function of Y . We can show that
                            $´        ¯1
                            ' 2 ´1 u 1 Y ,
                            '
                                                      0  u  2  2
                                                                 ,
                            '
                            & 2            0                  ´1
                   ´1
                  Y puq "                                                    (B.16)
                            ' ´             ¯ 1
                            % 1 ´2 p1 ´ uq              2
                            '                  2
                            '
                                 1
                                                 Y0 , 2 ´1
                                                            u  1.

                 1
By integrating ´
               Y p¨q, we obtain

z
        1
      ´
      Y puqdu                                                                            (B.17)
  0




                                                        36
   $      ´      ¯1         1 `1
     1      2 ´1 1                                                                               2
                      Y   z      ,                                                      0z             ,
   '                        1
                        0
   '
   & 1 `1    2                                                                                  2 ´1
   '
   '
 "               ¯ 1
                          «
                                   ¯ 2 `1
                                                         ff
   '      ´                 ´                       2 `1
   ' 2      1 ´2    2            1     2                              1 2                2
   '
   % 2 `1
   '         1
                      Y0      1 ´2
                                          ´ p1 ´ z q 2 `                       Y
                                                                  p1 `1qp2 ´1 q 0
                                                                                    ,   2 ´1
                                                                                                z  1.

                             z     1
                                 ´
                                 Y puqdu
Finally, by using LY p¨q "   0
                             1
                                 ´ 1       , we obtain the Lorenz curve (B.5) for earnings.
                             0   Y puqdu




                       C         Computing Aggregates
We compute equilibrium objects by iterating over candidate interest rates. First, for a
given r, we compute total savings EpX q by aggregating over individual's optimal savings
demand. Second, equations (30) and (29) imply that the wage rate w can be deduced from
the factor price frontier
                                                   ^         
                                                       r`    ´1
                                  w " Ap1 ´ q                      .                             (C.1)
                                                        A

    Third, endowed labor units H are exogenous and the agent does not value leisure.
Thus, the total wage payment to labor equals total labor earnings: wH " EpY q. Since we
fix µ and  when we perform comparative static analyses, we infer the value of Y0 from
wH " EpY q.
    Fourth, we solve for the aggregate capital stock K by using the equilibrium increasing
relation between K and w given in (30). Finally, we check whether the aggregate K
obtained in step 4 equals the aggregate savings EpX q obtained in step 1. If so, we have
found a fixed point. Otherwise, we continue the iteration process until we find one. From
a fixed point, we obtain equilibrium objects, r, w, Y0 , K , with the implied aggregate
                                         q1´
capital-output ratio K {F pK, Lq " pK {H
                                       A
                                             .




                                                   37
