                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     DOES MARIJUANA LEGALIZATION AFFECT WORK CAPACITY? EVIDENCE
                FROM WORKERS' COMPENSATION BENEFITS

                                         Rahi Abouk
                                      Keshar M. Ghimire
                                  Johanna Catherine Maclean
                                        David Powell

                                     Working Paper 28471
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28471


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   February 2021




Authors listed in alphabetical order. All authors contributed equally to the manuscript. Powell
gratefully acknowledges funding from NIDA (P50DA046351). We thank seminar participants at
Indiana University and the Workers' Compensation Research Institute for helpful feedback. We
also thank Alex Hollingsworth, Melissa McInerney, John Mullahy, Sarah Stith, and Shyam
Raman for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Rahi Abouk, Keshar M. Ghimire, Johanna Catherine Maclean, and David Powell. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Does Marijuana Legalization Affect Work Capacity? Evidence from Workers' Compensation
Benefits
Rahi Abouk, Keshar M. Ghimire, Johanna Catherine Maclean, and David Powell
NBER Working Paper No. 28471
February 2021
JEL No. H12,I12,I18,J32

                                       ABSTRACT

We study the effect of state recreational marijuana laws (RMLs) on workers' compensation (WC)
benefit receipt among adults 40-62 years. We find that WC receipt declines in response to RML
adoption both in terms of the propensity to receive benefits and benefit amount. We estimate
complementary declines in non-traumatic workplace injury rates and the incidence of work-
limiting disabilities. We offer evidence that the primary driver of these reductions is an
improvement in work capacity, likely due to access to an additional form of pain management
therapy.

Rahi Abouk                                    Johanna Catherine Maclean
William Paterson University                   Department of Economics
Department of Economics, Finance,             Temple University
and Global Business                           Ritter Annex 869
300 Pompton Road                              Philadelphia, PA 19122
Wayne, NJ 07470                               and NBER
aboukr@wpunj.edu                              catherine.maclean@temple.edu

Keshar M. Ghimire                             David Powell
Business and Economics Department             RAND Corporation
University of Cincinnati - Blue Ash           1776 Main Street
9555 Plainfield Road                          P.O. Box 2138
Blue Ash, OH 45236                            Santa Monica, CA 90407
USA                                           dpowell@rand.org
ghimirkr@ucmail.uc.edu
1. Introduction

         Marijuana has increasingly become legalized in the United States. We study the effects

of recent state laws that legalize the recreational use of marijuana on work capacity ­ the ability

to productively engage in paid employment ­ among older working-age adults. We rely

primarily on Workers' Compensation (WC) benefit receipt as a signal of diminished work

capacity; WC benefits are received when individuals become injured or ill while working and

require time away from work to recover. In addition to providing a useful measure of labor

productivity and work capacity, injuries incurred while working represent substantial costs to the

national economy (Leigh 2011).

         Most of the costs of workplace injuries are borne by workers and their families. The WC

program is designed specifically to transfer some of these costs from workers and families to

governments and firms. In 2018, WC cash and medical payments to workers totaled $62.9

billion (Weiss, Murphy, and Boden 2020), equivalent to the size of annual Earned Income Tax

Credit expenditures. The economic literature on WC to date typically focuses on the impacts of

the incentives inherent in the system on injury duration (e.g., Meyer, Viscusi, and Durbin (1995);

Neuhauser and Raphael (2004); and Cabral and Dillender (2020)) or the program's consumption

smoothing benefits (Bronchetti 2012). There is less evidence on the impact of policies not

directly targeting WC to affect costs and benefit receipt. 1

         The continued legalization of marijuana in the U.S. has been controversial, including its

potential to harm the productivity of the workforce. 2 Due to the product's medicinal properties,



1
  One exception is a small literature on the impacts of access to health insurance on WC claiming behavior (e.g.,
Bronchetti and McInerney (2017); Lakdawalla, Reville, and Seabury (2007); and Dillender (2015)). Further,
Ohsfeldt and Morrisey (1997) study the effect of beer taxes on WC and workplace injuries.
2
  See discussions in National Institute on Drug Abuse (2020) and https://www.usnews.com/news/best-
states/articles/2018-08-01/the-legalization-of-recreational-marijuana-an-economic-opportunity-for-states (last
accessed January 27, 2021).

                                                          1
states initially passed medical marijuana laws (MMLs), providing legal protection for individuals

with specific health conditions to use this product to treat symptoms associated with ailments. 3

California was the first state, in 1996, to adopt an MML. By December 2020, 33 states and the

District of Columbia had adopted such law (ProCon.org 2020a). Following the wave of MML

adoption, states have recently passed laws that legalize marijuana for recreational use (`RMLs').

The initial RMLs were adopted in 2012 when Colorado and Washington legalized recreational

marijuana use for adults 21 and older. As of December 2020, marijuana use is legal for

recreational purposes in 16 states and the District of Columbia with five additional states

officially announcing that they will adopt such a policy in the future (ProCon.org 2020b).

         Critics argue that legalization of marijuana will lead to greater addiction, crime,

healthcare costs, and other social ills within the population while harming health and labor

market outcomes. 4 However, marijuana legalization is popular among Americans: in 2019, 67%

supported legalization for recreational use, and 91% supported legalization for recreational or

medical use (Daniller 2019). Despite popular support and legislative efforts by some lawmakers

(e.g., the Marijuana Opportunity Reinvestment and Expungement [MORE] Act of 2019), 5

marijuana use has been prohibited federally since the Marihuana Act of 1937, leading to a direct

conflict between state and federal law.

         A small literature has considered the labor supply consequences, with a focus on older

working-age adults, of the availability of pain management therapies (Garthwaite 2012;

Bütikofer and Skira 2018). In this paper, we use RML adoption as a large shock to the



3
  Marijuana is not likely to improve health per se, but rather use of this product may allow better management of
symptoms associated with chronic and acute conditions.
4
  See for example https://marijuana.procon.org/ and https://www.haylor.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/05/Assurex-
Marijuana-White-Paper.pdf (all websites last accessed January 27, 2021).
5
  This Act, while not successful to date, proposes to decriminalize marijuana possession. The Act does not go as far
as legalization, either for medical or recreational purposes, but would reflect a profound shift in U.S. federal law.

                                                          2
availability of an alternative form of chronic pain management, in particular one that does not

require a prescription or a consultation with a healthcare professional but may pose other

concerns such as stigma, issues related to drug testing at work, and so forth. There is significant

policy interest in understanding and improving the work capacity of older adults in the U.S.,

especially given its implications for social insurance programs (Coile, Milligan, and Wise 2017;

Cutler, Meara, and Richards-Shubik 2013; Lopez-Garcia, Maestas, and Mullen 2019).

         We study WC as an important metric of work capacity for this population and due to

independent policy interest in the determinants of WC benefit receipt. While WC expenditures

are high, they have recently been on a decline. Figure 1A depicts trends in WC real expenditures

in the U.S. over the period 2010 to 2018. Of particular interest to our study, the most recent

decline in WC costs began in 2012 (Weiss, Murphy, and Boden 2020), the first year in which a

U.S. state adopted an RML.

         There is limited ­ though growing ­ evidence on the work capacity implications of

RMLs. These policies improve access to marijuana even beyond MMLs (Hollingsworth, Wing,

and Bradford 2019; Cerdá et al. 2020), leading to reduced demand for other types of pain

management therapies (Wen and Hockenberry 2018; McMichael, Van Horn, and Viscusi 2020;

Chan, Burkhardt, and Flyr 2020; Carrieri, Madio, and Principe 2020). This evidence indicates

that RMLs improve access to an additional channel for managing pain and other health

conditions, suggesting potential benefits on populations at risk of workplace injuries. 6 Many

states include a relatively limited set of `qualifying' health conditions in their MML; for

example, Pennsylvania does not consider chronic pain, the most commonly reported reason for

using medical marijuana (Park and Wu 2017; Kosiba, Maisto, and Ditre 2019), as a qualifying


6
 For example, 30% of all fatal and nonfatal occupational injuries and illnesses are due to musculoskeletal disorders,
such as back pain, hernias, sprains, strains, and tears, alone (Bureau of Labor Statistics 2016).

                                                          3
health condition. 7 Additionally, healthcare providers working in Federally Qualified Health

Centers must adhere to federal law and thus cannot recommend marijuana, even in states where

medical use of this product is legalized.

         In this study, we investigate the effect of state RMLs on WC receipt among adults ages

40 to 62 years of age (`older adults'). We study older adults since they are more likely to

experience health conditions for which marijuana may be effective in symptom management and

to use prescription medications for which marijuana may serve as a therapeutic substitute

(Nicholas and Maclean 2019; Hales, Martin, and Gu 2020). Over the period 2015 to 2018, only

5.4% of adults 20 to 39 years reported use of a prescription pain medication in the past 30 days

compared to 12.7% of adults 40 to 59 years and 15.1% of adults 60 years and older (Hales,

Martin, and Gu 2020). Chronic pain prevalence is substantially higher among adults 45 to 64

years (Dahlhamer et al. 2018). 8 At the same time, rates of marijuana misuse are lower among

older (vs. younger) adults (see Table 1 in Choi, DiNitto, and Marti (2017)), suggesting that

concerns regarding negative health and labor market implications associated with legalization

may be muted for older adults.

         We evaluate the effect of RMLs on WC benefit receipt and WC income over the period

2010 to 2018 using the Annual Social and Economic Supplement (ASEC) of the Current

Population Survey (CPS). We also assess possible mechanisms explaining the changes in WC

benefit receipt by studying marijuana use and misuse; use of therapeutic substitutes (medications

used to treat chronic pain); and a broader set of work capacity measures including labor supply,

workplace injury rates, self-assessed health, and the incidence of work-limiting disabilities.



7
  See, for example, https://filtermag.org/heres-how-infuriatingly-hard-it-still-is-to-get-medical-marijuana-in-new-
york/ (last accessed January 27, 2021).
8
  Chronic pain is defined as pain on most days or every day in the past six months (Deyo et al. 2015).

                                                          4
           Our results show a decline in WC benefit propensity of 0.18 percentage points (`ppts'),

which corresponds to a 20.0% reduction in any WC income, after states legalize marijuana for

recreational use. Similarly, we find that annual income received from WC declines by $21.98

(or 20.5%) post-RML. These results are not driven by pre-existing trends, and falsification

exercises suggest that observing estimates of this magnitude is statistically rare. While our

estimated effect sizes are arguably large, the literature to date demonstrates substantial (20-38%)

increases in marijuana use post-RML (see Section 2.2). Previous economic research documents

large changes in labor supply in response shocks to pain medication availability. Garthwaite

(2012) documents a 10% reduction in the probability of working following removal of one type

of pain management therapy from the market 9 while Bütikofer and Skira (2018) estimate 12-

16% reductions in sickness absences following the removal of this treatment.

           We find evidence that marijuana use, but not misuse, increases after RML adoption,

which is in line with additional medical use among older adults. We also show that prescription

fills for medications used to treat chronic pain decrease post-RML. The observed reduction in

WC benefits is not due to a concurrent decrease in labor supply mechanically reducing WC

participation or due to industry composition shifts which lead to a higher share of the workforce

in safer industries. Instead, we observe an increase in labor supply due to RML adoption, which

is further in line with RMLs improving work capacity among older adults (Ghimire and Maclean

2020; Nicholas and Maclean 2019). We observe complementary evidence that RMLs reduce

(non-fatal) workplace injury rates and self-reported work-limiting disability propensities. These

results suggest that RMLs reduce work limitations related to chronic health conditions.




9
    See page 125 of that paper.

                                                   5
           The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 outlines WC programs in the U.S., mechanisms

that may link RML adoption to WC benefit receipt, and related literature. Section 3 describes

data and methods. The main results and sensitivity analyses are reported in Section 4. We

consider possible mechanisms in Section 5 while heterogeneity is discussed in Section 6.

Finally, Section 7 concludes.

2. Background

2.1 Workers' Compensation

           WC was one of the earliest social insurance programs in the U.S. This program was

designed as a compromise to shield employers from tort liability, and to provide income and

medical assistance to injured workers. Except for Texas, where employer participation in WC is

optional (Cabral, Cui, and Dworsky 2019; Jinks et al. 2020), almost all wage and salary workers

are covered by WC. Employers typically purchase WC coverage or self-insure to meet these

obligations, though the costs of WC benefits, like many other mandated benefits, could be passed

on to employees through reduced wage and non-wage compensation (Summers 1989; Gruber

and Krueger 1991).

           These programs represent a critical component of the social safety net as they offer

financial protection to injured/ill workers. The Department of Labor, however, recently issued a

report which `sounds an alarm' regarding deteriorating benefits in state WC programs (U.S.

Department of Labor 2016). State attempts to reduce WC costs highlight increased policy

demand for mechanisms to decrease injury rates and WC participation. 10

           While there are differences across states, most WC programs in the U.S. require

employers to provide employees who become injured or ill while working with cash and medical



10
     We note that these state actions could also contribute to the decline in WC expenditures documented in Figure 1A.

                                                           6
benefits as the employee recovers. Employees unable to recover are evaluated for permanent

disability benefits. The wage-replacement rate for WC is typically two-thirds of an employee's

pre-injury/illness gross wage with minimum and maximum benefits levels varying by state

(Weiss, Murphy, and Boden 2020). Benefits are offered to the employee regardless of fault, but

covered employees are prohibited from suing the employer in relation to the injury or illness. 11

2.2 Related literature on marijuana legalization laws

         While there is a large literature on the effects of state MMLs, 12 fewer studies have

evaluated RML impacts given their recent adoption. In this section, we focus on studies

examining RML effects and draw upon studies evaluating the effects of MMLs on particularly

relevant outcomes to our study.

         Several studies clearly establish that adult marijuana use increases post-RML, typically

estimating very large effect sizes. Using national data from the NSDUH, a recent study shows

that past-30 day marijuana use among adults increases by 28% following RML adoption (Cerdá

et al. 2020). 13 Both Hollingsworth, Wing, and Bradford (2019), and Maclean, Ghimire, and

Nicholas (2020) report similarly large effect sizes in their analyses of RML effects in the

NSDUH. Dragone et al. (2019) study the legalization of recreational marijuana in Washington

and Oregon (compared to border counties) also using NSDUH data, and find that RML adoption

increases marijuana use by roughly 25%. Maclean, Ghimire, and Nicholas (2020) use

administrative data on admissions to substance use disorder (SUD) treatment and show that

marijuana-related SUD treatment admissions among all adults 21 years and older increase by


11
   In some states, the WC program reimburses injured or ill employees for medical marijuana. However, to the best
of our knowledge, that is not the case for recreational marijuana.
12
   There is also a large literature that attempts to estimate the impact of direct measures of individuals' marijuana use
on labor market outcomes. See, for example, Zwerling, Ryan, and Orav (1990), Register and Williams (1992),
Macdonald et al. (2010), and Williams and van Ours (2020).
13
   Studying adolescent marijuana use, Cerdá et al. (2017) investigate the effect of legalizing recreational marijuana
in the state of Washington and find an increase of up to 4% for this age group.

                                                           7
26% or more post-law. This measure likely captures particularly problematic marijuana use

which could negatively impact health and labor market outcomes. On net, most studies to date

show a non-trivial increase in measures of marijuana use following RML adoption. 14

        A small literature considers whether RMLs appear to reduce use of pain management

therapies, which are therapeutic substitutes for marijuana (Wen and Hockenberry 2018; Carrieri,

Madio, and Principe 2020; McMichael, Van Horn, and Viscusi 2020). For example, Wen and

Hockenberry (2018) document that, post-RML, prescriptions for chronic pain medications

(therapeutic substitutes for marijuana) decline by 6% among Medicaid enrollees. Since all states

adopting RMLs previously had MMLs, this finding suggests that RMLs impact access to

marijuana for pain management purposes even beyond the extent to which MMLs do (Bradford

and Bradford 2016, 2017). Similarly, Chan, Burkhardt, and Flyr (2020) show that RMLs reduce

opioid mortality by 20% to 35%, implying that both opioid use and misuse decline as legal

marijuana access expands.

        Marijuana access may influence labor market outcomes, although the direction of the

relationship may vary across demographics and margins of labor market engagement. An

important point of distinction is that the marginal user who is induced to consume marijuana

following an MML versus an RML potentially differs. For example, RMLs permit legal access

to marijuana (regardless of intent) for adults 21 years and older, while MMLs allow only

individuals who can demonstrate a legitimate medical need for the medication for a specified set

of conditions. Thus, the number of individuals who gain access to marijuana following an RML

adoption is likely much larger than the number gaining access post-MML, which can be quite


14
  We note that Hansen, Miller, and Weber (2020) observe no change in marijuana-involved traffic fatalities
following RML adoption in Oregon and Washington relative to comparison groups generated using synthetic control
methods. These null findings suggest that marijuana legalization does not lead to increases in a particularly costly
negative externality associated with substance use.

                                                         8
restrictive in some states (Smart 2015), and the populations potentially have different underlying

health statuses (i.e., the population gaining access to medical marijuana through an MML is

likely sicker than that for RMLs). Based on our calculations, in 2019, 2% of the population in

MML states was eligible for medical marijuana. 15 Alternatively, all older adults can legally

access marijuana in states with RMLs. These features, and likely others, of the policies and their

target populations potentially lead to different groups of new users and, in turn, heterogeneous

implications for labor market outcomes.

        A small literature studies changes in labor market outcomes due to MML adoption.

Using the CPS, Sabia and Nguyen (2018) conclude that the passage of an MML permitting open

marijuana dispensaries may decrease wages among younger males but has limited effect on other

individuals. Nicholas and Maclean (2019) focus on adults 50 and older in the Health and

Retirement Study and document that passage of an MML leads to an increase in the probability

of working full-time and the number of hours worked per week among those participating in paid

employment. Ullman (2017) finds that increased marijuana consumption due to MML adoption

reduces work absences as measured in the CPS. Anderson, Rees, and Tekin (2018) show that

workplace fatalities fall following MML passage among workers 25 to 44 years (coefficient

estimates are imprecise for other age groups). Finally, in related work, Ghimire and Maclean

(2020) find that following the adoption of an MML, WC benefit receipt declines by 7%. The

decline is driven primarily by older adults, for whom the probability of receiving WC benefits

declines by 13% post-MML. This finding further motivates the choice of sample in this paper.




15
  Calculations made using data from: https://www.statista.com/statistics/743485/medical-marijuana-patient-
population-united-states-by-state/ and https://www.mpp.org/issues/medical-marijuana/state-by-state-medical-
marijuana-laws/medical-marijuana-patient-numbers/ (last accessed January 27, 2021).

                                                        9
        Of particular relevance to our work, four recent studies examine the impact of

recreational marijuana access on labor market and social insurance outcomes. First,

Chakraborty, Doremus, and Stith (2020), using county-level data over the period 2011 to 2018

from Colorado, show that the opening of dispensaries (but not RMLs per se) reduces

unemployment rates but has minimal effects on labor market participation or wages. Second,

Maclean, Ghimire, and Nicholas (2020), using data from the Social Security Administration,

show that disability applications for disability ­ Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI) and

Supplemental Security Income (SSI) ­ increase post-RML, but successful applications (i.e.,

applications awarded benefits by SSA reviewers) are not appreciably changed following law

passage. They also find that RML adoption does not lead to observable changes in wages or

labor force participation rates among adults (though the unemployment rate declines by 6%).

Third, Abouk and Adams (2019) show that employment propensity increases post-RML. 16 Dong

(2020), using administrative WC data from Oregon, shows that workplace injuries increase after

a county legalizes the sale of recreational marijuana, with effects driven by younger workers.

        All states that have adopted an RML to date, with the exception of Maine, allow

employers to enforce a zero-tolerance workplace and to fire workers for off-work marijuana

use. 17 Thus, some workers who would otherwise use marijuana (medically or recreationally)

following an RML adoption may be deterred from using this product for fear of job loss. We

expect fear of job loss to mute the possible gains and harms of RMLs.

2.3 Possible mechanisms for a relationship between legalized recreational marijuana and

Workers' Compensation benefit receipt



16
  The authors note some declines in employment among women with young children post-RML, however.
17
  Please see https://www.nolo.com/legal-encyclopedia/state-laws-on-off-duty-marijuana-use.html (last accessed
January 27, 2021).

                                                       10
       We hypothesize that access to marijuana through RMLs increases its medical use and, in

turn, allows better management of symptoms that impede work capacity ­ e.g., chronic pain,

insomnia, mental health problems, nausea, and so forth (Watson, Benson, and Joy 2000; Lynch

and Campbell 2011; Hill 2015; Whiting et al. 2015; National Academies of Sciences and

Medicine 2017). Chronic pain management is likely to be particularly important in our context

as this is the health condition most commonly reported among medical marijuana users (Park and

Wu 2017; Kosiba, Maisto, and Ditre 2019; Reinarman et al. 2011). For example, in a recent

meta-analysis by Kosiba, Maisto, and Ditre (2019), 64% of patients reported using marijuana to

treat chronic pain. Improvements in symptom management may prevent an individual from

receiving WC or may shorten the period of job separation as has been documented in the context

of MMLs (Ghimire and Maclean 2020).

       There are other possible mechanisms that could also lead to changes in WC benefit

receipt following an RML adoption. We next describe these channels and then, in Sections 4 and

5, empirically test them alongside tests about the role of changes in work capacity.

       RML adoption could lead to changes in both labor supply- and demand-side factors

which could plausibly impact WC benefit receipt. In terms of labor supply, marijuana obtained

post-RML and used recreationally could reduce labor supply through addiction (Volkow et al.

2014); impaired mental and physical health (Van Ours and Williams 2012; Van Ours et al.

2013); reduced human capital accumulation (Chatterji 2006); worsened cognition, concentration,

and mental functioning (Hanson et al. 2010; Volkow et al. 2014; Winward et al. 2014); and

reduced motivation (Irons et al. 2014). Such pathways may prompt some workers, perhaps those

marginally attached to the labor market or with preexisting conditions, to place a WC claim.




                                                11
       In terms of labor demand, RMLs may offer a boost to the economy (Chakraborty,

Doremus, and Stith 2020; Nicholas and Maclean 2019). Improved labor market opportunities (in

terms of the number of jobs) could increase WC receipt as there are more employed individuals

`at risk' for a work-related injury. Labor demand shifts could also affect the composition of

employed individuals, leading to ambiguous effects on the propensity to claim/duration of WC

benefits. As the number of available jobs is rising with increased demand for recreational

marijuana, employees may be less concerned about possibly sending a negative signal regarding

their productivity to the employer (and thereby risking job loss as a result) through placing a WC

claim, thus benefit receipt could increase post-RML. Alternatively, economy-wide demand

shocks may lead to employers prioritizing workplace safety and training (Charles et al. 2019),

thus minimizing risk of a work-related injury and WC receipt.

       Moreover, additional marijuana use could increase workplace injury rates, especially

traumatic injuries, by worsening concentration. Kaestner and Grossman (1998), for example,

provide some evidence that drug use increases workplace injuries among males. On the other

hand, as noted in Section 2.2, Anderson, Rees, and Tekin (2018) show a decline in fatal

workplace injuries post-MML among some worker groups. Thus, the net effect on injury rates is

an empirical question, and we will consider a range of possible mechanisms.

3. Data and methods

3.1 Data

3.1.1 Workers' Compensation data




                                                12
        Our primary dataset is the 2011 to 2019 ASEC, prepared by the Integrated Public Use

Microdata (IPUMS) system (Flood et al. 2020). 18,19 The ASEC is fielded each year between

February and April, and collects detailed information on income, insurance, poverty, and other

socio-economic variables on approximately 150,000 respondents. 20 WC income in the ASEC

reflects income received over the previous calendar year, thus our analysis captures WC income

received over the period 2010 to 2018. When discussing these data, we will refer to the calendar

year (which we label `year'), not the survey year.

        ASEC information is self-reported; however, given that state WC systems are

independent, locating harmonized national sources with detailed information about recipients,

such as age, is difficult. The ASEC is commonly used by economists to study WC outcomes at a

national level (Ghimire and Maclean 2020; Krueger 1990; Gruber and Krueger 1991; Hirsch,

Macpherson, and DuMond 1997; Bronchetti and McInerney 2012; Bronchetti and McInerney

2019). For this reason, we view the ASEC as the most suitable dataset for our research.

        We truncate the sample at 62 as most Americans become eligible for Social Security

benefits at this age and access to this income support may impact decisions to claim WC that we

cannot accurately model. Results are similar if we include adults up to age 65 years. We

exclude respondents with remaining missing information on WC and demographics (outlined in

Section 3.5). We have 517,351 respondents in our analysis sample.

3.1.2 Marijuana use and misuse, and prescription medication use




18
   We exclude the survey collected in 2020 (which captures claiming in 2019) due to the COVID-19 pandemic. We
are concerned that this unprecedented public health crisis may have impacted reporting.
19
   The American Community Survey (ACS) does not collect information specifically on WC benefit receipt. We
cannot isolate income from WC from other sources, thus the ACS is not suitable for our research question.
20
   There was a change in the ordering of some of the income questions in 2014 in the ASEC (Hill et al. 2019). We
do not suspect that this change impacts our analysis since we include year fixed effects in all regression models,
accounting for such national changes.

                                                        13
         To provide evidence on the `first-stage' effect, we examine the impact of RMLs on

measures of marijuana use and misuse. To study use, we utilize the public state-level biennial

NSDUH files (2010-2018). 21 A limitation of these data is that we cannot isolate adults 40 to 62,

instead we examine past month and past year marijuana use among adults 26 years and older. 22

         To study a measure of misuse, we draw data on marijuana-related admissions to SUD

treatment, selecting on ages 40 to 64 years of age from the Treatment Episode Dataset (TEDS). 23

TEDS is a national database of approximately two million SUD treatment admissions per year

that is used by the federal government to track SUD treatment (Substance Abuse and Mental

Health Services Administration 2018). We use TEDS data on admissions for which the primary

substance associated with treatment is marijuana and any marijuana is reported at admission over

the period 2010 to 2018. 24 We aggregate the TEDS data to the state-year level. We have 450

state-year observations in the TEDS data, these data exclude some states in some years and we

are left with 450 observations from 51 states.

         We expect that post-RML workers may use marijuana rather than therapeutic substitutes.

To test this hypothesis, we use data from the Medicaid State Drug Utilization Database (SDUD).

The SDUD, managed by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, includes all

prescription fills that are reimbursed by Medicaid. We use quarterly data from 2011-2018 and

extract a set of medications used to treat chronic pain among Medicaid enrollees. 25 We focus on


21
   We match RMLs (and all other covariates) to the NSDUH data on the second year in two year averages. For
example, 2010 in the 2009/2010 file and 2011 in the 2010/2011 file. We then lag the RML variable by one year as
outlined later in the manuscript.
22
   This is the most accurate stratification (for our older adult age group) that we can apply in the public use data.
23
   Age information is provided in bins in the TEDS and thus we cannot exclude those 63 to 64 years of age. TEDS
does not include information on admission date below the year.
24
   Dave and Mukerjee (2011) estimate that TEDS covers two-thirds of SUD treatment received in stand-alone
facilities in the U.S. TEDS records up to three substances at admission.
25
   We use a set of medications that are commonly used by Medicaid enrollees to treat pain prepared by Ashley
Bradford and Shyam Raman. This list includes opioids such as OxyContin and non-narcotic analgesics such as
Tylenol. The full list of medications is available on request. Beginning in 1992 all state Medicaid programs have

                                                          14
pain as this is the most common condition reported by medical marijuana users. A limitation of

using the SDUD for our purposes is that these data only capture prescriptions from one payer.

3.1.3 Workplace injury rates

         As a complementary measure to our WC outcomes, we use administrative Bureau of

Labor Statistics (BLS) data on the number of non-fatal workplace injuries among those 40 to 62

years of age in each state over the period 2011 to 2018. 26 The BLS Survey of Occupational

Injuries and Illnesses (SOII) collects workplace injury data from approximately 200,000

employers. 27 We use nonfatal cases involving days away from work as our measure of

workplace injuries. This SOII variable shares some useful characteristics with WC benefit

receipt since both require time away from work due to workplace injuries. The SOII measure

does not necessarily imply WC benefit receipt, 28 offering an opportunity to distinguish between

changes in injury rates and WC outcomes conditional on injury. The SOII data exclude some

states and we are left with 337 observations from 41 states.

3.1.4 Broader labor supply measures

         To understand the broader context of changes in WC benefit receipt following RML

adoption, we also study labor supply more generally. The ASEC provides past calendar year

measures of labor force participation and usual hours worked per week. In addition, we use the



been required to report fee-for-service prescription fills to CMS in return for the ability to participate in the federal
government Medicaid Prescription Drug Rebate program. Prior to March 23, 2010 states were not required to report
managed care Medicaid prescription fills. We follow several studies in the literature and use data from 2011 onward
(although results, available on request, are not appreciably different if we include 2010 in the sample) and we
exclude quarters that display substantial variation in reporting, which we define as a quarter-over-quarter change
that falls at or below the 10th percentile of the empirical distribution or at or above the 90th percentile of the
empirical distribution, a full listing of excluded observations is available on request. We also exclude DC and
Rhode Island as CMS has documented irregularities in reporting on the part of these localities. See the
supplementary material reported in Wen and Hockenberry (2018) for a full discussion of this issue.
26
   There are concerns about the quality of the data prior to 2011 so we begin our analysis with the 2011 data.
27
   Some groups are excluded from this dataset such as federal employees, the self-employed, and workers on farms
with ten or fewer workers.
28
   Workers are often ineligible for cash WC benefits unless they miss at least three days of work.

                                                           15
basic monthly CPS data to study weekly employment, whether the respondent has a work-

limiting disability, and whether the respondent was absent from work for a health-related reason

in the past week. The basic monthly CPS collects information on employment, labor supply, and

demographics on 150,000 respondents from approximately 50,000 households. We use the 2010

to 2018 monthly surveys since the information collected is point-in-time and thus this time

period matches our ASEC years.

3.1.5 Number of establishments

        We also use data from the U.S. County Business Patterns (CBP) dataset 2010 to 2018 to

study if there are changes in the number of establishments post-RML. We consider the total

number of establishments and those that are arguably most likely to be impacted by an

expanding recreational marijuana market using results from Chakraborty, Doremus, and Stith

(2020). 29 We aggregate the CBP data to the state-year level and observe all states in all years.

3.2 RML Coding

        Data on RMLs are obtained from Chan, Burkhardt, and Flyr (2020), and ProCon.org

(2020b). 30 We match the RML variable to our data based on state, month, and year. 31 In our

main regression model, we lag this variable by one year to allow for marijuana legal status to

change, older adults use the product, symptoms change, and WC benefit receive changes. In

robustness tests, we explore the importance of recreational marijuana dispensaries, outlets in

which consumers can legally purchase marijuana. Figure 2 graphically depicts states that have


29
   The CBP data pertain to the week of March 12 of each year. These data are based on tax returns collected by the
Internal Revenue Service. The U.S. Census defines an establishment as `...a single physical location at which
business is conducted or services or industrial operations are performed.'
30
   We have also confirmed our effective dates using internal RAND policy data, PDAPS, NORML.org, and our own
reading of original state statutes where inconsistencies across sources appear. Full details on request.
31
   The aggregate data we study do not have month information, thus we match on the first year in which a law is in
place for at least six months. Put differently, if an RML is adopted between January and June in year t, we code the
law as in place in year t and all following years. On the other hand, if an RML is adopted between July and
December of year t, we code this RML as zero in year t and one in year t+1 and following years.

                                                        16
adopted or announced an RML by December 2020. By the end of our study period (2018), nine

states and DC had an RML in place, although 15 states and DC had adopted or announced such a

law by December 2020.

3.3 State-level control variables

         We control for several state-level variables that are potentially correlated with RML

adoption and WC benefit receipt in our regression models (outlined in Section 3.5). In

particular, we control for medical marijuana laws (Sabia and Nguyen 2018; ProCon.org 2020b),

prescription drug monitoring programs or PDMPs (Ali et al. 2017), naloxone & Good Samaritan

laws (Prescription Drug Abuse Policy System 2020), 32 and pain clinic management laws

(Prescription Drug Abuse Policy System 2020). In addition, we control for several state-level

labor market policies and characteristics: the effective minimum wage (in 2018 dollars), the state

earned income tax credit (EITC) as a share of the federal EITC, political party of the state

governor, 33 and population (University of Kentucky Center for Poverty Research 2020). 34

3.4 Primary WC outcomes and summary statistics

         We consider two measures of WC benefit receipt based on survey responses in the

ASEC. First, we use an indicator for any WC income. Second, we examine the level of WC



32
   We code these two variables as one indicator that takes on a value of one if a state has both policies in place
following Ghimire and Maclean (2020). The logic for this coding structure is that the two laws work more
effectively together. Naloxone laws provide access to this medication while Good Samaritan laws provide legal
protection for the administrator of the medication. Our results are not meaningfully affected if we instead code these
policies as two separate variables, indeed coefficient estimates are nearly identical and are available on request.
33
   We treat the mayor of DC as the governor of that locality following Maclean and Saloner (2018).
34
   In unreported analysis, we control for the state unemployment rate to account for changes in economic conditions,
which may impact the decision to claim WC. Results are not appreciably different. However, the unemployment
rate is potentially impacted by RML adoption, thus we do not report this specification as we are concerned about
inducing over-controlling bias (Angrist and Pischke 2008). In our analysis of the SDUD, we include an indicator for
Medicaid expansion with the Affordable Care Act obtained from the Kasiser Family Foundation (2021). These
Medicaid expansions lead to a substantial increase in the number of enrollees and also a change in the composition
of enrollees as the `newly eligible' are largely non-disabled childless adults. Thus, controlling for this policy change
is important in the SDUD. In unreported analyses, we have re-estimated our main WC regressions including the
ACA Medicaid expansion variable and results are nearly identical. Results are available on request.

                                                          17
income (in 2018 dollars). These outcomes refer to receipt of cash benefits only and we will

frequently refer to them as `WC benefits,' though they exclude medical benefits, 35 vocational

rehabilitation vouchers, and other types of reimbursements provided by WC systems.

           Table 1 reports summary statistics for the full sample of states and then stratified by

RML adoption. Data are weighted by ASEC-CPS provided survey weights. For adopting states,

the summary statistics refer to the average prior to adoption. Just under 1% of the full sample

reports receiving WC benefits and the average WC income in the sample is $75 overall. 6.2% of

the sample resides in a state with an active RML during our time period, reflecting that most

RMLs were adopted closer to the end of the sample. State- and individual-level characteristics

are broadly similar across the two groups of states. We discuss balance further in Section 4.3.2.

           Appendix Figure 1 reports trends in any WC income and WC income (in 2018 dollars)

over our study period. Both outcomes are trending downward modestly, which is in line with

trends in costs based on administrative data (Figure 1A).

3.5 Methods

           We estimate two-way fixed effects (TWFE) models to study the impact of RML passage

on WC benefit receipt outcomes:

(1)        ,, = 0 + 1 ,-1 + , 2 + ,, 3 +  +  + ,, ,

where ,, is a WC outcome for respondent i in state s in calendar year t. ,-1 is an

indicator variable for an RML in state s in year t-1. We lag the RML variable one year to permit

time for the policy to have an impact, though we show in robustness checks that our results are

not sensitive to this decision. , is a vector of state-level time-varying factors including

policies that target marijuana or related substances that can be used to manage chronic pain. We


35
     Many WC claims are `medical only' and do not involve any lost work time (Weiss, Murphy, and Boden 2020).

                                                        18
provide evidence about the importance of these control variables in Section 4.3. ,, is a vector

of respondent-level characteristics (i.e., age, sex, race, ethnicity, and education). 36

        We include state ( ) and year fixed effects ( ), the former account for time-invariant

state factors while the latter control for shocks that impact the nation as a whole. When the

outcome is binary, we assume  () = () and estimate a probit model, reporting average

marginal effects. 37 For the level of WC income, we estimate using least squares; i.e.,  () =

1(). We apply ASEC survey weights provided by IPUMS in our analyses of WC benefit receipt

outcomes, although as we show in robustness analyses unweighted results are similar. We

cluster standard errors by the state (Bertrand, Duflo, and Mullainathan 2004) in our main

analysis. We will also conduct inference using a score bootstrap and permutation tests, given

that these approaches can often have better properties for a small number of treated clusters.

        When we examine other measures of work capacity in the monthly CPS, we use a probit

model (reporting average marginal effects) for binary outcomes (e.g., any SSDI income) and

linear models for continuous outcomes (e.g., hours worked), comparable to our ASEC analyses.

We weight the data by the basic monthly person weight when the outcome is derived from the

basic monthly CPS (e.g., work-limiting disability) and the ASEC weight for ASEC variables.

        Many of our other outcomes are available at the state-year level. In analyses of aggregate

data (i.e., NSDUH, TEDS, SOII, and CBP), the outcomes are rates per 100,000, except for

SDUD outcomes in which case we report per Medicaid older adult enrollee. We estimate these

models using weighted least squares. We include the same controls in these models although we

replace the individual controls with state-level annual averages from the monthly CPS.


36
   We include age in years, sex (male and female, male is omitted), race (white, African American, and other, white
is omitted), ethnicity (Hispanic and non-Hispanic, non-Hispanic is omitted), and education (less than high school,
high school, some college, and a college degree or higher, less than high school is omitted).
37
   We estimate the implied change in probability for each treated observation and then report the average change.

                                                        19
        This research design leverages within-state variation over time. The identifying

assumption is that, after conditioning on included covariates, the error term in Equation (1) is

uncorrelated with ,-1. In Section 4.3, we explore the empirical importance of several

common threats to identification: violation of parallel trends, unobserved heterogeneity, violation

of the conditional independence assumption, and program-induced migration. Broadly, our

analysis suggests that these threats to identification do not drive our findings.

        Finally, we report `counterfactual outcomes' in our tables to help benchmark the

magnitudes of the coefficient estimates. These counterfactual outcomes are estimated using a

baseline regression model that controls for the RML and state and time fixed effects. 38 We then

subtract off the causal impact of RMLs to estimate the outcome value in the absence of RML

adoption. We report the average of these `untreated' outcomes for all treated observations.

4. Results

        We first present evidence about the impact of RMLs on marijuana use, misuse and pain

medication drug prescriptions. Next, we evaluate the impact of RML adoption on WC outcomes

and consider a number of explanations for this reduced form relationship. Finally, in the next

section, we consider different pathways through which RMLs may affect WC benefit receipt.

4.1 Marijuana use and misuse, and prescription medication use

        The literature provides ample evidence that RMLs increase adult marijuana use on the

order of 20-38% (Cerdá et al. 2020; Dragone et al. 2019; Hollingsworth, Wing, and Bradford

2019; Maclean, Ghimire, and Nicholas 2020). We replicate this analysis using the public use

National Survey on Drug Use and Health (NSDUH). A limitation of the public use NSDUH is



38
  Alternatively, we could present the counterfactual outcomes implied by each model (i.e., including covariates).
As we will show, the RML estimates are relatively stable across models so, for the sake of consistency, we hold the
calculation of the counterfactual outcomes constant.

                                                        20
that we cannot isolate older adults and instead examine marijuana use among all adults 26 years

and older (Table 2A). We document large increases in marijuana use post-RML: a 1.85 ppt

(17.9% compared to the counterfactual) increase in any past month and a 2.39 ppt (15.6%

compared to the counterfactual) increase in past year marijuana use. 39

         Marijuana use may also induce harms. To explore this possibility for our age group, we

assess whether RMLs lead to increased problematic use of marijuana among older adults using

data on marijuana-related admissions to SUD treatment in the TEDS. Results are reported in

Table 2B. We find no evidence that this measure of problematic marijuana use increases post-

RML. In fact, the coefficient estimates are negative (though statistically insignificant). We also

do not observe changes in admissions to treatment that are not related to marijuana: we construct

a measure that includes admissions that do not list marijuana on the admission record. We again

estimate negative and statistically insignificant effects.

         This increase in marijuana use coincides with meaningful reductions in use of opioids

following RML adoption (Carrieri, Madio, and Principe 2020; Wen and Hockenberry 2018;

McMichael, Van Horn, and Viscusi 2020). Additionally, the literature finds that RMLs reduce

opioid-related mortality (Chan, Burkhardt, and Flyr (2020) which is, again, in line with using

marijuana for pain management purposes in cases in which alternatives may be more dangerous.

Thus, there is substantial scope for RMLs to impact pain management as well as other outcomes

related to a large expansion of recreational marijuana use and sales. To test for substitution from

prescription medications used to treat chronic pain and marijuana in our time period and

specification, we estimate the impact of RML adoption on prescription fills in the SDUD (Table




39
  The differences compared to the literature are due to conditioning on different sets of covariates and our approach
to calculating proportional effects.

                                                         21
2B). Post-RML, the number of prescriptions decreases by 0.31 per older adult Medicaid enrollee

or 7.2% compared to the counterfactual mean, suggesting substitution across pain therapies.

       This section provides evidence, supporting findings in the literature, that marijuana use

among adults increases substantially following RML adoption. This additional use is not

accompanied with increases in marijuana-related dependence, though we also do not observe the

full spectrum of marijuana-related harms so we cannot rule out possible harmful health

consequences. Further, we show, similar to previous studies, that patients substitute marijuana

for prescription medications used to treat chronic pain. Given this background, we now turn to

our primary analyses of WC benefit receipt.

4.2 Effect of RML passage on WC benefits

       Our main findings are reported in Table 3. We study how RML adoption impacts WC

benefits. In the first column, we include state and year fixed effects but no time-varying

controls. We estimate that RML adoption reduces the probability of WC benefit receipt by 0.14

ppts, statistically significant from zero at the 1% level. This effect implies a 15.6% reduction

relative to the counterfactual benefit receipt rate (0.9 ppts). In Column 2, we add individual-

level demographic controls and the estimated effect is not meaningfully changed. We add state-

level controls in Column 3 and, again, the coefficient estimate is unaffected by these controls.

Appendix Table 1 provides a full set of coefficient estimates from this specification. Finally, in

Column 4, we repeat the Column 3 analysis except we do not population-weight the data. The

coefficient estimate is very similar.

       Our preferred coefficient estimate is the Column 3 estimate which finds that RML

adoption leads to a reduction in WC receipt among adults 40 to 62 years of age by 0.18 ppts,

equivalent to 20% reduction. The coefficient estimate is similar in magnitude as estimated in



                                                22
Ghimire and Maclean (2020) among older adults: 0.20 ppts (see Table 5 of that paper). This

effect size is large, which is in line with the substantial effects on marijuana use found in the

literature (see Section 4.1). While the relative effect size is large, we attribute that to the low

baseline benefit receipt rate and we note that the lower tail of the 95% confidence interval shows

that we cannot rule out a 4.7% decrease in the probability of receiving any income from WC.

        In Panel B of Table 3, we estimate the effect of RML adoption on annual WC income, a

measure which combines both the extensive margin effect (WC benefit receipt) as well as any

intensive margin effects (e.g., shorter injury durations and thus claiming periods). 40 This result

is robust to including individual controls (Columns 2), state policy controls (Column 3), and

removing population weights (Column 4). In our preferred model ­ Column 3 ­ we estimate that

RMLs decrease WC income by $21.98 or 20.5% (compared to the counterfactual mean).

        The WC results suggest that the large change in marijuana use established in other work

and our own analyses may be at least partially due to increased use for pain management, leading

to a reduction in WC receipt. We explore mechanisms in Section 5.

        Due to concerns about inference in TWFE models with only a few treated units (Brewer,

Crossley, and Joyce 2017), we also include t-statistics generated by testing the null hypothesis of

no effect using a score bootstrap approach (Kline and Santos 2012) for our preferred

specification (Column 3). 41 For both WC outcomes, we can reject the null hypothesis at the 5%

level. We will present permutation tests as well (see Section 4.3.4).

4.3 Internal validity

4.3.1 Parallel trends



40
   We note that we cannot fully separate duration of the claim from higher wages and thus higher benefits.
However, we do control for education and other demographics which are correlated with wages.
41
   We implement this approach using -boottest- in Stata (Roodman et al. 2019).

                                                         23
         To test for possible threats to identification, we first estimate an event study to assess

whether RML adopting and non-adopting states have different pre-existing trends. We include

time-relative-to-adoption indicators from four years pre-policy through one year (or more) post-

policy, normalizing any differences between adopting and non-adopting states five or more years

(the omitted category) before adoption to zero. The zero category represents the year of RML

adoption. We group all other post-adoption years into one or more years post-policy as we have

few post-years. 42 Several states adopted an RML after 2018, we observe these states in their pre-

treatment period and account for this change. 43 States that did not adopt an RML or announce a

date for a future RML by December 2020 are coded as zero for all lead and lag variables.

         Figure 3, Panel A examines the propensity of WC receipt by year-relative-to-RML

adoption. There is little evidence of any systematic pre-adoption differences, relative to the

omitted category, between adopting and non-adopting states. At the time of adoption, there is a

notable relative decline in WC benefit receipt. This reduced incidence persists into the next

periods. We observe a similar pattern of coefficient estimates in Panel B for annual WC income.

Thus, Figure 3 suggests that the reduction in WC benefits in adopting states is not an artifact of

systematic trends existing prior to RML adoption.

4.3.2 Possible confounders

         Next, we examine characteristics that predict RML passage to understand what is

changing in adopting states relative to non-adopting states. To this end, we aggregate the data to

the state-year level and regress the RML variable on state-level policies and demographics, and


42
   We do not apply a lag in construction of the event study indicators. As a specific example, the zero period in our
event study is the year of RML adoption, not the year of adoption lagged one year.
43
   For example, states that adopt a policy in 2019 are observed one-year pre-RML in 2018 and two years pre-RML
in 2017, we code these states as one for the one-year policy lag in 2018 and one for the two-year policy lag in 2017.
If we do not account for the fact that we observe these states in their pre-treatment period, we would incorrectly
classify them in the comparison group which could lead to inaccurate conclusions regarding the ability of our data to
satisfy the parallel trends assumption (Schmidheiny and Siegloch 2020).

                                                         24
state and year fixed effects. Results are listed in Appendix Table 2. We find that states adopting

naloxone & Good Samaritan laws and higher minimum wages are more likely to adopt an RML,

while states with increasing shares of African Americans and Hispanics are less likely to do so.

After conditioning on covariates, MML adoption and most of the laws in the model designed to

curb access to opioids through supply-side efforts (e.g., PDMPs) do not predict RML adoption.

       Additionally, we follow the logic of Altonji, Elder, and Taber (2005) and explore the

sensitivity of our results to different sets of control variables. If our coefficient estimates change

substantially as we include different sets of control variables, then we may be concerned that our

findings are driven by unobservable heterogeneity rather than capturing true RML effects. We

start from a regression specification that includes only the RML indicator, and state and year

fixed effects (the same as Table 4, Column 1). To this parsimonious model, we sequentially

include each state- and individual-level control variable and observe how the coefficient

estimates change. Results are reported in Appendix Table 3. Our coefficient estimates are not

appreciably changed as we add covariates. For any WC receipt, the coefficient estimates range

from -0.0018 to -0.0015, compared to our baseline coefficient estimate of -0.0018. Thus, we

conclude that the results are largely insensitive to the inclusion of any specific control.

4.3.3 Migration

       Next, we explore the extent to which RML adoption leads to changes in migration

patterns: are individuals more likely to move into or out of the state after RML adoption? Such

behavior, if present, is a form of program-induced migration (Moffitt 1992) or a violation of the

stable units assumption required for TWFE methods, and can lead to bias in regression

coefficient estimates. To explore this possibility, we use information on past-year migration

available in the ASEC. We construct measures of any migration, moving to an RML state from



                                                  25
a non-RML state (in-migration), and moving from an RML state to a non-RML state (out-

migration). Results are reported in Appendix Table 4 and do not reveal any evidence that RMLs

induce migration among our age group. Previous work, based on the full sample of adults,

provides more evidence of migration effects (Maclean, Ghimire, and Nicholas 2020; Carlin et al.

2020), which may suggest that younger adults or perhaps even adults ages 63 and above (who

are not in our sample) migrate following adoption of an RML.

4.3.4 Falsification exercise

       In this section, we conduct a falsification exercise. We randomly re-shuffle our RML

variable across states and years 100 times, and re-estimate Equation (1). In our randomization

process, we hold constant the number of states that adopt within each year. We follow

MacKinnon and Webb (2020), and report t-statistics from this exercise. Results of the placebo

analysis are reported in Figure 4. We mark the 2.5 and 97.5 percentiles of the placebo

distribution as well as the t-statistic generated when RMLs are correctly assigned. We find that

our main results are unlikely to occur by chance as the main t-statistics are below the 2.5th

percentile of the placebo distributions.

4.3.5 Additional sensitivity tests

       Finally, we report the results of a series of sensitivity tests in Appendix Table 5A.

We find that our point estimates are robust to including state-specific linear time trends (Panel

A) and Census region-by-year fixed effects (Panel B). The coefficient estimates are also similar

if we limit the sample to state-year pairs for which we have data on SUD treatment admissions in

the TEDS sample (Panel C) and injury rates from the SOII (Panel D). Additionally, we consider

the consequences of our decision to lag the RML variable. In Panel E, we present results in

which we use the contemporaneous RML. The results are similar. We also control for



                                                 26
respondent industry fixed effects (Panel F) and occupation fixed effects (Panel G). 44 While there

may be concerns that RMLs impact labor supply decisions on these margins, we find that the

coefficient estimates are unaffected by the inclusion of these fixed effects. Next, in Panel H, we

aggregate the data to the state-year level. 45 The coefficient estimates and standard errors are

similar. In Panel I, we add controls for state-level WC policy variables (i.e., maximum weekly

benefits). Our results do not appear to be driven by concurrent shifts in WC benefit generosity.

Finally, in Panel J we apply a method proposed by de Chaisemartin and d'Haultfoeuille (2020a,

2020b) that accounts for heterogeneity in treatment effects. Our results are robust. 46

         In Appendix Table 5B, we report results based on different regression model

specifications. We use a linear probability model for WC benefit receipt. For the WC income

variable, we use a Poisson model (Column 2, average marginal effects are reported). Our main

coefficient estimates do not appear to be driven by our choice of functional form.

         We also conduct a `leave-one-out' analysis to assess differences across states in RML

effects. While we use a single indicator for law passage, each law has unique characteristics

(ProCon.org 2020b) and therefore a potentially different effect on WC benefit receipt. We

sequentially drop each treatment state from the sample and re-estimate Equation (1). This

exercise allows to explore whether our main findings (Table 3) are driven by the experience of a

specific state(s). We report the leave-one-out analysis results graphically in Appendix Figure 2;




44
   For both industry and occupation fixed effects we include a separate fixed effect for those not in the labor market.
45
   In this analysis, we aggregate the individual level data to the state-year level. More specifically, we take the
average values of each individual-level variable.
46
   We provide average effects using a weighted (by the number of `switchers') average of five post-period effects
minus the weighted average of three pre-period placebos using the -did_multiplegt- package in Stata. The post-
periods are defined to only include fully-treated periods to exclude any partially-treated year, which is in line with
lagging the RML variable in our main specification. To make the coefficient estimates more comparable to our
main TWFE estimates, we use three pre-periods as the baseline instead of only the period prior to adoption. We
cluster (by state) bootstrap this average effect estimate 500 times to estimate standard errors.

                                                          27
any WC is reported in Panel A and WC income is reported in Panel B. Our findings are similar

across the leave-one-out samples, suggesting effects are relatively homogenous across states.

4.3.6 Discussion of internal validity and sensitivity checking

        In summary, we have probed the validity of our design to assess the empirical importance

of several common threats to identification: (i) a violation of parallel trends, (ii) a violation of the

CIA, (iii) unobserved heterogeneity, and (iv) program-induced migration. We also explore the

robustness of our findings to alternative samples and specifications, and allow for heterogeneity

across states in treatment effects. Our assessment of this testing is that our key results are not

driven by violations of key model assumptions, other concurrent policies adopted by states, or

the selected sample or specification.

5. Mechanisms

        We find that RMLs reduce WC benefit receipt. RMLs may broadly impact the economy

and, consequently, labor supply outcomes (including WC benefit receipt). RMLs may also

impact pain management and work capacity. Our welfare calculus of RMLs and related policies

depends on our understanding about how RMLs reduce WC benefit receipt.

        To evaluate these different possible mechanisms, we study broader measures of labor

supply as well as metrics of labor demand. We also study alternative measures of work capacity

to provide complementary evidence of the scope for RMLs to impact that dimension of labor

market participation.

5.1 Changes in labor supply and labor demand

        We consider the possibility that overall labor supply is changing in response to RML

adoption and present these results in Table 4A. We first evaluate the following outcomes

available in the CPS: working in the past year, current labor force participation, working in the



                                                  28
past week, and usual hours worked per week in the past year (unconditional and conditional on

any hours worked). The results are presented in Table 4A.

        We observe that, after RML adoption, the propensity to work in the past year increases

by 0.54 ppts (0.70% relative to the counterfactual) while the number of hours usually worked per

week increases by 0.28 hours or 0.70% (conditional on any hours). Both coefficient estimates

are statistically significant from zero at the 10% level. Using the monthly CPS, we do not

observe statistically significant changes in the probability of labor force participation or working

in the past week or the unconditional number of hours worked, though all three coefficient

estimates again suggest a positive relationship. The results in Table 4A cast doubt on the

possibility that RMLs reduce WC benefit receipt mechanically through decreased labor supply

(i.e., reduced opportunities to incur injuries at work). Instead, we observe evidence of increases

in overall labor supply, which ­ all else equal ­ would predict that WC benefit receipt should

increase post-RML as working exposes individuals to workplace injuries.

        As a related measure, we study whether RML adoption leads to changes in the number of

establishments using the 2010 to 2018 CBP data. We consider two measures of establishments:

total number of establishment and number of establishment in industries plausibly related to the

recreational marijuana market as examined by Chakraborty, Doremus, and Stith (2020). 47 We

present these results in Table 4B. 48 We observe an increase in both types of establishments post-

RML, although the coefficient estimates are not precise. These findings suggest, if anything, an

increase in labor demand post-policy. Such changes should, all else equal, lead to increased WC




47
   We use the following NAICS codes: Natural Resources and Mining (11), Construction (23), Manufacturing (31-
33), Trade (42, 44-45), Information (51), Financial Activities (52), Education (61), and Health Services (62).
48
   For this analysis, we scale the outcome and weight the regression by the full population size.

                                                      29
benefit receipt as workers are more exposed to workplace injuries. We consider the possibility

of changes in the composition of jobs in Sections 5.2 and 5.3 below.

5.2. Changes in workplace injury rates

        We next provide evidence about whether we are observing differences in WC receipt

(possibly through differences in claiming behavior) versus differences in injury rates. We use

workplace injuries reported in the SOII data, scaled by the population size for ages 40-62. 49

These results are presented in Table 5. We estimate that RMLs reduce the workplace injury rate

by 32 per 100,000 older adults, equivalent to about a 5.4% reduction relative to the

counterfactual mean for the treated states.

        The SOII data also permit us to evaluate injuries based on injury type. We separate

traumatic injuries from non-traumatic injuries, and present the results in Columns 2 and 3 in

Table 5. Injuries such as sprains, strains, tears, hernias, and burns are classified as traumatic

injuries, including complex region pain syndrome. Non-traumatic injuries include low back

disorders, infectious diseases, and cancer. While both categories potentially include injuries

which benefit from pain management therapies (e.g., a traumatic injury may result in a sprain

which requires pain management for the worker to continue working), our hypothesis is that the

rate of non-traumatic injuries ­ which include longer-term chronic pain injuries ­ should be

disproportionately impacted by RML adoption if this policy improves pain management therapy

access. We observe reductions of 25 traumatic injuries and seven non-traumatic per 100,000

older adults, representing 4.5% and 23.4% reductions. Despite the imperfect categorization of

injuries more `exposed' to marijuana access for pain management purposes, we observe




49
  While the SOII data do not cover all state-years, we show in Appendix Table 5A, Panel D that the main WC
results hold for the SOII sub-sample.

                                                      30
especially large proportional effect sizes on the type of injuries we would likely expect to be

more impacted by improved access to pain management therapy ex ante.

5.3 Changes in industry composition

        We consider the possible role of changes to industry composition on affecting injury rates

using the SOII data again. One possibility is that RMLs alter the local economy in a way that

shifts workers to safer jobs, explaining the reduction in injury rates and WC benefit receipt. We

test this possibility by assigning each worker in the ASEC with the injury rate 50 of their industry

in their state in 2011 (the year prior to the first RML adoption). 51 The motivation behind this test

is to hold constant the industry injury rate such that the outcome (conditionally) only varies due

to systematic movements in industry composition and extensive labor supply decisions. Holding

the injury rate constant shuts down any endogenous within-industry changes to the injury rate

due to RML adoption. We observe no evidence of a change in the predicted injury rate (Table 5

Column 4), suggesting that the decreases estimated in Columns 1 to 3 are not due to changes in

labor force participation or industry composition. 52

        We estimate increases in labor supply but reductions in workplace injury rates. These

reductions disproportionately impact non-traumatic injuries. Moreover, they do not reflect

changes in industry composition. The evidence we have presented so far does not suggest that

the changes in WC are due to shifts in overall or industry-specific labor supply/demand. This

finding also does not suggest that RML adoption induces a large labor demand shock that

induces firms to considerably improve workplace safety since we would not necessarily expect



50
   Here, the injury rate is defined as injuries per 100,000 workers in the industry. Non-workers are assigned a
workplace injury rate of zero.
51
   The SOII provides injury rates by NAICS. We map the NAICS codes to the 1990 Census industry codes provided
in the IPUMS CPS.
52
   The estimate is noisy, but implies a roughly 2% reduction in the predicted injury rate. This effect size is small
compared to the 6% decrease implied by the Column 1 coefficient estimate.

                                                        31
such improvements to disproportionately target the types of injuries also directly impacted by

marijuana access. 53 In the next section, we further consider the possible role of improvements in

pain management and work capacity.

5.4 Alternative measures of work capacity

        To further probe whether our findings are driven by changes in work capacity, we study

complementary measures (in the CPS) of health and disability: self-assessed health, whether the

respondent reports having a work-limiting disability, and absence from work in the past week

due to a health-related reason. These results are presented in Table 6. In the first column, the

outcome is whether the respondent reports good, very good, or excellent health. In the second

and third columns, the outcomes are whether the respondent reports a work-limiting disability

and is absent from work due to a health-related reason respectively. We observe only small and

statistically insignificant changes in self-assessed health or the propensity of being absent from

work for a health-related reason post-RML, but the probability of reporting a work-limiting

disability declines following law adoption (statistically significant at the 1% level). In particular,

the propensity to report a work-limiting disability declines by 0.68 ppts due to RML adoption, or

6.2% relative to the counterfactual proportion for the treated states. This decline is consistent

with work capacity improvements driving the WC results.

        The null finding for work absences is also potentially informative regarding work

capacity improvements attributable to RMLs. In particular, RMLs appear to impact longer-term

health rather than short-term work separations. This pattern of results is again in line with the




53
  We cannot rule out that labor demand shocks cause firms to improve workplace safety primarily for these types of
conditions, but we also do not find much evidence of RMLs creating large increases in labor demand (e.g., Table
4B) which would induce such improvements.

                                                       32
hypothesis that RMLs allow better symptom management of health conditions that would

otherwise require a substantial amount of time away from work.

5.5 Discussion of mechanisms

        The objective of our study is to examine changes in WC benefit receipt, a proxy for work

capacity, due to RML adoption and understand the possible mechanisms for this relationship.

There are many pathways through which RMLs could reduce WC benefit receipt. We conjecture

that improvements in the management of chronic pain and other health condition symptoms play

a key role in the observed findings. Many of the alternative pathways discussed above would

operate through observable changes in labor supply or demand, or industry composition. We

observe increases in labor supply and no evidence of meaningful shifts to jobs which would

decrease workplace injury rates. Thus, the mechanism does not appear to be related to a

mechanical reduction in workplace injury incidence due to fewer people working or working in

safer jobs.

        In fact, we estimate that RMLs reduce workplace injury rates overall, disproportionately

among injuries which we would expect to be more impacted by additional access to chronic pain

therapies--non-traumatic injuries. Moreover, we find complementary reductions in self-reported

work-limiting disabilities. These results suggest that RMLs positively impact work capacity,

driving down injury rates and WC claiming. The increases in broader measures of labor supply

are also consistent with this mechanism. The improvements in work capacity may originate

from the increased use of marijuana to manage pain or through reductions in other medications

which have harmful effects on labor productivity.

6. Heterogeneity in RML effects

6.1 The importance of dispensaries



                                               33
         In our primary analysis, we use an indicator for any RML and do not distinguish between

policies that protect dispensaries, legal establishments in which individuals can purchase

marijuana, and those that do not. We next include a second indicator variable in Equation (1)

that takes the value of one if a state RML provides the legal framework for dispensaries to

operate (we do not alter our main RML indicator). We also separately consider whether there is

a legal and operational recreational dispensary in the state. We report results based on the

augmented specifications in Appendix Table 6; Panel A reports results for a law that allows

dispensaries and Panel B reports results that use the first legal recreational marijuana dispensary

in operation in a state. We do not observe any evidence that, conditional on RML, dispensaries

(either measured as the legal framework allowing dispensaries or dispensaries in operation) lead

to additional changes in WC claiming. We report tests of the combined effect (RML +

dispensary) at the bottom, and they are similar to our prior coefficient estimates, although we

note that we lose precision in the specification with an operating dispensary. Overall, we do not

observe evidence suggesting that dispensaries are particularly important; this pattern of null

findings is similar to the MML context (Ghimire and Maclean 2020) and for other forms of

social insurance (Maclean, Ghimire, and Nicholas 2020). 54

6.2 Heterogeneity by respondent characteristics

         We consider heterogeneity in RML effects across individuals based on the type of job

they hold. We follow Ghimire and Maclean (2020) and separately consider those employed in

`physically demanding jobs' and other jobs. 55 The magnitudes are larger for physically

demanding jobs, though the differences are small (see Appendix Table 7).


54
  Maclean et al find evidence that dispensaries may impact SSI applications, but not SSDI applications.
55
  We define the following past-year occupational codes as `physically demanding jobs.' To do so, we follow
Ghimire and Maclean (2020) and use a harmonized 1990 past-year occupational coding scheme available in the
IPUMS data to classify jobs into those that are physically demanding and those that are not. In particular, we use

                                                         34
        We estimate separate regressions for men and women (Appendix Table 8). While results

are similar across the samples ­ coefficient estimates are negative and non-trivial in size, effect

sizes are larger in the sample of men than women. Further, we lose power in the female sample

likely due to lower shares of women receiving WC benefits.

6.3 Heterogeneity across social insurance programs

        We next examine the impact of RMLs on the receipt of other benefits: SSDI and SSI

given that WC benefit receipt often predicts subsequent enrollment in SSDI or SSI (O'Leary et

al. 2012). SSDI provides income and health insurance (Medicare) for disabled workers who are

not able to return to work. Correspondingly, SSI offers income and health insurance (Medicaid)

to disabled individuals with very limited work history and financial resources. Both programs

provide income support for the disabled, with some individuals being eligible for both programs

(concurrent recipients). Results are listed in Appendix Table 9; SSDI results are reported in

Panel A and SSI results are reported in Panel B. We observe a decline in SSDI receipt (both any

income from this program and the level of income). In particular, we observe a decline of 0.30

ppt (21.4% relative to the counterfactual outcome) in the probability of receiving SSDI.

        Maclean, Ghimire, and Nicholas (2020) find that SSDI and SSI applications (but not

awards) increase post-RML but are unable to stratify by age. Combined, these results suggest

important age heterogeneity in terms of SSDI/SSI claiming behavior due to RML adoption.

7. Discussion and conclusion




the following IPUMS-created occupation variable: occ90ly. The following occupation codes are coded as
physically demanding: 473 to 905. We code all other occupations as not physically demanding. An example of a
physically demanding occupation is a miner. An example of a non-physically demanding occupation is a
pharmacist. We note that not all individuals report occupational information and thus the sum of the stratified
samples is smaller than the full sample size.

                                                       35
        Our study evaluates the effect of recent laws legalizing recreational marijuana on

workers' compensation benefits among adults ages 40 to 62 in the U.S. The analysis reveals a

decline in WC benefit receipt by 0.18 ppts, equivalent to a 20.0% decrease, and annual income

received from WC declines by $21.98 (or 20.5%) post-RML. We provide evidence that our

results are not attributable to common threats to identification in TWFE models: differential pre-

trends between adopting and non-adopting states, unobservable confounders, and program-

induced migration. We conduct a detailed analysis of mechanisms to understand this

relationship. First, we show that marijuana use ­ but not misuse ­ increases post-RML and

reduces prescriptions for medications used to treat pain. Second, our mechanism analysis

provides suggestive evidence that our results are not attributable to an overall reduction in labor

supply or systematic shifting into safer industries. Instead, we observe large reductions in non-

traumatic workplace injuries and work-limiting disabilities, in line with improvements in work

capacity among older adults.

        The magnitudes of our coefficient estimates are reasonably similar to those found in the

literature relating access to pain management therapies and measures of work capacity, though

direct comparisons are difficult due to the varying contexts. Garthwaite (2012) estimates 10%

labor supply reductions resulting from the removal of Cox-2 inhibitors. 56 Similarly, Bütikofer

and Skira (2018) find the work sickness absences are very responsive to the introduction (7-12%

decreases) and removal (12-16% increases) of these drugs from the market. Disability benefit

receipt is also impacted following removal of these medications from the market.




56
  This reduction refers to the labor supply of a population disproportionately impacted by access to pain
management therapies. Our estimates can also be viewed in a similar context since we focus on WC benefit receipt,
a margin which would also be disproportionately impacted by pain management.

                                                       36
        The effect size of marijuana legalization on WC claiming and income appears to be more

substantial than that of MMLs on the same outcomes, as documented by Ghimire and Maclean

(2020). In the present study, we find a 20.0% decline in WC claiming post-RML. In

comparison, Ghimire and Maclean document a 13% decline in WC claiming for older adults,

after states adopted medical marijuana laws during the 1990 to 2012 period. The related

magnitudes of the results are consistent with RMLs affecting a substantially larger share of the

population (and all older adults that we study) than MMLs. These differential effects seem

plausible as recreational marijuana is more readily accessible than medical marijuana for which

the patient requires a formal prescription from a healthcare professional. The ability to purchase

the medication `over-the-counter' (OTC) may reduce hassle costs and/or stigma, which have

been found to affect access in the context of other health products. For example, the conversion

of nicotine replacement therapies (used for smoking cessation) to OTC status lead to an increase

in their use (Keeler et al. 2002). In fact, we observe large increases in marijuana use due to

RMLs and evidence of corresponding reductions in alternative medications treating chronic pain

(consistent with findings in the literature).

        Our findings suggest potentially important benefits to older workers and society at large.

Broadly, we show non-trivial improvements in work capacity, which we proxy with WC benefit

receipt and various other metrics in our mechanism analysis, among older adults. The ability to

work likely has positive benefits to workers themselves due to improved earning capacity, and

overall health and life satisfaction. Older workers are at elevated risk of leaving the labor market

due to poor health (Dwyer and Mitchell 1999). Keeping workers actively engaged in paid

employment can have positive spillovers to Social Security and can reduce costs to employers

who will experience reduced WC costs. Similarly, working can increase household income and



                                                37
improve health (Coe and Zamarro 2011). Hirth et al. (2003) note how little evidence we have on

the relationship between access to medical treatments and labor supply outcomes. Since that

paper, a small literature has emerged on the availability of specific prescriptions drugs and labor

outcomes (e.g., Thirumurthy, Zivin, and Goldstein (2008); Bütikofer, Cronin, and Skira (2020);

Garthwaite (2012); and Bütikofer and Skira (2018)). This paper provides additional evidence

about the importance of pain management therapies, in particular those that lie outside of

traditional pharmaceuticals, on improving work capacity.

       There is a continuing debate in the U.S. on whether and how states should address

marijuana legalization. In order to formulate a solution, as the first step, identifying both the

harms and benefits followed by the policy change is potentially useful. Previous studies provide

several pieces of evidence on the positive or negative effect of marijuana legalization on several

outcomes related to individuals' health and well-being. The present study provides empirical

evidence on the consequences of marijuana legalization on issues related to the labor market

outcomes, in particular, WC claiming of older adults.




                                                 38
Table 1. Summary statistics
                                                All states         RML states             Non-RML states
 Sample:
                                               (all years)      (pre-RML years)              (all years)
 Outcome
                Any WC income (past year)        0.007                   0.008                    0.006
                 WC income (past year; $)        75.07                   92.47                    70.18
 RML policy
                        RML (lagged one year)      0.062                    0                         0
  State-level characteristics
                                          MML      0.396                 0.863                      0.191
         Prescription drug monitoring program      0.937                 0.976                      0.920
              Naloxone & Good Samaritan law        0.402                 0.466                      0.321
                   Pain clinic management law      0.247                    0                       0.346
                            Minimum wage ($)       8.439                 8.895                      8.102
                               State EITC ratio,   0.099                 0.048                      0.078
                            Governor Democrat      0.424                 0.660                      0.306
                          Population (millions)    1.411                 2.122                      1.141
  Individual-level characteristics
                                    Age (years)    50.99                 50.85                      51.03
                                           Male    0.487                 0.492                      0.485
                                         Female    0.513                 0.508                      0.515
                                          White    0.794                 0.795                      0.794
                              African American     0.123                 0.085                      0.142
                                      Other race   0.083                 0.120                      0.064
                                       Hispanic    0.143                 0.184                      0.123
                         Less than high school     0.104                 0.115                      0.098
                                    High school    0.295                 0.265                      0.310
                                  Some college     0.269                 0.273                      0.269
                        College degree or more     0.332                 0.347                      0.323
  Observations                                    517,351               101,202                    370,990
Notes: Dataset is ASEC 2011 to 2019, which captures WC benefit receipt over the period 2010 to 2018. The sample
includes respondents 40 to 62 years. Data are weighted by ASEC survey weights. Dollar values expressed in 2018
dollars.




                                                      39
Table 2A. Effect of recreational marijuana law passage on marijuana use among adults 26 years and older
                                                    Marijuana use in the                 Marijuana use in the
 Outcome:                                               past 30 days                           past year
 RML (lagged one year)                                    0.0185**                             0.0239**
                                                          (0.0075)                             (0.0107)
 Mean in RML states, pre-RML                               0.0691                               0.1073
 Counterfactual mean                                       0.1035                               0.1532
 Observations                                                459                                  459
 Data source                                              NSDUH                                NSDUH
 (years)                                                (2010-2018)                          (2010-2018)
Notes: The unit of observation is a state in a year. Data in the public use NSDUH data are reported in two-year
averages. We use data averaged over the years 2009-2010, 2010-2011, 2011-2012, 2012-2013, 2013-2014, 2014-
2015, 2016-2017, and 2017-2018. We match the RML data (lagged one year) based on the second year of the two-
year averages, that is: 2010, 2011, 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015, 2016, 2017, and 2018. All regression models are
estimated with least squares and control for state characteristics (MML, PDMP, naloxone & Good Samaritan law,
pain management clinic law, minimum wage [$], EITC ratio, Governor Democrat, and population 26 years and
older), individual characteristics (age in years, female, African American, other race, Hispanic ethnicity, high school
education, some college education, and college education ­ averaged to the state-year level), state fixed effects, and
year fixed effects. Data are weighted by the state population ages 26 years and older. Standard errors are clustered
at the state level and are reported in parentheses.
***,**,* = statistically different from zero at the 1%,5%,10% level.



Table 2B. Effect of recreational marijuana law passage on marijuana misuse: and prescription drug use
Admissions to substance use disorder treatment and prescriptions for medications used to treat chronic pain
  Substance listed at                   Marijuana                 Any                    No              Chronic pain
  admission:                             primary              marijuana             marijuana            prescriptions
  RML (lagged one year)                    -2.31                 -1.72                 -34.49                 -0.31*
                                          (7.50)                 (1.63)               (21.17)                 (0.16)
  Mean in RML states, pre-                24.28                   6.76                108.62                   3.54
  RML
  Counterfactual mean                     40.11                   9.90                185.81                   4.29
  Observations                              450                   450                   450                   1,263
  Data source                             TEDS                   TEDS                  TEDS                  SDUD
  (years)                              (2010-2018)           (2010-2018)           (2010-2018)            (2011-2018)
Notes: The TEDS sample includes admissions to SUD treatment for which the patient is 40-64 years and the SDUD
sample includes prescription fills for pain medications among Medicaid enrollees. The following states have
missing years of TEDS data: Georgia (2016, 2017, and 2018); Oregon (2015, 2016, 2017, and 2018); and South
Carolina (2014 and 2015). In the SDUD, we exclude Washington DC and Rhode Island along with state-quarter-
years that display large swings in reporting, see text for full details. The unit of observation is a state in a year in the
TEDS analysis and a state in a quarter in a year in the SDUD analysis. All regression models are estimated with
least squares and control for state characteristics (MML, PDMP, naloxone & Good Samaritan law, pain management
clinic law, minimum wage [$], EITC ratio, Governor Democrat, and population), individual characteristics (age in
years, female, African American, other race, Hispanic ethnicity, high school education, some college education, and
college education ­ averaged to the state-year level), state fixed effects, and year fixed effects in the TEDS analysis
and quarter-year fixed effects in the SDUD analysis. We also control for Affordable Care Act Medicaid expansion
in the SDUD analysis, see text for details. Data are weighted by the state population ages 40-64 in the TEDS
analysis and data are weighted by the count of Medicaid enrollees 40-62 in the SDUD analysis. Standard errors are
clustered at the state level and are reported in parentheses.
***,**,* = statistically different from zero at the 1%,5%,10% level.




                                                            40
Table 3. Effect of recreational marijuana law passage on Workers' Compensation benefit receipt
  Specification:                          (1)                   (2)                   (3)                  (4)
                                               Panel A: Any WC income
  RML (lagged one year)               -0.0014**           -0.0015**             -0.0018***            -0.0017**
                                       (0.0006)             (0.0006)              (0.0007)             (0.0007)
  RML state proportion, pre-
                                         0.008                 0.008                0.008                0.008
  RML
  Counterfactual proportion              0.009                 0.009                 0.009                0.009
  Bootstrapped t-statistic                 --                    --                -2.2540                  --
  Observations                         517,351               517,351              517,351              517,351
                                                 Panel B: WC income
  RML (lagged one year)               -18.89***            -19.42***             -21.98***              -18.63*
                                        (6.84)                (6.73)                (8.04)               (9.67)
  RML state mean, pre-RML               $92.47                $92.47                $92.47               $92.47
  Counterfactual mean                  $107.22               $107.22              $107.22              $107.22
  Bootstrapped t-statistic                 --                    --                -2.1803                  --
  Observations                         517,351               517,351              517,351              517,351
  Data are weighted                        Y                     Y                     Y                    N
  State fixed effects                      Y                     Y                     Y                    Y
  Year fixed effects                       Y                     Y                     Y                    Y
  Individual controls                      N                     Y                     Y                    Y
  State controls                           N                     N                     Y                    Y
Notes: Dataset is ASEC 2011 to 2019, which captures WC benefit receipt over the period 2010 to 2018. The sample
includes respondents 40 to 62 years. The unit of observation is a respondent in state in a year. The any WC
regression is estimated with a probit model and average marginal effect is reported. The WC income regression is
estimated with least squares. All regression models control for state characteristics (MML, PDMP, naloxone &
Good Samaritan law, pain management clinic law, minimum wage [$], EITC ratio, Governor Democrat, and
population), individual characteristics (age in years, female, African American, other race, Hispanic ethnicity, high
school education, some college education, and college education), state fixed effects, and year fixed effects, unless
otherwise noted. Data are weighted by ASEC survey weights, unless otherwise noted. Standard errors are clustered
at the state level and are reported in parentheses.
***,**,* = statistically different from zero at the 1%,5%,10% level.




                                                         41
Table 4A. Effect of recreational marijuana law passage on other labor market outcomes
                                                                                           Hours            Hours
                                                                                          worked           worked
                                  Worked          Labor force          Worked            last week        last week
 Outcome:                         last year      participation        last week          (uncond.)          (cond.)
 RML (lagged one year)            0.0054**           0.0025             0.0037             0.1508         0.2800**
                                  (0.0025)          (0.0040)           (0.0036)           (0.1303)         (0.1292)
 Prop./mean. RML                    0.768            0.768              0.697              28.36             39.59
 states, pre-RML
 Counterfactual                     0.775            0.775              0.699              28.55             39.75
 prop./mean
 Observations                      517,351         4,298,723          4,298,723          4,298,723        3,053,812
 Data source                        ASEC         Monthly CPS       Monthly CPS         Monthly CPS      Monthly CPS
 (years)                        (2011-2019)       (2010-2018)        (2010-2018)        (2010-2018)      (2010-2018)
Notes: The sample includes respondents 40 to 62 years. The unit of observation is a respondent in the ASEC, and a
respondent in a state in a year-month in the monthly CPS. The regression model is estimated with a probit model
and average marginal effect is reported (binary outcome variable) or least squares (continuous outcome variable).
All regression models control for state characteristics (MML, PDMP, naloxone & Good Samaritan law, pain
management clinic law, minimum wage [$], EITC ratio, Governor Democrat, and population), individual
characteristics (age in years, female, African American, other race, Hispanic ethnicity, high school education, some
college education, and college education), state fixed effects, year fixed effects, and month-fixed effects (only for
CPS monthly data). Data are weighted by ASEC survey weights in the ASEC data and monthly CPS survey person
weights in the monthly CPS files. Standard errors are clustered at the state level and are reported in parentheses.
***,**,* = statistically different from zero at the 1%,5%,10% level.



Table 4B. Effect of recreational marijuana law passage on the number of establishments
                                                          Total                           Marijuana related
 Outcome:                                            establishments                         establishments
 RML (lagged one year)                                    65.11                                   46.39
                                                         (90.07)                                 (48.72)
 Mean in RML states, pre-RML                             14,436                                   6,381
 Counterfactual mean                                     15,262                                   6,486
 Observations                                              459                                     459
 Data source                                              CBP                                     CBP
 Years                                                 2010-2018                               2010-2018
Notes: The outcome is establishment per 100,000 people. The unit of observation is a state in a year. All regression
models are estimated with least squares and control for state characteristics (age in years, female, African American,
other race, Hispanic ethnicity, high school education, some college education, and college education), state policies
(MML, PDMP, naloxone & Good Samaritan law, pain management clinic law, minimum wage [$], EITC ratio,
Governor Democrat, and population ­ averaged to the state-year), state fixed effects, and year fixed effects. Data
are weighted by the state population. Standard errors are clustered at the state level and are reported in parentheses.
Marijuana related establishments are defined as the following two-digit NAICS codes: Natural Resources and
Mining (11), Construction (23), Manufacturing (31-33), Trade (42, 44-45), Information (51), Financial Activities
(52), Education (61), and Health Services (62). See text for details.
***,**,* = statistically different from zero at the 1%,5%,10% level.




                                                          42
Table 5. Effect of recreational marijuana law passage on injury outcomes
                                         Non-fatal        Non-fatal injury Non-fatal injury               Predicted
  Outcome:                                 injury            (traumatic)        (non-traumatic)          injury rate
  RML (lagged one year)                  -32.49***             -25.39**             -7.10***                -20.12
                                           (11.42)              (10.82)               (1.82)               (24.83)
  Mean in RML states, pre-                 518.48               493.12                25.36                687.97
  RML
  Counterfactual mean                      600.54               570.18                30.36                  844.41
  Observations                               337                  337                  337                    344
  Data source                            BLS SOII             BLS SOII              BLS SOII                ASEC
  Years                                 (2011-2018)          (2011-2018)          (2011-2018)           (2011-2018)
Notes: The BLS SOII sample includes injuries among those 40 to 62 years and the ASEC sample includes
respondents ages 40 to 62 years. The unit of observation is a state in a year, the ASEC data are aggregated from the
microdata (respondent in a state in a year) to the state-year level. There are ten states with missing data in the BLS
data, full details available on request (see Appendix Table 5A for corresponding WC results for this same sample).
All regression models are estimated with least squares and control for state characteristics (age in years, female,
African American, other race, Hispanic ethnicity, high school education, some college education, and college
education ­ averaged to the state-year level), state policies (MML, PDMP, naloxone & Good Samaritan law, pain
management clinic law, minimum wage [$], EITC ratio, Governor Democrat, and population), state fixed effects,
and year fixed effects. Data are weighted by the state population 40 to 62. Standard errors are clustered at the state
level and are reported in parentheses.
***,**,* = statistically different from zero at the 1%,5%,10% level.




                                                          43
Table 6. Effect of recreational marijuana law passage on health outcomes
                                            Good/very                 Work limiting          Absent from work due
  Outcome:                            good/excellent health              disability              to own health
  RML (lagged one year)                       -0.0050                   -0.0068***                    0.0006
                                             (0.0082)                    (0.0020)                    (0.0004)
  Prop. in RML states, pre-                    0.886                       0.111                      0.0081
  RML
  Counterfactual prop.                         0.849                       0.109                      0.0075
  Observations                               517,351                      517,351                   3,078,174
  Data source                                  ASEC                        ASEC                   Monthly CPS
  (years)                                  (2011-2019)                 (2011-2019)                 (2010-2018)
Notes: The sample includes respondents 40 to 62 years. The unit of observation is a respondent in state in a year in
the ASEC, and a respondent in a state in a year-month in the monthly CPS. All regression models are estimated
with a probit model (average marginal effect reported) and control for state characteristics (MML, PDMP, naloxone
& Good Samaritan law, pain management clinic law, minimum wage [$], EITC ratio, Governor Democrat, and
population), individual characteristics (age in years, female, African American, other race, Hispanic ethnicity, high
school education, some college education, and college education), state fixed effects, and year fixed effects. The
ASEC regression models also control for individual characteristics. Data are weighted by ASEC survey weights in
the ASEC data and monthly CPS survey person weights in the monthly CPS files. Standard errors are clustered at
the state level and are reported in parentheses.
Absent from work due to health is defined as reporting being absent from work in the past week due to own
illness/injury/medical problems.
***,**,* = statistically different from zero at the 1%,5%,10% level.




                                                         44
Figure 1A. Workers' Compensation claiming costs in the U.S.: 2010 to 2018

       00
     ,0
   73
       00
     ,0
   72
       00
     ,0
   71
       00
     ,0
   70
       00
     ,0
   69
      00
     ,0
   68
      00
     ,0
   67
      00
     ,0
   66
      00




                         11
               10




                                    12



                                              13



                                                         14



                                                                   15



                                                                             16



                                                                                        17



                                                                                                  18
     ,0




                        20
             20




                                  20



                                            20



                                                       20



                                                                 20



                                                                            20



                                                                                      20



                                                                                                 20
   65




Notes: The figure is based on Table 5 in Weiss et al (2020). The most recent year of data available at the time of
writing is 2018. We inflate nominal values to 2020 dollars using the Consumer Price Index. See text for details.




                                                         45
Figure 1B. RML adoptions and announcements by December 2020

        4
        3
  Changes
        2
        1
        0




                   11
            10




                          12


                                 13


                                        14


                                               15


                                                      16


                                                             17


                                                                    18


                                                                           19


                                                                                  20


                                                                                         21


                                                                                                22
                 20
            20




                        20


                               20


                                      20


                                             20


                                                    20


                                                            20


                                                                  20


                                                                         20


                                                                                20


                                                                                       20


                                                                                              20
Notes: The figure is based on data reported in Chan et al (2019) and ProCon.org (2020). Note that law changes are
coded as of January 1st of each year. RML effective dates (adopted or announced by December, 2020) are as
follows: Alaska: February 2015, Arizona: November 2020; California: November 2016, Colorado: December 2012,
District of Columbia: February 2015, Illinois: January 2020, Maine: January 2017, Massachusetts: December 2016,
Michigan December 2018, Montana: January 2021, Nevada: January 2017, New Jersey January 2021, Oregon: July
2015, South Dakota: July 2021, Vermont: July 2018, and Washington: November 2012. See text for details.




                                                       46
Figure 2. States with an RML implemented or announced by December 2020




   RML
   No RML

Notes: The figure is based on data reported in Chan et al (2019) and ProCon.org (2020). Note that law changes are
coded as of January 1st of each year. RML effective dates (adopted or announced by December, 2020) are as
follows: Alaska: February 2015, Arizona: November 2020; California: November 2016, Colorado: December 2012,
District of Columbia: February 2015, Illinois: January 2020, Maine: January 2017, Massachusetts: December 2016,
Michigan December 2018, Montana: January 2021, Nevada: January 2017, New Jersey January 2021, Oregon: July
2015, South Dakota: July 2021, Vermont: July 2018, and Washington: November 2012. See text for details.




                                                       47
Figure 3. The effect of recreational marijuana law passage on Workers' Compensation benefit receipt: Event
study analysis
Panel A: Any WC income
    40
  .0
    20
  .0
    0
    2 0
  -.0
   04
  -.0
   06
  -.0




           -4




                       -3




                                   -2




                                                    -1




                                                                     0




                                                                         +1
                              Time relative to RML effective date


Panel B: WC income




Notes: Dataset is ASEC 2011 to 2019, which captures WC benefit receipt over the period 2010 to 2018. The sample
includes respondents 40 to 62 years. The unit of observation is a respondent in state in a year. Circles represent
coefficient estimates and 95% confidence intervals are depicted by vertical lines. The regression is estimated with a
probit model and average marginal effects are reported when the outcome is binary and least squares when the
outcome is continuous. The omitted category is five or more years pre-RML passage. States that do not adopt an
RML are coded as zero for all event-time indicators. The regression model controls for state characteristics (MML,
PDMP, naloxone & Good Samaritan law, pain management clinic law, minimum wage [$], EITC ratio, Governor
Democrat, and population), individual characteristics (age in years, female, African American, other race, Hispanic
ethnicity, high school education, some college education, and college education), state fixed effects, and year fixed
effects. Data are weighted by ASEC survey weights. Confidence intervals are clustered at the state level.


                                                                    48
Figure 4. The effect of recreational marijuana law passage on Workers' Compensation benefit receipt:
Falsification exercise
Panel A: Any WC income




Panel B: WC income




Notes: Dataset is ASEC 2011 to 2019, which captures WC benefit receipt over the period 2010 to 2018. The sample
includes respondents 40 to 62 years. The unit of observation is a respondent in state in a year. All regression
models are estimated with a probit model (average marginal effects reported) when the outcome is binary, and least
squares when the outcome is continuous and control for state characteristics (MML, PDMP, naloxone & Good
Samaritan law, pain management clinic law, minimum wage [$], EITC ratio, Governor Democrat, and population),
individual characteristics (age in years, female, African American, other race, Hispanic ethnicity, high school
education, some college education, and college education), state fixed effects, and year fixed effects. Data are
weighted by ASEC survey weights. The x-axis reports the t-statistic value. We randomly assign states into
treatment status, holding constant the number of states adopting in each year. The `true' t-statistic is the solid blue
line. The red dotted lines are the 2.5 and 97.5 percentiles of the placebo t-statistics. See text for more details.

                                                          49
Appendix Table 1. Effect of recreational marijuana law passage on Workers' Compensation benefit receipt:
All coefficient estimates
  Outcome:                                                  Any WC income                       WC income
  RML (lagged one year)                                         -0.0018***                       -21.98***
                                                                  (0.0007)                          (8.04)
  Other controls
  MML                                                              -0.0010                           -0.97
                                                                  (0.0006)                          (9.67)
  Prescription drug monitoring program                             -0.0006                          -13.51
                                                                  (0.0007)                          (8.26)
  Naloxone & Good Samaritan law                                    -0.0004                         -12.46*
                                                                  (0.0005)                          (7.04)
  Pain management clinic law                                        0.0002                          10.85
                                                                  (0.0008)                         (11.41)
  Minimum wage ($)                                                  0.0004                            5.63
                                                                  (0.0003)                          (5.54)
  State EITC ratio                                                 -0.0001                           -9.97
                                                                  (0.0007)                         (10.60)
  Governor Democrat                                                -0.0000                            0.71
                                                                  (0.0005)                          (6.86)
  Population                                                      -0.0000*                           -0.00
                                                                  (0.0000)                          (0.00)
  Age (in years)                                                 0.0001***                         2.06***
                                                                   (0.000)                          (0.42)
  Female                                                        -0.0024***                       -42.29***
                                                                  (0.0004)                          (4.65)
  African American                                                  0.0006                           -0.07
                                                                  (0.0005)                          (5.86)
  Other race                                                       -0.0005                            0.09
                                                                  (0.0005)                          (8.14)
  Hispanic ethnicity                                                0.0000                            2.22
                                                                  (0.0000)                          (9.73)
  High school                                                       0.0002                          11.38
                                                                  (0.0006)                          (9.23)
  Some college                                                     -0.0000                          11.39
                                                                  (0.0006)                         (12.71)
  College degree or more                                        -0.0065***                       -53.48***
                                                                  (0.0005)                         (10.66)
  RML state prop./mean, pre-RML                                      0.008                          $92.47
  Counterfactual prop./mean                                          0.009                          107.22
  Observations                                                     517,351                         517,351
Notes: Dataset is ASEC 2011 to 2019, which captures WC benefit receipt over the period 2010 to 2018. The sample
includes respondents 40 to 62 years. The unit of observation is a respondent in state in a year. The any WC
regression is estimated with a probit model and average marginal effect is reported. The WC income regression is
estimated with least squares. All regression models control for state fixed effects and year fixed effects. Omitted
categories are male (sex), white (race), non-Hispanic (ethnicity), and less than high school (education). Data are
weighted by ASEC survey weights. Standard errors are clustered at the state level and are reported in parentheses.
***,**,* = statistically different from zero at the 1%,5%,10% level.




                                                        50
Appendix Table 2. State-level correlates predicting adoption of a recreational marijuana law
  Outcome:                                                                               RML
  MML                                                                                   -0.0253
                                                                                       (0.0483)
  Prescription drug monitoring program                                                  -0.0161
                                                                                       (0.0485)
  Naloxone & Good Samaritan law                                                       0.0944**
                                                                                       (0.0367)
  Pain management clinic                                                                 0.0915
                                                                                       (0.0569)
  Minimum wage                                                                        0.1436***
                                                                                       (0.0454)
  State EITC ratio                                                                     0.5483*
                                                                                       (0.3191)
  Governor Democrat                                                                     -0.0166
                                                                                       (0.0542)
  Population                                                                            -0.0000
                                                                                       (0.0000)
  Age                                                                                   -0.0445
                                                                                       (0.0587)
  Female                                                                                 0.0032
                                                                                       (1.4295)
  African American                                                                    -0.5370**
                                                                                       (0.2560)
  Other race                                                                             0.1263
                                                                                       (0.3592)
  Hispanic                                                                            -0.0020**
                                                                                       (0.0009)
  High school                                                                           -1.0327
                                                                                       (0.6888)
  Some college                                                                          -0.2527
                                                                                       (0.5892)
  College degree or more                                                                -0.7246
                                                                                       (0.6562)
  F-test of joint significance of time-varying variables                                  23.15
  (p-value)                                                                            (<0.000)
  Mean proportion                                                                         0.083
  Observations                                                                             459
Notes: The unit of observation is a state in a year. The regression model is estimated with least squares and controls
for state characteristics, state fixed effects, and year fixed effects. Omitted categories are male (sex), white (race),
non-Hispanic (ethnicity), and less than high school (education). Note that we aggregate the demographics from the
respondent-state-year to the state-year level, applying ASEC weights in the aggregation. Data are weighted by the
state population. Standard errors are clustered at the state level and are reported in parentheses.
***,**,* = statistically different from zero at the 1%,5%,10% level.




                                                          51
Appendix Table 3. Effect of recreational marijuana law passage on Workers' Compensation benefit receipt:
Add time-varying controls one at a time
  Outcome:                                                           Any WC income                 WC income
  Panel A: Baseline model
  RML (lagged one year)                                                  -0.0018***                 -21.98***
                                                                           (0.0007)                    (8.04)
  Panel B: Progressively add control variables
  Added control: MML                                                      -0.0015**                 -19.14***
                                                                           (0.0006)                    (6.95)
  Added control: Prescription drug monitoring program                     -0.0015**                 -19.24***
                                                                           (0.0006)                    (6.84)
  Added control: Naloxone & Good Samaritan law                            -0.0015**                 -19.95***
                                                                           (0.0006)                    (6.92)
  Added control: Pain management clinic                                   -0.0015**                  -18.65**
                                                                           (0.0006)                    (7.02)
  Added control: Minimum wage                                            -0.0018***                 -24.31***
                                                                           (0.0006)                    (8.13)
  Added control: State EITC ratio                                         -0.0016**                  -21.59**
                                                                           (0.0007)                    (8.28)
  Added control: Governor Democrat                                        -0.0016**                  -21.58**
                                                                           (0.0007)                    (8.17)
  Added control: Population                                               -0.0017**                  -21.62**
                                                                           (0.0007)                    (8.16)
  Added control: Age                                                      -0.0017**                  -21.87**
                                                                           (0.0007)                    (8.33)
  Added control: Female                                                   -0.0017**                  -21.54**
                                                                           (0.0007)                    (8.16)
  Added control: African American                                         -0.0017**                  -21.52**
                                                                           (0.0007)                    (8.16)
  Added control: Other race                                               -0.0017**                  -21.55**
                                                                           (0.0007)                    (8.16)
  Added control: Hispanic                                                 -0.0017**                  -21.63**
                                                                           (0.0007)                    (8.17)
  Added control: High school                                              -0.0017**                 -21.97***
                                                                           (0.0007)                    (8.13)
  Added control: Some college                                             -0.0017**                  21.98***
                                                                           (0.0007)                    (8.04)
  Added control: College degree or more                                  -0.0018***                 -21.98***
                                                                           (0.0007)                    (8.04)
  RML state prop./mean, pre-RML                                             0.008                      $92.47
  Counterfactual prop./mean                                                 0.009                      107.22
  Observations                                                             517,351                    517,351
Notes: Dataset is ASEC 2011 to 2019, which captures WC benefit receipt over the period 2010 to 2018. The sample
includes respondents 40 to 62 years. The unit of observation is a respondent in state in a year. The any WC
regression is estimated with a probit model and average marginal effect is reported. The WC income regression is
estimated with least squares. The baseline model controls for state characteristics (MML, PDMP, naloxone & Good
Samaritan law, pain management clinic law, minimum wage [$], EITC ratio, Governor Democrat, and population),
individual characteristics (age in years, female, African American, other race, Hispanic ethnicity, high school
education, some college education, and college education), state fixed effects, and year fixed effects. Omitted
categories are male (sex), white (race), non-Hispanic (ethnicity), and less than high school (education). Each row in
Panel B progressively adds time-varying controls to the regression model. Data are weighted by ASEC survey
weights. Standard errors are clustered at the state level and are reported in parentheses.
***,**,* = statistically different from zero at the 1%,5%,10% level.




                                                         52
Appendix Table 4. Effect of recreational marijuana law passage on migration into and out of states
 Outcome:                                       Any migration              Migrate in            Migrate out
 RML (lagged one year)                              -0.0003                  -0.0012                0.0005
                                                   (0.0000)                 (0.0010)               (0.0000)
 Proportion in RML states, pre-RML                   0.011                    0.008                  0.003
 Counterfactual proportion                           0.012                    0.012                  0.004
 Observations                                       517,351                  517,351               517,351
Notes: Dataset is ASEC 2011 to 2019. The sample includes respondents 40 to 62 years. The unit of observation is a
respondent in state in a year. All regression models estimated with a probit model (average marginal effects
reported) and control for state characteristics (MML, PDMP, naloxone & Good Samaritan law, pain management
clinic law, minimum wage [$], EITC ratio, Governor Democrat, and population), individual characteristics (age in
years, female, African American, other race, Hispanic ethnicity, high school education, some college education, and
college education), state fixed effects, and year fixed effects. Data are weighted by ASEC survey weights. Standard
errors are clustered at the state level and are reported in parentheses.
***,**,* = statistically different from zero at the 1%,5%,10% level.




                                                        53
Appendix Table 5A. Effect of recreational marijuana law passage on Workers' Compensation benefit receipt,
alternative specifications and samples
 Outcome:                                                Any WC income                         WC income
                                   Panel A: Include state-specific linear time trends
 RML (lagged one year)                                       -0.0020**                              -14.95
                                                              (0.0010)                             (13.17)
 Observations                                                  517,351                            517,351
                                     Panel B: Include region-by-year fixed effects
 RML (lagged one year)                                         -0.0014                             -16.50*
                                                              (0.0009)                              (8.37)
 Observations                                                  517,351                            517,351
                         Panel C: Exclude state-year pairs with no TEDS admissions data
 RML (lagged one year)                                       -0.0018**                            -21.11**
                                                              (0.0008)                              (8.44)
 Observations                                                  509,627                            509,627
                         Panel D: Exclude states-year pairs with no BLS SOII injury data
 RML (lagged one year)                                       -0.0016**                            -16.85**
                                                              (0.0008)                              (7.78)
 Observations                                                  38,4673                            384,673
                                              Panel E: Use current RML
 RML (current year)                                         -0.0024***                            -27.27**
                                                              (0.0008)                             (10.65)
 Observations                                                  517,351                            517,351
                                         Panel F: Include industry fixed effects
 RML (lagged one year)                                       -0.0020**                           -22.03***
                                                              (0.0009)                              (7.91)
 Observations                                                  517,351                            517,351
                                      Panel G: Include occupation fixed effects
 RML (lagged one year)                                       -0.0020**                           -21.78***
                                                              (0.0008)                              (8.03)
 Observations                                                  517,351                            517,351
                                   Panel H: Aggregate data to the state-year level
 RML (lagged one year)                                        -0.0015*                             -20.15*
                                                              (0.0008)                             (11.33)
 Observations                                                    459                                  459
                                  Panel I: Control for state-level WC policy variables
 RML (lagged one year)                                       -0.0019**                           -31.88***
                                                               (0.009)                              (9.77)
 Observations                                                  517,351                            517,351
                     Panel J: Allow for heterogeneous treatment effects across states and time
 RML (lagged one year)                                       -0.0016*                             -16.73**
                                                              (0.0009)                               (9.02)
 Observations                                                  517,351                            517,351
 Prop./mean in RML states, pre-RML                              0.008                               $92.47
 Counterfactual prop./mean                                      0.009                             $107.22
Notes: Dataset is ASEC 2011 to 2019, which captures WC benefit receipt over the period 2010 to 2018. The unit of
observation is a respondent in state in a year. All regression models estimated with a probit model (average
marginal effects reported) when the outcome is binary and least squares when the outcome is continuous, and
control for state characteristics (MML, PDMP, naloxone & Good Samaritan law, pain management clinic law,
minimum wage [$], EITC ratio, Governor Democrat, and population), individual characteristics (age in years,
female, African American, other race, Hispanic ethnicity, high school education, some college education, and
college education), state fixed effects, and year fixed effects, unless otherwise noted. Data are weighted by ASEC
survey weights. Standard errors are clustered at the state level and are reported in parentheses.
***,**,* = statistically different from zero at the 1%,5%,10% level.
Data are aggregated to the state-year level. The unit of observation is a state in a year.

                                                       54
Counterfactual proportions and means are based on the full sample.




                                                     55
Appendix Table 5B. Effect of recreational marijuana law passage on Workers' Compensation benefit receipt,
alternative specifications of the regression model
  Outcome:                                                  Any WC income                       WC income
  Column:                                                           (1)                               (2)
  Regression model:                                    Linear probability model                    Poisson
  RML (lagged one year)                                         -0.0021**                         -16.29**
                                                                 (0.0009)                           (7.61)
  Prop./mean in RML states, pre-RML                                0.008                            $92.47
  Counterfactual prop./mean                                        0.009                           $102.67
  Observations                                                   517,351                           517,351
Notes: Dataset is ASEC 2011 to 2019, which captures WC benefit receipt over the period 2010 to 2018. The unit of
observation is a respondent in state in a year. Marginal effects reported for the Poisson model. All regression
models control for state characteristics (MML, PDMP, naloxone & Good Samaritan law, pain management clinic
law, minimum wage [$], EITC ratio, Governor Democrat, and population), individual characteristics (age in years,
female, African American, other race, Hispanic ethnicity, high school education, some college education, and
college education), state fixed effects, and year fixed effects unless otherwise noted. Data are weighted by ASEC
survey weights. Standard errors are clustered at the state level and are reported in parentheses.
***,**,* = statistically different from zero at the 1%,5%,10% level.




                                                       56
Appendix Table 6. Effect of recreational marijuana law passage on Workers' Compensation benefit receipt,
allowing for dispensaries
  Outcome:                                          Any WC income                            WC income
                                         Panel A: Control for dispensary law
  RML (lagged one year)                                  -0.0017*                             -30.44***
                                                         (0.0009)                               (10.54)
  RML dispensary law                                      -0.0004                                 -8.72
  (lagged one year)                                      (0.0019)                               (18.32)
  RML+RML dispensary law                                 -0.0021*                              -39.16**
  (lagged on year)                                       (0.0013)                               (16.19)
                                      Panel B: Control for operating dispensary
  RML (lagged one year)                                   -0.0019                              -30.78**
                                                         (0.0013)                               (12.67)
  RML operating dispensary                                 0.0005                                 -3.62
  (lagged one year)                                      (0.0019)                               (19.51)
  RML+RML operating dispensary                            -0.0014                              -34.40**
  (lagged one year)                                      (0.0009)                               (14.02)
  Prop./mean in RML states, pre-RML                         0.008                                $92.47
  Counterfactual prop./mean                                 0.009                               $107.22
  Observations                                            517,351                               517,351
Notes: Dataset is ASEC 2011 to 2019, which captures WC benefit receipt over the period 2010 to 2018. The sample
includes respondents 40 to 62 years. The unit of observation is a respondent in state in a year. All regression
models estimated with a probit model (average marginal effects reported) when the outcome is binary and least
squares when the outcome is continuous, and control for control for state characteristics (MML, PDMP, naloxone &
Good Samaritan law, pain management clinic law, minimum wage [$], EITC ratio, Governor Democrat, and
population), individual characteristics (age in years, female, African American, other race, Hispanic ethnicity, high
school education, some college education, and college education), state fixed effects, and year fixed effects. Data
are weighted by ASEC survey weights. Standard errors are clustered at the state level and are reported in
parentheses.
***,**,* = statistically different from zero at the 1%,5%,10% level.




                                                         57
Appendix Table 7. Effect of recreational marijuana law passage on Workers' Compensation benefit receipt,
heterogeneity by job physicality
  Outcome:                                        Any WC income                            WC income
                        Panel A: Sample includes workers with a physically demanding job
  RML (lagged one year)                                -0.0020                                 -32.23
                                                      (0.0017)                                (27.57)
  Prop./mean in RML states, pre-RML                      0.013                                 $89.60
  Counterfactual prop./mean                              0.015                                $102.45
  Observations                                          98,670                                 98,670
                   Panel B: Sample includes workers with a non-physically non-demanding job
  RML (lagged one year)                               -0.0016*                                 -14.78
                                                      (0.0008)                                (10.33)
  Prop./mean in RML states, pre-RML                      0.005                                 $42.64
  Counterfactual prop./mean                              0.006                                 $50.47
  Observations                                         306,194                                306,194
Notes: The summation of the two sub-samples is less than the full sample due to missing information on job-type.
See text for job-type definitions and details. Dataset is ASEC 2011 to 2019, which captures WC benefit receipt over
the period 2010 to 2018. The unit of observation is a respondent in state in a year. All regression models estimated
with a probit model (average marginal effects reported) when the outcome is binary and least squares when the
outcome is continuous, and control for state characteristics (MML, PDMP, naloxone & Good Samaritan law, pain
management clinic law, minimum wage [$], EITC ratio, Governor Democrat, and population), individual
characteristics (age in years, female, African American, other race, Hispanic ethnicity, high school education, some
college education, and college education), state fixed effects, and year fixed effects. Data are weighted by ASEC
survey weights. Standard errors are clustered at the state level and are reported in parentheses.
***,**,* = statistically different from zero at the 1%,5%,10% level.




                                                        58
Appendix Table 8. Effect of recreational marijuana law passage on Workers' Compensation benefit receipt,
heterogeneity by sex
 Outcome:                                          Any WC income                          WC income
                                                       Panel A: Men
 RML (lagged one year)                                  -0.0020**                            -42.73*
                                                         (0.0010)                            (23.13)
 Prop./mean in RML states, pre-RML                         0.0093                           $120.68
 Counterfactual prop./mean                                0. 0106                           $ 138.02
 Observations                                            249,623                            249,623
                                                     Panel B: Women
 RML (lagged one year)                                    -0.0016                             -22.01
                                                         (0.0012)                            (16.47)
 Prop./mean in RML states, pre-RML                         0.0061                            $57.18
 Counterfactual prop./mean                                 0.0073                            $ 77.78
 Observations                                            267,728                            267,728
Notes: Dataset is ASEC 2011 to 2019, which captures WC benefit receipt over the period 2010 to 2018. The unit of
observation is a respondent in state in a year. All regression models estimated with a probit model (average
marginal effects reported) when the outcome is binary and least squares when the outcome is continuous, and
control for state characteristics (MML, PDMP, naloxone & Good Samaritan law, pain management clinic law,
minimum wage [$], EITC ratio, Governor Democrat, and population), individual characteristics (age in years,
female, African American, other race, Hispanic ethnicity, high school education, some college education, and
college education), state fixed effects, and year fixed effects. Data are weighted by ASEC survey weights. Standard
errors are clustered at the state level and are reported in parentheses.
***,**,* = statistically different from zero at the 1%,5%,10% level.




                                                        59
Appendix Table 9. Effect of recreational marijuana law passage on SSDI and SSI benefit receipt
                                               Panel A: SSDI outcomes
  Outcome:                                         Any SSDI income                          SSDI income
  RML (lagged one year)                                -0.0030**                                 -38.49
                                                         (0.001)                                (32.29)
  Prop./mean RML states, pre-RML                          0.014                                $213.00
  Counterfactual prop./mean                               0.014                                $219.76
  Observations                                          517,351                                517,351
                                                 Panel B: SSI outcomes
  Outcome:                                          Any SSI income                           SSI income
  RML (lagged one year)                                 -0.0011                                  -10.87
                                                         (0.002)                                (15.66)
  Prop./mean RML states, pre-RML                          0.028                                $267.40
  Counterfactual prop./mean                               0.027                                $257.10
  Observations                                          517,351                                517,351
Notes: Dataset is ASEC 2011 to 2019, which captures benefit receipt over the period 2010 to 2018. The sample
includes respondents 40 to 62 years. The unit of observation is a respondent in state in a year. The any SSDI and
any SSI regressions are estimated with a probit model and average marginal effects are reported. The SSDI income
and SSI income regressions are estimated with least squares. All regression models control for state characteristics
(MML, PDMP, naloxone & Good Samaritan law, pain management clinic law, minimum wage [$], EITC ratio,
Governor Democrat, and population), individual characteristics (age in years, female, African American, other race,
Hispanic ethnicity, high school education, some college education, and college education), state fixed effects, and
year fixed effects. Data are weighted by ASEC survey weights. Standard errors are clustered at the state level and
are reported in parentheses.
***,**,* = statistically different from zero at the 1%,5%,10% level.




                                                         60
Appendix Figure 1. Trends in Workers' Compensation benefit receipt in each year of the study period
Panel A: Any WC income




Panel B: WC income




Notes: The data source is the ASEC 2011 to 2019, which captures WC benefit receipt over the period 2010 to 2018.
The sample includes respondents 40 to 62 years. Data are aggregated to annual level and weighted by ASEC survey
weights.




                                                      61
Appendix Figure 2. The effect of recreational marijuana law passage on Workers' Compensation benefit
receipt: Leave-one-out analysis
Panel A: Any WC income




Panel B: WC income




Notes: Dataset is ASEC 2011 to 2019, which captures WC benefit receipt over the period 2010 to 2018. The sample
includes respondents 40 to 62 years. The unit of observation is a respondent in state in a year. Circles capture the
coefficient estimate and vertical bars capture 95% confidence intervals that account for within-state clustering for
each leave-one-out sample. All regression models estimated with a probit model (average marginal effects reported)
when the outcome is binary and least squares when the outcome is continuous, and control for state characteristics
(MML, PDMP, naloxone & Good Samaritan law, pain management clinic law, minimum wage [$], EITC ratio,
Governor Democrat, and population), individual characteristics (age in years, female, African American, other race,
Hispanic ethnicity, high school education, some college education, and college education), state fixed effects, and
year fixed effects. Data are weighted by ASEC survey weights.



                                                        62
References:
Abouk, R., and S. Adams. 2019. Legal cannabis access and the obesity of younger children. In
        University of Wisconsin-Milwakee Mimeo.
Ali, M.M., W.N. Dowd, T. Classen, R. Mutter, and S.P. Novak. 2017. "Prescription drug
        monitoring programs, nonmedical use of prescription drugs, and heroin use: Evidence
        from the national survey of drug use and health." Addictive Behaviors 69:65-77.
Altonji, J.G., T.E. Elder, and C.R. Taber. 2005. "Selection on observed and unobserved
        variables: Assessing the effectiveness of catholic schools." Journal of Political Economy
        113 (1):151-184.
Anderson, D.M., D.I. Rees, and E. Tekin. 2018. "Medical marijuana laws and workplace
        fatalities in the united states." International Journal of Drug Policy 60:33-39.
Angrist, J.D., and J.-S. Pischke. 2008. Mostly harmless econometrics: An empiricist's
        companion: Princeton university press.
Bertrand, M., E. Duflo, and S. Mullainathan. 2004. "How much should we trust differences-in-
        differences estimates?" The Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (1):249-275.
Bradford, A.C., and W.D. Bradford. 2016. "Medical marijuana laws reduce prescription
        medication use in medicare part d." Health Affairs 35 (7):1230-1236.
------. 2017. "Medical marijuana laws may be associated with a decline in the number of
        prescriptions for medicaid enrollees." Health Affairs 36 (5):945-951.
Bronchetti, E.T. 2012. "Workers' compensation and consumption smoothing." Journal of Public
        Economics 96 (5-6):495-508.
Bronchetti, E.T., and M. McInerney. 2012. "Revisiting incentive effects in workers'
        compensation: Do higher benefits really induce more claims?" ILR Review 65 (2):286-
        315.
------. 2017. Does increased access to health insurance impact claims for workers'
        compensation? Evidence from massachusetts health care reform.
Bronchetti, E.T., and M.P. McInerney. 2019. "Health care reform and workers' compensation:
        Evidence from massachusetts." ILR Review.
Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2016. Nonfatal occupation injuries and illnesses requiring days away
        from work, 2015. Washington, DC: Bureau of Labor Statistics.
Bütikofer, A., C.J. Cronin, and M.M. Skira. 2020. "Employment effects of healthcare policy:
        Evidence from the 2007 fda black box warning on antidepressants." Journal of Health
        Economics 73:102348.
Bütikofer, A., and M.M. Skira. 2018. "Missing work is a pain: The effect of cox-2 inhibitors on
        sickness absence and disability pension receipt." Journal of Human Resources 53 (1):71-
        122.
Cabral, M., C. Cui, and M. Dworsky. 2019. What is the rationale for an insurance coverage
        mandate? Evidence from workers' compensation insurance. In National Bureau of
        Economic Research Working Paper Series. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of
        Economic Research.
Cabral, M., and M. Dillender. 2020. The impact of benefit generosity on workers' compensation
        claims: Evidence and implications. In National Bureau of Economic Research Working
        Paper Series. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Carrieri, V., L. Madio, and F. Principe. 2020. "Do-it-yourself medicine? The impact of light
        cannabis liberalization on prescription drugs." Journal of Health Economics 74:102371.


                                               63
Cerdá, M., C. Mauro, A. Hamilton, N.S. Levy, J. Santaella-Tenorio, D. Hasin, M.M. Wall, K.M.
        Keyes, and S.S. Martins. 2020. "Association between recreational marijuana legalization
        in the united states and changes in marijuana use and cannabis use disorder from 2008 to
        2016." JAMA Psychiatry 77 (2):165-171.
Cerdá, M., M. Wall, T. Feng, K.M. Keyes, A. Sarvet, J. Schulenberg, P.M. O'malley, R.L.
        Pacula, S. Galea, and D.S. Hasin. 2017. "Association of state recreational marijuana laws
        with adolescent marijuana use." JAMA Pediatrics 171 (2):142-149.
Chakraborty, A., J. Doremus, and S. Stith. 2020. The effects of recreational cannabis access on
        the labor market: Evidence from colorado.
Chan, N.W., J. Burkhardt, and M. Flyr. 2020. "The effects of recreational marijuana legalization
        and dispensing on opioid mortality." Economic Inquiry 58 (2):589-606.
Charles, K.K., M.S. Johnson, M. Stephens Jr, and D.Q. Lee. 2019. Demand conditions and
        worker safety: Evidence from price shocks in mining. National Bureau of Economic
        Research.
Chatterji, P. 2006. "Illicit drug use and educational attainment." Health Economics 15 (5):489-
        511.
Choi, N.G., D.M. DiNitto, and C.N. Marti. 2017. "Nonmedical versus medical marijuana use
        among three age groups of adults: Associations with mental and physical health status."
        The American Journal on Addictions 26 (7):697-706.
Coe, N.B., and G. Zamarro. 2011. "Retirement effects on health in europe." Journal of Health
        Economics 30 (1):77-86.
Coile, C., K. Milligan, and D.A. Wise. 2017. "Health capacity to work at older ages: Evidence
        from the united states." In Social security programs and retirement around the world:
        The capacity to work at older ages, 359-394. University of Chicago Press.
Cutler, D.M., E. Meara, and S. Richards-Shubik. 2013. Health and work capacity of older adults:
        Estimates and implications for social security policy. Social Science Research Network.
Dahlhamer, J., J. Lucas, C. Zelaya, R. Nahin, S. Mackey, L. DeBar, R. Kerns, M. Von Korff, L.
        Porter, and C. Helmick. 2018. "Prevalence of chronic pain and high-impact chronic pain
        among adults--united states, 2016." Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 67
        (36):1001.
Daniller, A. 2019. Two-thirds of americans support marijuana legalization. In Fact tank: News in
        the numbers: Pew Research Center.
Dave, D., and S. Mukerjee. 2011. "Mental health parity legislation, costsharing and substance
        abuse treatment admissions." Health Economics 20 (2):161-183.
de Chaisemartin, C., and X. d'Haultfoeuille. 2020a. Difference-in-differences estimators of
        intertemporal treatment effects. In Social Science Research Network Working Paper
        Series: Social Science Research Network.
------. 2020b. "Two-way fixed effects estimators with heterogeneous treatment effects."
        American Economic Review 110 (9):2964-96.
Deyo, R.A., S.F. Dworkin, D. Amtmann, G. Andersson, D. Borenstein, E. Carragee, J. Carrino,
        R. Chou, K. Cook, and A. DeLitto. 2015. "Report of the nih task force on research
        standards for chronic low back pain." Physical Therapy 95 (2):e1-e18.
Dillender, M. 2015. "The effect of health insurance on workers' compensation filing: Evidence
        from the affordable care act's age-based threshold for dependent coverage." Journal of
        Health Economics 43:204-228.



                                               64
Dong, X. 2020. The economic impact of government regulations on marijuana and immigration.
        Ph.D., Syracuse University, Ann Arbor.
Dragone, D., G. Prarolo, P. Vanin, and G. Zanella. 2019. "Crime and the legalization of
        recreational marijuana." Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 159:488-501.
Dwyer, D.S., and O.S. Mitchell. 1999. "Health problems as determinants of retirement: Are self-
        rated measures endogenous?" Journal of Health Economics 18 (2):173-193.
Flood, S., M. King, S. Ruggles, and J.R. Warren. 2020. Integrated public use microdata series,
        current population survey. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota.
Garthwaite, C.L. 2012. "The economic benefits of pharmaceutical innovations: The case of cox-
        2 inhibitors." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 4 (3):116-37.
Ghimire, K.M., and J.C. Maclean. 2020. "Medical marijuana and workers' compensation
        claiming." Health Economics 29 (4):419-434.
Gruber, J., and A.B. Krueger. 1991. "The incidence of mandated employer-provided insurance:
        Lessons from workers' compensation insurance." Tax Policy and the Economy 5:111-143.
Hales, C.M., C.B. Martin, and Q. Gu. 2020. Prevalence of prescription pain medication use
        among adults: United states, 2015­2018. In NCHS data brief Hyattsville, MD: National
        Center for Health Statistics.
Hansen, B., K. Miller, and C. Weber. 2020. "Early evidence on recreational marijuana
        legalization and traffic fatalities." Economic Inquiry 58 (2):547-568.
Hanson, K.L., J.L. Winward, A.D. Schweinsburg, K.L. Medina, S.A. Brown, and S.F. Tapert.
        2010. "Longitudinal study of cognition among adolescent marijuana users over three
        weeks of abstinence." Addictive Behaviors 35 (11):970-976.
Hill, K.P. 2015. "Medical marijuana for treatment of chronic pain and other medical and
        psychiatric problems: A clinical review." JAMA 313 (24):2474-2483.
Hill, S.C., K.T. Solomon, J.C. Maclean, and M.F. Pesko. 2019. "Effects of improvements in the
        cps on the estimated prevalence of medical financial burdens." Health Services Research
        54 (4):920-929.
Hirsch, B.T., D.A. Macpherson, and J.M. DuMond. 1997. "Workers compensation recipiency in
        union and nonunion workplaces." ILR Review 50 (2):213-236.
Hirth, R.A., M.E. Chernew, M.N. Turenne, M.V. Pauly, S.M. Orzol, and P.J. Held. 2003.
        "Chronic illness, treatment choice and workforce participation." International Journal of
        Health Care Finance and Economics 3 (3):167-181.
Hollingsworth, A., C. Wing, and A. Bradford. 2019. Comparative effects of recreational and
        medical marijuana laws on drug use among adult and adolescents. In Social Science
        Research Network Woking Paper Series: Social Science Research Network
Irons, J.G., K.A. Babson, C.L. Bergeria, and M.O. BonnMiller. 2014. "Physical activity and
        cannabis cessation." The American Journal on Addictions 23 (5):485-492.
Jinks, L., T.J. Kniesner, J. Leeth, and A.T. Lo Sasso. 2020. "Opting out of workers'
        compensation: Non-subscription in texas and its effects." Journal of Risk and Uncertainty
        60 (1):53-76.
Kaestner, R., and M. Grossman. 1998. "The effect of drug use on workplace accidents." Labour
        Economics 5 (3):267-294.
Kasiser Family Foundation. 2021. Status of state medicaid expansion decisions. Washington,
        DC: Kasiser Family Foundation.




                                               65
Keeler, T.E., T.w. Hu, A. Keith, R. Manning, M.D. Marciniak, M. Ong, and H.Y. Sung. 2002.
        "The benefits of switching smoking cessation drugs to overthecounter status." Health
        Economics 11 (5):389-402.
Kline, P., and A. Santos. 2012. "A score based approach to wild bootstrap inference." Journal of
        Econometric Methods 1 (1):23-41.
Kosiba, J.D., S.A. Maisto, and J.W. Ditre. 2019. "Patient-reported use of medical cannabis for
        pain, anxiety, and depression symptoms: Systematic review and meta-analysis." Social
       Science & Medicine 233:181-192.
Krueger, A.B. 1990. "Incentive effects of workers' compensation insurance." Journal of Public
       Economics 41 (1):73-99.
Lakdawalla, D.N., R.T. Reville, and S.A. Seabury. 2007. "How does health insurance affect
       workers' compensation filing?" Economic Inquiry 45 (2):286-303.
Leigh, J.P. 2011. "Economic burden of occupational injury and illness in the united states." The
        Milbank Quarterly 89 (4):728-772.
Lopez-Garcia, I., N. Maestas, and K.J. Mullen. 2019. Latent work capacity and retirement
        expectations. In Stanford University mimeo.
Lynch, M.E., and F. Campbell. 2011. "Cannabinoids for treatment of chronic noncancer pain; a
        systematic review of randomized trials." British Journal of Clinical Pharmacology 72
        (5):735-744.
Macdonald, S., W. Hall, P. Roman, T. Stockwell, M. Coghlan, and S. Nesvaag. 2010. "Testing
        for cannabis in the workplace: A review of the evidence." Addiction 105 (3):408-416.
MacKinnon, J.G., and M.D. Webb. 2020. "Randomization inference for difference-in-differences
        with few treated clusters." Journal of Econometrics.
Maclean, J.C., K.M. Ghimire, and L. Nicholas. 2020. "Marijuana legalization and disability
        claiming." Health Economics Forthcoming.
Maclean, J.C., and B. Saloner. 2018. "Substance use treatment provider behavior and healthcare
        reform: Evidence from massachusetts." Health Economics 27 (1):76-101.
McMichael, B.J., R.L. Van Horn, and W.K. Viscusi. 2020. "The impact of cannabis access laws
        on opioid prescribing." Journal of Health Economics 69:102273.
Meyer, B.D., W.K. Viscusi, and D.L. Durbin. 1995. "Workers' compensation and injury
        duration: Evidence from a natural experiment." The American Economic Review:322-
        340.
Moffitt, R. 1992. "Incentive effects of the us welfare system: A review." Journal of Economic
        Literature 30 (1):1-61.
National Academies of Sciences, E., and Medicine. 2017. The health effects of cannabis and
        cannabinoids: The current state of evidence and recommendations for research: National
        Academies Press.
National Institute on Drug Abuse. 2020. How does marijuana use affect school, work, and social
        life? Bethesda, MD: National Institute on Drug Abuse.
Neuhauser, F., and S. Raphael. 2004. "The effect of an increase in worker's compensation
        benefits on the duration and frequency of benefit receipt." Review of Economics and
        Statistics 86 (1):288-302.
Nicholas, L.H., and J.C. Maclean. 2019. "The effect of medical marijuana laws on the health and
        labor supply of older adults: Evidence from the health and retirement study." Journal of
        Policy Analysis and Management 38 (2):455-480.



                                              66
O'Leary, P., L.I. Boden, S.A. Seabury, and A. Ozonoff. 2012. "Workplace injuries and the take-
        up of social security disability benefits." Soc. Sec. Bull. 72:1.
Ohsfeldt, R.L., and M.A. Morrisey. 1997. "Beer taxes, workers' compensation, and industrial
        injury." Review of Economics and Statistics 79 (1):155-160.
Park, J.-Y., and L.-T. Wu. 2017. "Prevalence, reasons, perceived effects, and correlates of
        medical marijuana use: A review." Drug and Alcohol Dependence 177:1-13.
Prescription Drug Abuse Policy System. 2020. Prescription drug abuse policy system.
ProCon.org. 2020a. Legal medical marijuana states and dc. ProCon.org.
------. 2020b. Legal recreational marijuana states and dc. ProCon.org.
Register, C.A., and D.R. Williams. 1992. "Labor market effects of marijuana and cocaine use
        among young men." ILR Review 45 (3):435-448.
Reinarman, C., H. Nunberg, F. Lanthier, and T. Heddleston. 2011. "Who are medical marijuana
        patients? Population characteristics from nine california assessment clinics." Journal of
        Psychoactive Drugs 43 (2):128-135.
Roodman, D., M.Ø. Nielsen, J.G. MacKinnon, and M.D. Webb. 2019. "Fast and wild: Bootstrap
        inference in stata using boottest." The Stata Journal 19 (1):4-60.
Sabia, J.J., and T.T. Nguyen. 2018. "The effect of medical marijuana laws on labor market
        outcomes." The Journal of Law and Economics 61 (3):361-396.
Schmidheiny, K., and S. Siegloch. 2020. On event studies and distributed-lags in two-way fixed
        effects models: Identification, equivalence, and generalization. In ZEW-Centre for
        European Economic Research Discussion Paper.
Summers, L.H. 1989. "Some simple economics of mandated benefits." The American Economic
        Review 79 (2):177-183.
Thirumurthy, H., J.G. Zivin, and M. Goldstein. 2008. "The economic impact of aids treatment
        labor supply in western kenya." Journal of Human Resources 43 (3):511-552.
U.S. Department of Labor. 2016. Does the workers' compensation system fulfill its obligations
        to injured workers? Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Labor.
Ullman, D.F. 2017. "The effect of medical marijuana on sickness absence." Health Economics
        26 (10):1322-1327.
University of Kentucky Center for Poverty Research. 2020. State level data of economic,
        political, and transfer program information for 1980-2018. Lexington, KY: University of
        Kentucky.
Van Ours, J.C., and J. Williams. 2012. "The effects of cannabis use on physical and mental
        health." Journal of Health Economics 31 (4):564-577.
Van Ours, J.C., J. Williams, D. Fergusson, and L.J. Horwood. 2013. "Cannabis use and suicidal
        ideation." Journal of Health Economics 32 (3):524-537.
Volkow, N.D., R.D. Baler, W.M. Compton, and S.R. Weiss. 2014. "Adverse health effects of
        marijuana use." New England Journal of Medicine 370 (23):2219-2227.
Watson, S.J., J.A. Benson, and J.E. Joy. 2000. "Marijuana and medicine: Assessing the science
        base: A summary of the 1999 institute of medicine report." Archives of General
        Psychiatry 57 (6):547-552.
Weiss, E., G. Murphy, and L.I. Boden. 2020. Workers' compensation benefits, costs, and
        coverage ­ 2018 data. Washington, DC: National Academy of Social Insurance.
Wen, H., and J.M. Hockenberry. 2018. "Association of medical and adult-use marijuana laws
        with opioid prescribing for medicaid enrollees." JAMA Internal Medicine 178 (5):673-
        679.


                                               67
Whiting, P.F., R.F. Wolff, S. Deshpande, M. Di Nisio, S. Duffy, A.V. Hernandez, J.C.
       Keurentjes, S. Lang, K. Misso, and S. Ryder. 2015. "Cannabinoids for medical use: A
       systematic review and meta-analysis." JAMA 313 (24):2456-2473.
Williams, J., and J.C. van Ours. 2020. "Hazardous or not? Cannabis use and early labor market
       experiences of young men." Health Economics 29 (10):1148-1160.
Winward, J.L., K.L. Hanson, S.F. Tapert, and S.A. Brown. 2014. "Heavy alcohol use, marijuana
       use, and concomitant use by adolescents are associated with unique and shared cognitive
       decrements." Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society: JINS 20 (8):784.
Zwerling, C., J. Ryan, and E.J. Orav. 1990. "The efficacy of preemployment drug screening for
       marijuana and cocaine in predicting employment outcome." JAMA 264 (20):2639-2643.




                                              68
