                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             HOUSING CONSUMPTION AND THE COST OF REMOTE WORK

                                     Christopher T. Stanton
                                        Pratyush Tiwari

                                      Working Paper 28483
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28483


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2021




We thank Ed Glaeser, Bill Kerr, Nathan Seegert, and seminar participants in the HBS
Entrepreneurial Management Unit for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Christopher T. Stanton and Pratyush Tiwari. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Housing Consumption and the Cost of Remote Work
Christopher T. Stanton and Pratyush Tiwari
NBER Working Paper No. 28483
February 2021
JEL No. J32,J81,J82,R21,R3,R40

                                        ABSTRACT

This paper estimates housing choice differences between households with and without remote
workers. Prior to the pandemic, the expenditure share on housing was more than seven percent
higher for remote households compared to similar non-remote households in the same commuting
zone. Remote households' higher housing expenditures arise from larger dwellings (more rooms)
and a higher price per room. Pre-COVID, households with remote workers were actually located
in areas with above-average housing costs, and sorting within-commuting zone to suburban or
rural areas was not economically meaningful. Using the pre-COVID distribution of locations, we
estimate how much additional pre-tax income would be necessary to compensate non-remote
households for extra housing expenses arising from remote work in the absence of geographic
mobility, and we compare this compensation to commercial office rents in major metro areas.


Christopher T. Stanton
210 Rock Center
Harvard University
Harvard Business School
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
christopher.t.stanton@gmail.com

Pratyush Tiwari
Harvard University
ptiwari@hbs.edu
1    Introduction
The surge in remote work during COVID-19 has the potential to change residential real
estate markets, yet very little prior research has examined the housing choices of remote
versus non-remote households. At the time of our writing, projections about the location
of remote workers across states or territories remain difficult due to the sheer size of the
pandemic shock and questions about whether remote households will be free to relocate to
new cities after the pandemic subsides. However, historical data on housing consumption of
remote versus non-remote households is likely to be informative about differences in housing
needs for remote workers. In this paper we ask whether remote households make different
choices when facing the same housing market conditions. That is, do households with remote
employees consume more housing? We also ask whether remote households sort to suburbs or
rural parts of their respective commuting zones. These differences between remote and non-
remote households are two crucial building blocks for understanding the general equilibrium
implications of remote work (Behrens, Kichko, and Thisse, 2021).

We address these questions using American Community Survey data from 2013-2017. We
split the analysis for households who rent versus own. When we hold fixed household income,
education, and household structure (age, children, number of adults), we find that the average
renting household with at least one adult who works remotely spent between 6.5 and 7.4
percent more of their income on housing compared to similar non-remote households in the
same narrow 100,000 person Public Use Microdata Area (PUMA) or in the same broader
Commuting Zone. Among owners, mortgage payments and property taxes as a share of
household income were between 8.4 and 9.8 percent greater for remote households.

To understand why remote households were spending more of their income on housing, we
first decompose the differences in housing expenses for remote and non-remote households
into three components: differences in the size of the dwelling (measured by rooms, as square
footage isn't available in the ACS data), differences in the price per room after holding fixed
average prices in a PUMA, and differences in the average price of housing across PUMAs in
the same commuting zone. The first channel captures demand for more space. The second
channel captures either demand for higher quality housing or demand for larger rooms. The
third channel captures sorting within a commuting zone to areas that are on average either
more or less expensive.

Prior to the COVID pandemic, remote households consumed 0.3 to 0.4 more rooms per


                                              1
dwelling, which is between a 5% to 7% increase in space relative to non-remote households.
Remote households also lived in higher quality housing, as measured by rent- or value-per-
room, but these quality measures may also capture larger average room sizes for remote
households. Remote households were thus consuming more space, and were possibly con-
suming higher-quality space.

There has been much recent discussion regarding how remote work might affect geographic
sorting. When we conduct analysis within commuting zones (shutting down geographic
sorting across disconnected areas but allowing sorting within the same markets, a la Rosen-
thal, Strange, et al. (2005)), remote households are actually found to have located in areas
with slightly higher than average home prices compared to non-remote households. Fur-
ther assessment of whether remote households are more or less suburban or rural depends
on a number of factors, including educational attainment and whether the household was a
"mixed" household containing both on-premises and remote workers. Unconditionally, mixed
households are more likely to be suburban and less likely to be rural, but adult education
appears to be explaining these location outcomes rather than remote status. Controlling for
education, fully remote households are slightly more likely to live in rural areas rather than
urban or suburban ones, but any differences in location sorting are small in magnitude. That
is, location sorting within commuting zones, at least prior to the pandemic, did nothing to
offset remote households greater housing expenditure share.

Our primary focus is on housing demand for remote households, and focusing at the com-
muting zone level is natural because it allows us to compare consumption differences for
households that face similar prices. This analysis within commuting zone sidesteps a possi-
ble reshuffling across geographies, where remote households may flee to areas with cheaper
or more elastic housing supply. Forecasting post-pandemic locations across commuting zones
from the pre-pandemic location distribution is likely unwise, but our estimates are nonethe-
less useful for understanding historical patterns of where remote households located by com-
muting zone. Prior to the pandemic, remote households were not locating in the least
expensive commuting zones; instead they were likely to be in places with some urban urban
amenities. Reflecting this, we find that housing expenditure differences actually increase by
about 40% for renters and 20% for owners when we omit commuting zone fixed effects.1
   1
    In ongoing related work, we find that remote households were less likely to be located in the 10 most
expensive commuting zones prior to the pandemic, but they were also less likely to locate outside of the 50
most expensive commuting zones.




                                                    2
Having established that the greater housing expenditure share among remote households is
due to larger houses, we ask why remote work entails choosing more space. Two possibilities
are: 1) Vehicles are complementary with commuting for non-remote households, and savings
on vehicles allow remote households to consume more housing. 2) Additional space comple-
ments working at home, so remote households adjust housing consumption to accommodate
home offices. After accounting for differences in the presence of vehicle for remote and non-
remote households, we conclude that vehicles are insufficient to explain remote households'
greater housing expenses. The most plausible explanation for larger homes is that additional
space is needed to accommodate remote work.2

For firms, managers often speak colloquially of cost savings from remote work due to reduc-
tions in office space. But this neglects the fact that remote households need more space to
accommodate working from home. As a result, remote work entails a transition from firms'
financing of office space to household financing of home workspaces. To quantify how big a
cost expanding remote work would be for the marginal household, we conduct a back-of-the
envelope calculation to capture how much more non-remote households would need to earn
to compensate for the additional housing expenses they would incur if moving to remote
work (the remote premium).3 The premium amount varies over the household income dis-
tribution due to differences in the average expenditure share on housing. We estimate that
bottom decile households would require between a 10-15% earnings premium, while house-
holds between the 80th and 90th percentile of income would require about a 3% earnings
premium, and households in the top decile would not require additional compensation to
offset housing expenses. Across the income distribution, the expected premium is 3.8% of
household income with no adjustments and is 2.4% when we adjust for vehicle expenses that
may not be required with remote work. Using this latter number, if 10% of non-remote
households became remote, the required compensation would total $15 billion annually at
current housing prices.4 Of course new demand for housing that can accommodate remote
work may push up prices for larger dwellings, whereas sorting to cheaper areas or places
with elastic housing supply may offset some of these costs (Ozimek, 2021). This analysis
    2
      It is also possible that more space is simply complementary with time spent at home, but this explanation
is unlikely to fully explain the results, as households where one spouse engages in home production (rather
than working for pay outside the home), have only one-third the space increases associated with remote
work.
    3
      Our exercise assumes preference neutrality for remote versus in-office work, so our results are the docu-
mented non-pecuniary preferences for remote work arrangements Mas and Pallais (2017). Presumably those
pushed into remote work by the pandemic will be less likely to have high willingness to pay for the remote
work amenity compared to those who were previously observed in remote jobs.
    4
      For analysis of how remote work is affecting prices, see Ramani and Nick Bloom (n.d.)



                                                      3
also says nothing about the incidence of potential productivity gains or losses from remote
work.5

Our final piece of analysis examines housing cost differences for remote and non-remote
households relative to office space expenses across major metropolitan areas. This analysis
serves as a rough estimate of potential office cost savings in the event that there is limited
sorting across geographies, i.e. where most remote households remain in the same commuting
zone as their original offices. Using average commercial rents and assuming the average
worker has about 150 square feet of office space suggests that increased housing expenditures
from remote work would offset about one-third of any savings on office space. Despite having
very expensive housing, the San Francisco Bay Area would still offer the highest savings in
office rents, at about $6,000 per worker per year because of San Francisco's extremely high
commercial rents. For other areas, some non-obvious patterns emerge. For example, the
entire New York metro area had the third highest commercial rents nationwide as of 2020
but New York ranks sixth in terms of savings from remote work due to high local housing
costs. Nashville had the twelfth most expensive office space, but low housing costs mean the
$4,100 per-worker net savings from remote work ranks seventh nationally. The areas with
the lowest estimated cost savings from remote work are Detroit, Michigan and Fort Worth,
Texas, at $2,100 and $1,400 annually.

The combined findings are relevant for understanding an ever-expanding literature on re-
mote work. Several important papers estimate the productivity effects of remote workers
(Choudhury, Foroughi, and Larson, 2020; Nicholas Bloom et al., 2015) or the extent of
remote work (Mas and Pallais, 2020). More recent papers document changes in remote
work and time use during the pandemic (Barrero, Nicholas Bloom, and Davis, 2020a; Bick,
Blandin, and Mertens, 20200; Brynjolfsson et al., 20200) or forecast the extent of remote
work after pandemic health risks subside (Bartik et al., 2020). This paper fills a gap by
seeking to understand how a shift to remote work might affect housing consumption and
broader housing demand, with more general implications for understanding how information
technology affects demand for space in cities (Gaspar and Glaeser, 1998) or the demand for
suburbanization (Baum-Snow, 2007). While a general equilibrium model that might account
for changing locations, the disutility of commuting, and other standard features in urban
economics is beyond the scope of our empirical orientation in this paper, our findings cor-
roborate some of the tenets of this general equilibrium model with remote work in Behrens,
   5
    For evidence on the productivity implications of remote work, see Bartik et al. (2020); Barrero, Nicholas
Bloom, and Davis (2020b); Ozimek (2020).



                                                     4
Kichko, and Thisse (2021).


2    A Framework
We consider the consumption choices of two types of households. Households with at least
one remote worker are denoted by R and households with no remote workers by N . All
households derive utility from consuming a bundle of non-housing goods denoted C and
housing denoted H . The simplest way to model differences in housing expenditure is to
formulate a utility function with differences across household types. As in Glaeser and
Gottlieb (2009), we work with a simple Cobb-Douglas utility setup, but we allow the share
parameters to vary by household type k  {R, N }. We use this simple version to fix ideas,
but when taking the model to the data, we will allow the parameters to vary flexibly by
other household characteristics and by income, as housing expenses appear non-homothetic.
In this simple model, households maximize

                                  Uk (Ci , Hi ) = Ci1-k Hik
                                                  subject to
                                         Ci + Pa Hi  Wi .

In the budget constraint, Wi is the income of household i, the price of the consumption
bundle Ci is normalized to 1, and the price of a unit of housing in area a is given by Pa .
Solving for the consumption decisions yields the following for households of type k  {R, N }:

                                     Ck = (1 - k )Wi
                                                  Wi
                                         Hk = k
                                                  Pa


When R > N , remote households place a higher value on additional units of housing, and
their housing expenditures are given by R Wi > N Wi , as k is the expenditure share on
housing for type k .

As we confront the possibility that many more households may move to remote work after
the pandemic, it is useful to understand how compensation would need to change to equalize
utility between remote and non-remote households. That is, how much additional income
would be required for a remote household to be on the same indifference curve as a non-
remote household under the parameters for non-remote households? The indirect utility


                                              5
function is used to calculate this differential, labeled  , setting equal the maximized utility
as-if remote households had the same parameters as non-remote households.6

                 (1 - R )1-N (W (1 +  ))1-N (HR )N = (1 - N )1-N W 1-N (HN )N
                                                          (1 - N )              HN
                                                                                     R /(1-N )        (1)
                                                     =  =                                        -1
                                                          (1 - R )              HR

In this formulation,  is the additional compensation required to make a household indif-
ferent between remote and non-remote work due to the additional housing expense. When
we estimate  empirically, we also account for sources of possible savings among remote
households, like on vehicle expenses. This framework might also be adjusted to account
for differences in labor supply and leisure time, but we find work hours vary little between
remote and non-remote workers.

We note that this framework is likely most useful for understanding the expansion of re-
mote work rather than as a commentary on the utility levels of remote versus non-remote
households. In particular, we do not observe the counterfactual for households of either
type. This is important because remote employees may be earning a premium relative to
their non-remote option in order to finance additional housing expenses. While our empirical
strategy conditions on Wi , it is possible that remote households are consuming more housing
because their employers pay them more to do so. Assuming the incidence of who pays for
office expenses remains similar, any differences would indicate that the shift to remote work
will require a transfer from employers to workers to compensate for higher housing expenses.


3         Data and Summary Measures of Differences Between
          Remote and Non-Remote Households
We use data from the 2013-2017 1-year waves of the American Community Survey (ACS),
an annual survey of 1% of the population conducted by the Census Bureau. From the ACS,
we primarily use data on remote working status of individuals in the household, household
income, home ownership status, monthly rent, the value of the house, the number of rooms,
the number of children, adult education, and population density.

We define a household as a remote household if it has at least one member that works
                                                                           k
                                                                      k
    6
        The indirect utility function is vk (Pa , W ) = (1 - k )1-k   Pa       W.




                                                          6
remotely. Our measure of an individual's remote working status originates form the IPUMS
variable "TRANWORK", which is based on the question "How did this person usually get
to work LASTWEEK? If this person usually used more than one method of transportation
during the trip, mark (X) the box of the one used for most of the distance." Among the
choices, respondents have the option to choose "Worked at home" and anyone making that
choice is defined as a remote worker.

Our modeling approach requires comparing similar households except for their choices to
work remotely. While households are heterogeneous along a number of dimensions, the most
important one from the model's perspective is the household budget constraint. Budget con-
straints obviously vary with household income, but may also vary with household structure,
as households with slightly older adults or with children may have different savings levels
and propensities to consume out of savings. We deal with many of these issues via controls
or matching: what is crucial is to compare remote and non-remote households with a similar
budget constraint, meaning their income levels are similar today, their expected life-cycle
earnings are similar (meaning we must control for age and education), and they face the
same set of home and goods prices. To approximate the household budget constraint, we
use pre-tax household income and then flexibly control for household structure and local
area to account for different tax regimes. Pre-tax household income is computed based on
the IPUMS variable "HHINCOME", which is defined as "total money income of all house-
hold members age 15+ during the previous year."7 We incorporate household structure by
examining the age of adults, the number of adults, and the number of children. We define
any household member aged 21 or more as an adult and calculate the average adult age
by taking the mean for all adults living in the household. The household (rather than the
nuclear family) is our unit of analysis for this comparison, as multi-generational household
structures may determine dwelling choices.

We also use several measures describing the price and characteristics of each housing unit. For
renters, we use the IPUMS measure for the amount of the household's monthly contractual
rent payment and multiply by 12 to annualize the measure. For home owners, we calculate
home value from the survey question "About how much do you think this house and lot,
apartment, or mobile home (and lot, if owned) would sell for if it were for sale?" To capture
  7
    This amount in turn, equals the sum of all household members' individual incomes, as given by the
individual income variable "INCTOT" and the ACS survey question that populates "INCTOT" is "What
was this person's total income during the PAST 12 MONTHS? Add entries in questions 47a to 47h; subtract
any losses. If net income was a loss, enter the amount and mark (X) the "Loss" box next to the dollar
amount."



                                                  7
dwelling size, we use the number of rooms. Rent per room and value per room are each
calculated by dividing rent and house value amounts by the number of rooms in the house.

To capture differences in non-housing aspects of consumption, we examine vehicles and
time spent working (the complement of leisure). The ACS includes data on the number of
vehicles available, and we capture leisure time as the inverse of hours worked plus time spent
commuting.

We use Public Use Microdata Area (PUMA) and Commuting Zone (CZ) as the main geo-
graphic units of analysis. PUMAs are geographically contiguous units used for dissemination
of Public Use Microdata samples. They are nested within states and for the years 2013-17,
have a minimum population of 100,000. CZs are geographical units that most accurately
reflect the local economy - where people live and work and we use them to identify local
economies for our analysis, along the lines of much of the recent work on spatial differences
across labor markets.8

Table 1 provides summary statistics for the main outcomes and controls, overall and by
household type. The first row is informative for our empirical strategy and displays house-
hold income for different types of households. Average household income is $84, 400 in
the overall sample, yet mean income for remote households is $42, 500 higher than non-
remote households. Households with remote workers are also more likely to be owners than
non-remote households, with 25% of remote households renting versus 34% of non-remote
households.

Given our interest in understanding how the housing needs of remote and non-remote house-
holds differ, we focus on the characteristics of housing to quantify differences in demand for
space. Using rooms as a measure of house size, remote households have 6.89 rooms per house
on average compared to 5.95 rooms for non-remote households, implying a 16% difference
in space. However, this is not an apples-to-apples comparison, as remote households may
live in different areas and face different prices. Later our analysis will compare remote and
non-remote households who face the same consumption opportunities and prices by using
   8
    Commuting zones frequently contain multiple counties, although counties are sometimes contained in
multiple commuting zones. We thus use commuting zones rather than counties because the ACS sampling
frame is based on residence rather than workplace, and we want to capture features of local labor markets
broadly. Sampling weights are constructed accounting for this probabilistic mapping by using the product
of the ACS weights and the PUMA to Commuting Zone mapping. The sum of the resulting weights for
an individual or household, across all the Commuting zones that the individual or household is mapped to,
equals the original ACS sampling weight.


                                                   8
Commuting Zone or PUMA fixed effects. Similar issues plague simple analyses of the share
of income spent on housing, as without adjusting for income differences and prices, remote
households actually spend a lower share of household income (HHI) on rent. Yet when
examining rent per room and the number of rooms, it is clear that remote households on
average are spending more in rent in total, suggesting that accounting for income differences
will be important. Among owners, remote households report average home values that are
$121,000 greater than non-remote households, with part of this difference arising from a
$13,700 average difference in value per room.

The next two rows display demographic information by household type. Remote households
average 0.86 children (household members under 18) compared to 0.67 children for non-
remote households, and mean adult average age in a remote household is 48 compared to
50.6 in non-remote households.

The next row is important to understand that not all remote households are equal, and
may themselves face different constraints. The variable "Share of Mixed Remote HH" is
an indicator that the remote household has at least one adult who is a non-remote worker.
Fifty-six percent of the remote households in our sample are mixed households, where at
least one adult is working outside the home. These households may need to locate closer to
an urban core to accommodate commuting needs, whereas fully remote households may be
able to more freely sort to areas with different amenities or cheaper prices per square foot.

The next two rows examine commuting and vehicle ownership pattersn. Remote house-
holds spend a smaller amount of time commuting per day, with remote households totalling
34 minutes of one-way commute time on average compared to 42 minutes for non-remote
households.9 Surprisingly, remote households have more vehicles, 2.14 compared to 1.84,
likely reflecting income differences, households structure differences, and possibly location
differences.

The next two rows capture potential location differences, defined by characteristics of dif-
ferent local areas. We adopt a classification by Molfino (2020) of whether a census tract is
urban, suburban, or rural. We then aggregate these characteristics to the PUMA level using
  9
    One may have thought that the total commute time among remote households would be less than half of
the non-remote commute time, as 44% of remote households have no commuters. However, remote households
are more likely to have multiple earners who enter the commute time calculation. Remote households are
also less likely to be located in very sparse commuting zones where average commute times are lower. For
more detail, see Figure A.2.



                                                   9
2010 Census Tract to 2010 PUMA relationship file from the Census Bureau. Sixty-eight
percent of remote households live in PUMAs classified as suburban compared to 62 percent
of non-remote households. While remote households are more likely to live in suburbs, they
are less likely to locate in rural areas, with 18% of remote households in rural areas compared
to 24% of non-remote households. Adding the rural and suburban share means that 14%
of remote households were in urban areas prior to the pandemic, which is identical to the
urban share among non-remote households. The overall summary statistics thus suggest re-
mote households sort to the suburbs at the expense of rural areas, yet leave the urban share
untouched. This may reflect some value placed on urban amenities or social opportunities
for those who mostly work alone at home.

The last row of Table 1 shows that remote households actually work fewer hours, but work
hours look more similar (especially for households with above-median incomes) after con-
trolling for characteristics (see Figure A.3).


4    Housing Consumption Differences
It is obvious from Table 1 that remote households differ significantly from non-remote house-
holds - the average remote household earns more, consumes more housing, pays more per
room, commutes less and has more vehicles than the average non-remote household. Com-
parison of household consumption thus may prove difficult because of non-overlap in the
budget constraints faced by the different types of households. The ideal experiment to iso-
late how remote work influences consumption would be to randomly allocate some households
to working remotely and then allow households to make housing choices with that knowledge
in hand.

Of course remote work is not random, but for our purposes we need an approach that
compares the choices households make when facing the same budget constraint, housing
prices, and local consumption opportunities. To do so, we flexibly control for household
income and household structure, which approximates households facing the same budget
constraint. To provide flexibility in the specification, we classify households into deciles
of the household income distribution, and allow for interactions of income decile dummies
with household characteristics. We also let household income vary linearly within decile to
capture differences in budget constraints locally.

To control for the same local prices, we use commuting zone and PUMA fixed effects. Al-

                                              10
though we present several specifications, they are all restricted versions of this general esti-
mating equation:

    yi,c,d,t = 1 RHi,c,d,t + Xi,c,d,t 2 + t + c + d + d HHI3 + d AdultAge4 + i,c,d,t          (2)

where yi,c,d,t is the outcome variable for household i, in commuting zone c, in income decile
d and year t. The main parameter of interest is 1 , the coefficient on RHi,c,d,t , which is a
dummy that takes the value 1 when i contains at least one adult who works remotely. The
matrix Xi,c,d,t is a set of controls that includes fixed effects for household structure (e.g. the
number of children and the total number of household occupants) and may include adult
education.  ,  and  are year, geography (either commuting zone or commuting zone and
PUMA) and income decile fixed effects, respectively. The coefficient 3 on the interaction of
d and household income allows the effect of household income to vary linearly within each
income decile. Finally, 4 allows the effect of income deciles to vary linearly with average
adult age, which may capture lifecycle changes in housing consumption beyond the presence
of children. We subsequently run regressions varying the conditioning set to assess sensitivity
to omitted variables.

Tables 2 contains the main results for various dependent variables that capture housing
expenses and some other aspects of consumption. For analysis of housing expenditures, we
split the sample between renters and owners to avoid confounding ownership and expenditure
differences. Ultimately our results are similar for renters and owners, but evaluating renters
separately is closer to the ideal experiment of allowing each type of household to optimize,
as renters in most places have fewer frictions to changing or adjusting housing compared to
owners.

The first set of regressions examines the log of the household expenditure share on rent,
calculated as the log of annualized rent payments divided by the annual household pre-tax
income. The coefficient estimate of 0.135 in Column 1 indicates that remote households
spend about 13.5 percent more of their income (about 3.5 percentage points) on housing
than non-remote with similar incomes. Column 2 interacts average adult age with income
deciles, yielding a very similar estimate to Column 1. Adding fixed effect for household
structure (number of children and size) does little to change the estimate.

The most substantial change arises from the addition of fixed effects for geography. The
parameter estimate falls to 0.092 with the inclusion of commuting zone fixed effects. The


                                               11
change in the parameter indicates that remote households are actually locating in commuting
zones with more expensive housing compared to non-remote households. At first glance this
is surprising, but Stanton and Tiwari (2020) show that there is an inverted-U shaped pattern
of remote work with respect to average commuting zone wages. Column 5 adds controls for
adult education, and the coefficient remains at 0.71. Adding PUMA fixed effects in Column
6 allows more geographic granularity, allowing for sorting within a commuting zone. The
coefficient indicates that within the same local area and facing the same local prices, remote
households' spend about 7.8 percent more on rent, translating to a housing expenditure
share that is 2.1 percentage points higher at the mean. The last column adds education and
PUMA fixed effects, yielding a coefficient of 0.063.10

While the table examines the log expenditure share on rent, Figure 1 shows how the ex-
penditure share in levels varies across the income distribution. This figure is constructed
from separate regressions for each income decile after controlling for number of children,
household size and commuting zone. Panel A shows that remote households spend a greater
proportion of their income on rent across each decile, with the largest differences for lower
income households. Later when we estimate utility differences between remote and non-
remote households, we use the projected expenditure share for each decile and estimate how
the implied compensation required to keep utility from remote work constant varies across
the household income distribution.

The expenditure share for owners is a bit more difficult conceptually, as ownership is both a
savings and consumption decision. We take several different approaches, all of which yield
qualitatively similar answers to the analysis for renters. The second set of results in Table
2 shows that house values are between 21.5 and 15 percent higher for remote households,
depending on whether geography and education fixed effects are present. We then examine
the log of the expenditure share on flow housing costs, defined as the interest payments on a
30 year mortgage for the full value of the house plus depreciation and maintenance expenses
(computed as home value divided by 40, capturing a 40 year useful life) and reported property
taxes divided by households' pre-tax income. This measure captures something akin to
what a new owner would need to pay in flow housing costs as a share of income. Estimates
range from an 11.7-18 percent greater expenditure share. We also examine actual mortgage,
property tax, and insurance payments as a share of income, which is closer to capturing the
cash outlay on housing. The next row shows these expenditures are between 8 and 11.7
  10
    Table A.2 in the Appendix also allows a comparison between these regression based adjustments and a
nearest-neighbor matching approach.



                                                  12
percent higher for remote households.

Figure 1 Panel B describes how our preferred measure of expenditure shares for owners, the
expenditure share on mortgage payments plus taxes, varies across the income distribution.
We use these expenditure share estimates later when calculating compensation for remote
households.

Regardless of the sample or the approach to estimating expenditures, remote households
spend more of their budget on housing. The next rows of Table 2 shed light on different
explanations for the greater housing expenses. Regressions of the number of rooms in the
household show coefficients of about 0.32 to 0.44 relative to a sample mean of 5.99. Using
the estimates of 0.37 with PUMA fixed effects implies that remote households are living in
houses that are about 6.2% larger than non-remote households. Figure 1 Panel C shows
differences in rooms across the income distribution. The next two sets of regression results
also show that remote households are also spending more in rent per room and living in
houses that have higher value per room, but it is not clear whether these measures capture
housing quality or unobserved size differences, like bigger rooms. Thus the 6.2% increase in
size for remote households is likely a lower bound on housing quantity demand.

To this point we have varied specifications with and without commuting zone and PUMA
fixed effects. Differences in parameters provide a suggestive diagnostic on the extent of
geographic sorting between different locations. The next specifications do more to address
sorting directly. We examine average residual home prices in a PUMA Expensiveness Index
after controlling for dwelling characteristics, to ask whether remote households are sorting to
more or less expensive areas (see Table notes for details on index construction). Regressions
of the PUMA expensiveness index yield positive coefficients on the remote dummy in all
specifications. The coefficient in Column 3 roughly indicates that remote households are
in PUMAs that are 0.068 standard deviations more expensive than the average PUMA in
the United States. This specification does not contain commuting zone fixed effects, so this
estimate is picking up both between commuting zone sorting and sorting within commuting
zone. With commuting zone fixed effects in Column 4, the estimate remains positive and
significant, but falls to 0.04. Comparing these estimates indicates that remote households
are not locating to commuting zones with below average housing costs and they are not
decamping to PUMAs with inexpensive housing within the commuting zones where they
do choose to locate. Figure 1 Panel D shows this relationship over the income distribution.
Unsurprisingly, there is little relationship with log density, as shown in the last sets of results.


                                                13
Finally, why do remote households spend more? It is possible they need to spend less on other
necessities for commuting, like vehicles or that time spent at home and larger dwellings are
generally complementary. The last row of Table 2 examines vehicle ownership, and we find
that on average, remote households own more vehicles unconditionally. After controlling for
commuting zone and PUMA fixed effects, the coefficients turn negative, but they are small
in magnitude. Vehicle expense reductions are thus unlikely to be large enough to explain
increased housing expenses. However, it is possible that higher housing expenses arise from
a time-use complementarity channel. Appendix Table A.3 re-estimates the model but looks
at the effect of having a stay-at-home spouse (rather than a stay-at-home worker). When we
regress rooms per household on the full suite of controls, we find positive coefficients of about
.08 to .115 on the homemaker household dummy. By contrast, the estimates are three-times
as large for the remote household dummy. Because we control for the household budget
constraint and household structure, these differences are not arising because of different
income levels or household composition, yielding support for the notion that extra space is
complementary to the efficacy of working at home rather than space consumption arising
due to general preference heterogeneity.


5     Geographic Sorting
With greater demands for space, will remote work reduce the demand for urban housing
and encourage flight to the suburbs? To examine this question, we focus on the location
choices of remote households. Table 3 displays estimates of three different regressions across
the rows, where the dependent variables are a dummy for a rural PUMA, a dummy for
an urban PUMA, and a dummy for a suburban Puma. By construction, the coefficients
should sum to 0, as these estimates represent share differences for collectively exhaustive
and mutually exclusive categories of places. The estimates are presented separately for fully
remote households versus non-remote households and mixed-remote households, accounting
for the possibility that fully remote households are more flexible in where they choose to
live.

In columns without commuting zone fixed effects, both fully remote and mixed remote house-
holds are about 1.4-2.5 percentage points more likely to be suburban and are between .07
and 3.2 percentage points less likely to be rural. Mixed remote households are a bit less likely
to be in urban PUMAs than fully remote households, possibly suggesting that fully remote
households have a slight relative preference for urban consumption amenities compared to
mixed households. However, much of this sorting appears to be between commuting zone.

                                               14
When we add Commuting Zone fixed effects in Column 4, we find that coefficients fall across
the board. We detect no differences in within-commuting zone locations for fully remote
households: their location choices mirror non-remote households. Within commuting zones,
mixed remote households are about 0.6 percentage points more likely to be suburban than
other households and about 0.5 percentage points less likely to be rural. Because mixed
households make up 56% of all remote households, this suggests a modest correlation be-
tween remote work and suburbanization within commuting zone, but overall evidence for the
importance of sorting by geography is weaker than the evidence suggesting remote house-
holds need more space. We caution that these results from before the pandemic may look
different in the face of an abrupt shock. After the COVID-19 pandemic, a large and per-
sistent increase in the share of work done remotely may change these patterns, as suburban
homes may be more or less readily available to meet the space requirements of an influx of
new remote workers compared to the existing stock of urban dwellings.


6       What Compensation Would Non-Remote Households
        Require to Shift to Remote Work?
Given that remote households must spend more on housing, how much compensation would
they require to offset other consumption losses? This section details estimates of  from
equation (1), the percentage increase in household income required to compensate a non-
remote household moving to remote work for their additional housing expenses. To that
end, we need to estimate the parameters k and differences in housing quantity Hk , for
k  {N, R}. We estimate two s, one using reported household income and one after
adjusting household income for the cost of vehicle ownership. We adjust for the number of
vehicles by multiplying the total vehicles present in a household by the yearly cost of owning
a vehicle11 , and subtract the total from the household income. This latter approach is an
implicit adjustment to income accounting for offsetting expenses by non-remote households.

We perform the estimation for renters and owners separately, then average within each
decile. For renters, we estimate equation (2) with the share of income spent on rent and
rooms per adult as the dependent variables, with the adjusted (unadjusted) income decile
fixed effects. We then calculate the predicted values for both dependent variables using the
regression estimates and then take the weighted mean of the predicted value by income decile
and household type. For owners, we use the share of income spent on mortgage payments,
 11
      We use an approximate annual cost of vehicle ownership as $10, 000



                                                    15
inclusive of property tax and insurance and repeat the process. Appendix Table A.1 displays
the estimates of expenditure shares by income decile.

We find that lower income households would need substantial compensation to move to
remote work. When using reported income in Figure 2 Panel A, households in the lowest
decile of the income distribution require between 13 and 18 percent higher compensation
to engage in remote work. The range in these estimates arises from differences in controls
and whether geography fixed effects are included. Contrary to all other households, top
decile households would move to remote work without any additional compensation. This
is primarily due to these top-decile households spending a lower share of their income on
housing than households in other deciles. When totaling across all households, we find an
average  of 3.8% and a total required compensation dollar amount equal to $23.7 billion if
10% of the non-remote households (10.4 million households) moved to remote work.

Panel B presents the estimates after adjusting for vehicle ownership. Households in the
lowest income decile require between 8 and 12 percent higher compensation to engage in
remote work after adjusting for vehicle ownership differences in this decile. Patterns are
similar (except in the second decile) across most of the income distribution. Totalling yields
an overall estimate of 2.4%, which would mean that a shift of 10.4 million households to
remote work would require $15 billion to keep non-housing consumption at the non-remote
level.

Finally, Table 4 compares the additional cost required to compensate households for remote
work to the potential per-employee savings in commercial office rents across different metro
areas. We take data on commercial rents from JLL and assume that employees have 150
square feet of dedicated office space. We then compare the rent savings to metro-area level
estimates of required compensation estimated via matching metro-by-metro. We caveat that
this is surely an out-of-equilibrium analysis, but we believe it is a telling one nonetheless,
allowing us to benchmark current commercial rental prices against housing compensation
under the current spatial allocation of households. As a result, this analysis likely serves as
a rough estimate of potential office cost savings in the event that there is limited sorting
across geographies, i.e. where most remote households remain in the same commuting zone
as their original offices and where office prices don't fall percipitously because of a large-scale
move to remote work.12
  12
    Large reductions in commercial office rents are likely to occur with a lag due to long-term contracts, but
extreme rental price reductions may mean these estimates overstate potential savings from remote work.



                                                     16
Overall, Table 4 indicates that increased housing expenditures from remote work would offset
about one-third of any savings on office space. Despite having very expensive housing, the
San Francisco Bay Area would still offer the highest savings in office rents, at about $6,000
per worker per year because of San Francisco's extremely high commercial rents. New York
is another interesting case given high rents and home prices. The entire New York metro
area had the third highest commercial rents nationwide as of 2020 but New York ranks sixth
in terms of savings from remote work due to high local housing costs. At a different place in
the distribution, Nashville had the twelfth most expensive office space, but low housing costs
mean the $4,100 per-worker net savings from remote work ranks seventh nationally. Finally,
the areas with the lowest estimated cost savings from remote work are Detroit Michigan and
Fort Worth, Texas, at $2,100 and $1,400 annually.


7    Conclusion
There has been much recent popular discussion about the potential for firms to save office
space costs by allowing remote work. Our analysis shows that a the increased cost of housing
needed to support remote working will offset a significant portion of any savings on commer-
cial real estate from remote work. This is because households with remote workers spend
more of their income on housing to live in larger dwellings to accommodate having a home
office.

Assuming that the incidence of who bears expenses for home office and corporate space is
similar, our findings indicate that nominal cost savings to firms are overstated by about 30%
relative to hybrid remote work where workers stay in the same local areas. Cost savings will
possibly be greater for firms if households are allowed to sort to lower cost areas, but it is
yet to be determined whether frictions to mobility or preferences for places will limit this
reallocation.


References

Barrero, Jose Maria, Nicholas Bloom, and Steven J Davis (2020a). "60 million fewer com-
  muting hours per day: How Americans use time saved by working from home". University
  of Chicago, Becker Friedman Institute for Economics Working Paper 2020-132.
­ (2020b). "Why Working From Home Will Stick". University of Chicago, Becker Friedman
  Institute for Economics Working Paper 2020-174.


                                             17
Bartik, Alexander W et al. (2020). "What jobs are being done at home during the COVID-19
  crisis? Evidence from firm-level surveys".
Baum-Snow, Nathaniel (2007). "Did highways cause suburbanization?" The quarterly journal
  of economics 122.2, pp. 775­805.
Behrens, Kristian, Sergey Kichko, and Jacques-Fran¸  cois Thisse (2021). "Working from home:
  Too much of a good thing?"
Bick, Alexander, Adam Blandin, and Karel Mertens (2020). "Work from home after the
  COVID-19 Outbreak".
Bloom, Nicholas et al. (2015). "Does working from home work? Evidence from a Chinese
  experiment". The Quarterly Journal of Economics 130.1, pp. 165­218.
Brynjolfsson, Erik et al. (2020). "COVID-19 and remote work: an early look at US data".
Choudhury, Prithwiraj, Cirrus Foroughi, and Barbara Zepp Larson (2020). "Work-from-
  anywhere: The productivity effects of geographic flexibility". Academy of Management
  Proceedings. Vol. 2020. 1. Academy of Management Briarcliff Manor, NY 10510, p. 21199.
Dingel, Jonathan I and Brent Neiman (2020). How many jobs can be done at home? Tech.
  rep. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Dorn, David (Spetember 2009). "Essays on Inequality, Spatial Interaction, and the Demand
  for Skills. Dissertation". University of St. Gallen no. 3613.
Gaspar, Jess and Edward L Glaeser (1998). "Information technology and the future of cities".
  Journal of urban economics 43.1, pp. 136­156.
Glaeser, Edward L and Joshua D Gottlieb (2009). "The wealth of cities: Agglomeration
  economies and spatial equilibrium in the United States". Journal of economic literature
  47.4, pp. 983­1028.
Mas, Alexandre and Amanda Pallais (2017). "Valuing alternative work arrangements". Amer-
  ican Economic Review 107.12, pp. 3722­59.
­ (2020). "Alternative work arrangements".
Molfino, Emily (2020). "The Urbanization Perceptions Small Area Index: An Application of
  Machine Learning and Small Area Estimation to Household Survey Data".
Ozimek, Adam (2020). "The future of remote work". Available at SSRN 3638597.
­ (2021). "When Work Goes Remote". Available at SSRN 3777324.
Ramani, Arjun and Nick Bloom (n.d.). "The donut effect: How COVID-19 shapes real estate"
  ().
Rosenthal, Stuart S, William C Strange, et al. (2005). "The geography of entrepreneurship
  in the New York metropolitan area". Federal Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy
  Review 11.2, pp. 29­54.
Ruggles, Steven et al. (2020). "IPUMS USA: Version 10.0 [dataset]".


                                            18
Stanton, Christopher and Pratyush Tiwari (2020). "Remote Work Across Geographies and
  Occupations".




                                        19
Figures and Tables
                            .8                                                                                                          1




                            .6                                                                                                          .8




                                                                                                                       Mortgage Share
               Rent Share




                                                                                                                                        .6
                            .4




                                                                                                                                        .4
                            .2



                                                                                                                                        .2
                            0
                                 1   2   3             4            5          6       7        8        9   10                               1                                2       3       4          5           6       7        8            9       10
                                                           Household Income Deciles                                                                                                                Household Income Deciles

                                                              Non-Remote           Remote                                                                                                              Non-Remote             Remote




                             (a) Expenditure Share on Rent                                                         (b) Expenditure Share on Mortgage +
                                                                                                                   Taxes
          5                                                                                                                                                              .4




                                                                                                                                              PUMA Expensiveness Index
         4.5
                                                                                                                                                                         .2
 Rooms




          4


                                                                                                                                                                          0

         3.5




          3                                                                                                                                                              -.2

                   1             2   3   4         5            6          7       8        9       10                                                                             1       2       3          4           5       6        7            8        9   10
                                             Household Income Deciles                                                                                                                                             Household Income Deciles

                                                Non-Remote              Remote                                                                                                                                       Non-Remote            Remote




                            (c) Rooms Per Household                                                                                          (d) PUMA Housing Expensiveness In-
                                                                                                                                             dex

Figure 1: Housing Consumption Measures Across the Household Income Dis-
tribution
Notes. Estimates of expenditure share on rent for renters, expenditure share on mortgage +
property taxes for owners, rooms per household, and average PUMA expensiveness indices by
household income decile. Household income deciles are calculated using pooled data from 2013-
2017. The PUMA expensiveness index is a measure of residual prices calculated by regressing rent
for renters (and value for owners) on number of rooms, age of structure, number of bedrooms and
number of units in the building, taking the residual, standardising the residual to have mean 0 and
standard deviation 1, and then averaging across ownership status in the PUMA using the sampling
weights. All panels control for number of children, household size and commuting zone. Regressions
to estimate cell averages are weighted using ACS sampling weights.




                                                                                                                  20
                                                      .2                                                                                                                                          .15




      Beta (Difference in HHI To Equalize Utility)




                                                                                                                                                   Beta (Difference in HHI To Equalize Utility)
                                                     .15
                                                                                                                                                                                                   .1


                                                      .1


                                                                                                                                                                                                  .05

                                                     .05



                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                      0

                                                           1   2         3          4       5       6         7            8       9     10                                                             1   2         3          4       5       6         7            8       9     10
                                                                                    Household Income Deciles                                                                                                                     Household Income Deciles

                                                                   No Controls                  Adding Household Size and Num Children                                                                          No Controls                  Adding Household Size and Num Children
                                                                   Adding CZ Fixed Effect       Adding PUMA Fixed Effect                                                                                        Adding CZ Fixed Effect       Adding PUMA Fixed Effect




                                                                   (a) Reported Income                                                                                                                          (b) Adjusted Income



Figure 2: Estimates of Compensation Increase (Beta) Required Offset Utility
Loss Due to Remote Work Housing Expenditure
Notes. Estimates of beta (the premium required to compensate households for remote work) are
on the y-axis and household income deciles are on the x-axis. Calculations are done separately
for renters and owners and then pooled and averaged together by decile. See text for calculation
details. Households are weighted using ACS sampling weights. Reported income is raw income
and adjusted income treats vehicles as a necessity by reducing household income in the budget
constraint by $10,000 times the number of vehicles present.




                                                                                                                                              21
                                     Table 1: Summary Statistics
                                              Overall    Non-Remote       Remote        Difference
             Household Income               84383.84        81917.39    128046.57     -42542.08***
                                           (86402.64)     (83719.68)   (116324.43)        (108.23)
             Rooms per Household                 6.00           5.95          6.89        -0.91***
                                               (2.40)         (2.37)        (2.69)          (0.00)
             Proportion of Renters               0.34           0.34          0.25         0.07***
                                               (0.47)         (0.47)        (0.43)          (0.00)
             Share HHI on Rent                   0.28           0.28          0.26         0.02***
                                               (0.18)         (0.18)        (0.18)          (0.00)
             Share HHI on Mortgage               0.27           0.27          0.25         0.01***
                                               (0.30)         (0.30)        (0.29)          (0.00)
             Rent per Room                    258.93          256.94       308.45        -48.40***
                                             (236.16)       (234.77)      (263.83)          (0.72)
             Value of House                281001.46       272942.53    405968.93    -120640.54***
                                          (371169.74)    (360754.03)   (489243.14)        (485.78)
             Value per Room                 42751.46        41872.65     56378.92     -13689.21***
                                           (60390.73)     (59415.68)    (72531.48)         (77.52)
             Number of Children                  0.68           0.67          0.86        -0.22***
                                               (1.11)         (1.10)        (1.21)          (0.00)
             Average Adult Age                  50.45          50.59         48.02         3.40***
                                              (16.24)        (16.42)       (12.55)          (0.02)
             Share of Mixed Remote HH            0.03           0.00          0.56        -0.55***
                                               (0.17)         (0.00)        (0.50)          (0.00)
             Total HH Commute Time              41.90          42.22         34.10         7.84***
                                              (36.22)        (36.41)       (30.22)          (0.07)
             Vehicles per HH                     1.85           1.84          2.14        -0.36***
                                               (1.07)         (1.06)        (1.08)          (0.00)
             Share Suburban HH                   0.62           0.62          0.68        -0.06***
                                               (0.49)         (0.49)        (0.47)          (0.00)
             Share Rural HH                      0.23           0.24          0.18         0.07***
                                               (0.42)         (0.42)        (0.39)          (0.00)
             Hours per Employed Member          40.09          40.16         39.25         0.52***
                                              (10.34)        (10.17)       (12.31)          (0.02)
             Number of Observations         10943512       10392288        551224
             Implied Population            544222158      515123557      29098601
Notes. Sample includes all households in the ACS 2013-17. HHI is an abbreviation for household
(HH) income. For Rent per Room and Share HHI on Rent, the sample is restricted to only renters,
while the sample is restricted to home owners for Value of House and Value per Room. A household
is classified as remote if it has at least 1 member working from home. Mixed Remote HH are
households that have at least one remote and one non-remote worker. Commute time is one-way
travel time between home and work for all working adults. ACS household sampling weights are
used for all calculations. Standard deviation (standard error in last column) in parentheses.




                                                    22
        Table 2: Regression Results of Housing and Consumption Choices
  Dependent Variable                            (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)
  Log Expend. Share on Rent                  0.1351***   0.1311***   0.1264***   0.0920***    0.0712***    0.0781***    0.0633***
                                             (0.0108)    (0.0109)    (0.0095)     (0.0040)     (0.0041)     (0.0033)     (0.0035)
                                               0.400       0.404       0.411       0.532        0.545        0.566        0.574
  Log House Value                            0.1916***   0.2061***   0.2150***   0.1822***    0.1566***    0.1499***    0.1316***
                                             (0.0071)    (0.0071)    (0.0072)     (0.0036)     (0.0037)     (0.0035)     (0.0035)
                                               0.194       0.202       0.213       0.328        0.334        0.367        0.374
  Log Expend. Share on Flow Housing Costs    0.1645***   0.1770***   0.1806***   0.1576***    0.1355***    0.1335***    0.1172***
                                             (0.0057)    (0.0057)    (0.0059)     (0.0035)     (0.0037)     (0.0035)     (0.0034)
                                               0.165       0.173       0.181       0.258        0.270        0.290        0.298
  Log Expend Share on Mortgage+Taxes         0.1154***   0.1170***   0.1162***   0.1067***    0.0935***    0.0896***    0.0802***
                                             (0.0046)    (0.0047)    (0.0048)     (0.0024)     (0.0025)     (0.0028)     (0.0028)
                                               0.367       0.370       0.380       0.455        0.463        0.478        0.483
  Rooms per Household                        0.4097***   0.4390***   0.3467***   0.3656***    0.3255***    0.3557***    0.3167***
                                             (0.0271)    (0.0268)    (0.0228)     (0.0130)     (0.0119)     (0.0105)     (0.0099)
                                               0.147       0.166       0.225       0.270        0.276        0.298        0.304
  Log Rent per Room                          0.0557***   0.0553***   0.0778***   0.0318***    0.0116**     0.0155***     0.0028
                                             (0.0163)    (0.0161)    (0.0131)     (0.0045)     (0.0048)     (0.0036)     (0.0039)
                                               0.122       0.125       0.178       0.380        0.391        0.431        0.437
  Log Value per Room                         0.1411***   0.1541***   0.1709***   0.1375***    0.1180***    0.1071***    0.0942***
                                             (0.0084)    (0.0084)    (0.0085)     (0.0043)     (0.0043)     (0.0039)     (0.0038)
                                               0.129       0.137       0.149       0.301        0.308        0.344        0.348
  PUMA Expensiveness Index                   0.0595***   0.0592***   0.0677***   0.0406***    0.0327***
                                             (0.0138)    (0.0138)    (0.0135)     (0.0078)     (0.0066)
                                               0.068       0.070       0.086       0.682        0.686
  Log PUMA Density                            0.0304      0.0140      0.0329     -0.0195**    -0.0357***
                                             (0.0260)    (0.0260)    (0.0218)     (0.0096)     (0.0091)
                                               0.013       0.022       0.042       0.645        0.647
  Vehicles per Household                     0.0669***   0.0593***   -0.0169**   -0.0205***   -0.0170***   -0.0148***   -0.0143***
                                             (0.0072)    (0.0080)    (0.0075)     (0.0043)     (0.0043)     (0.0046)     (0.0049)
                                               0.176       0.180       0.366       0.413        0.417        0.443        0.445


  Household Income Decile*Household Income     Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
  Household Income Decile*Age                   No         Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
  Household Structure Control                   No          No         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
  Commuting Zone Fixed Effect                   No          No          No          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
  State & PUMA Fixed Effect                     No          No          No          No           No           Yes          Yes
  Education Fixed Effect                        No          No          No          No           Yes          No           Yes
Notes. Coefficients reported are for the remote household dummy. Dependent variable is displayed
in the first column. The second row in each panel is the standard error and the third row is
the R-squared. PUMA expensiveness is calculated by regressing rent/value (for renters/owners) on
number of rooms, age of structure, number of bedrooms and number of units in the building, taking
the residual, standardising the residual and then averaging across ownership status in the PUMA
using sampling weights. ACS household sampling weights used for all calculations. Standard errors
are clustered by commuting zone. The sample consists of 10,943,512 observations (households) in
total, with 2,427,258 observations for renters and 8,252,533 observations for owners. These numbers
change based on the availability of the particular variable of interest.




                                                              23
                    Table 3: Regression Results of Location Choices
     Dependent Variable                            (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)



                                   Panel A: Only Fully Remote Households

     Rural Dummy                                -0.0187***   -0.0323***   -0.0207***    0.0033      0.0065***
                                                 (0.0049)     (0.0051)     (0.0052)     (0.0020)    (0.0020)
                                                  0.015        0.019        0.030        0.534        0.536
     Urban Dummy                                 -0.0033     0.0103**      0.0062       0.0044       0.0026
                                                 (0.0046)     (0.0048)     (0.0046)     (0.0037)    (0.0034)
                                                  0.005        0.010        0.025        0.215        0.217
     Sub-urban Dummy                            0.0220***    0.0220***    0.0145**      -0.0077*    -0.0091**
                                                 (0.0056)     (0.0062)     (0.0056)     (0.0041)    (0.0037)
                                                  0.018        0.018        0.023        0.287        0.289

                                   Panel B: Only Mixed Remote Households

     Rural Dummy                                -0.0147***    -0.0077*    -0.0215***   -0.0048***    -0.0003
                                                 (0.0043)     (0.0040)     (0.0039)     (0.0016)    (0.0014)
                                                  0.018        0.022        0.031        0.538        0.539
     Urban Dummy                                 -0.0064     -0.0161***    -0.0035      -0.0013      -0.0022
                                                 (0.0053)     (0.0061)     (0.0040)     (0.0027)    (0.0024)
                                                  0.003        0.012        0.024        0.213        0.215
     Sub-urban Dummy                            0.0211***    0.0238***    0.0251***    0.0061**      0.0025
                                                 (0.0046)     (0.0050)     (0.0041)     (0.0030)    (0.0027)
                                                  0.020        0.021        0.025        0.299        0.300


     Household Income Decile*Household Income      Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes
     Household Income Decile*Age                   No           Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes
     Household Structure Control                   No           No           Yes          Yes         Yes
     Commuting Zone Fixed Effect                   No           No           No           Yes         Yes
     Education Fixed Effect                        No           No           No           No          Yes
Notes.    Reported estimates are coefficients on a dummy for remote household. The dependent
variable is displayed in the first column. The second row contains the standard error and the third
row the R-squared. The geographic area of analysis is a PUMA. We use the classification of census
tracts from Molfino (2020) and aggregate to the PUMA level to determine whether each PUMA
is rural, urban and suburban. For the sample in panel A, 15.5% of the households live in urban
areas, 21.7% live in rural areas and the remaining 62.8% live in suburban areas. Of the households
in each type of area, the share of households that are fully remote is 3.1%, 2.8% and 3.2% in
rural, urban and suburban areas, respectively. For the sample in panel B, the share of households
across areas is 14.7%, 23.4% and 61.9% for rural, urban and suburban areas, respectively. Of these
households, 2.8%, 2.3% and 3.5% households are partially remote in rural, urban and suburban
areas, respectively.




                                                     24
       Table 4: Home-Office Real Estate Cost Difference-in-Difference
                     Commuting Zone     Office Cost   Housing Cost Difference     Net
                     San Francisco       8,845.80            2,815.48           6,030.32
                     Austin              7,489.50            2,082.63           5,406.87
                     Seattle-Bellevue    6,838.50            1,480.47           5,358.03
                     Washington, DC      6,394.50            1,492.20           4,902.30
                     Boston              6,609.00            1,724.19           4,884.81
                     New York            7,024.50            2,549.84           4,474.66
                     Nashville           5,073.00             928.15            4,144.85
                     Portland            5,041.50            1,145.40           3,896.10
                     Chicago             5,211.00            1,679.33           3,531.67
                     Los Angeles         6,138.00            2,681.04           3,456.96
                     San Diego           5,737.50            2,378.26           3,359.24
                     Houston             4,795.50            1,545.98           3,249.52
                     Denver              4,780.50            1,542.00           3,238.50
                     Orlando             3,837.00             710.97            3,126.03
                     Miami               6,003.00            2,916.43           3,086.57
                     Raleigh-Durham      4,288.50            1,323.77           2,964.73
                     Atlanta             4,402.50            1,460.08           2,942.42
                     New Jersey          4,356.00            1,416.28           2,939.72
                     Dallas              4,662.00            1,729.20           2,932.80
                     Phoenix             4,284.00            1,379.95           2,904.05
                     Minneapolis         4,411.50            1,594.67           2,816.83
                     San Antonio         4,063.50            1,445.12           2,618.38
                     Pittsburgh          3,903.00            1,368.08           2,534.92
                     Philadelphia        4,294.50            1,768.55           2,525.95
                     Salt Lake City      3,798.00            1,291.73           2,506.27
                     Stamford            5,617.50            3,129.53           2,487.97
                     Charlotte           4,911.00            2,468.06           2,442.94
                     Sacramento          3,943.50            1,703.31           2,240.19
                     Baltimore           3,976.50            1,780.71           2,195.79
                     Detroit             3,033.00             929.64            2,103.36
                     Fort Worth          3,717.00            2,305.64           1,411.36


Notes. The Office Cost column provides an estimate of the cost of providing in-office work-
ing space for each employee, based on marketed office rent per square foot taken from
JLL (https://www.us.jll.com/en/trends-and-insights/research/office-market-statistics-trends) and
scaled by an average per employee space consumption of 150 square feet. The Housing Cost Dif-
ference is an estimate of the dollar value difference in the yearly housing expenditure of remote
households compared to their non-remote counterparts. This is calculated using matching esti-
mates based on the main estimating equation. In particular, households are matched exactly on
ownership status (renters versus owners), household income deciles, bins of average age of adults
in the household, household structure and educational qualifications within each commuting zone.
The last column provides the net difference between in-office versus at home yearly cost.



                                                      25
A                                 Appendix Figures and Tables
                                  50000
    Household Income Adjustment




                                  40000



                                  30000



                                  20000



                                  10000



                                     0
                                          1   2        3     4      5         6   7        8   9   10
                                                             Household Income Deciles

                                                                 Non-Remote       Remote



                                                  Figure A.1: Adjustment for Vehicles
Notes. This figure displays the empirical distribution of adjustments to the household budget
constraints for vehicle expenditures. We assume that each vehicle has a cost to the household of
$10,000, inclusive of driving expenses.




                                                                   26
                34                                                                              34




                30                                                                              30
 Transit Time




                                                                                 Transit Time
                26                                                                              26




                22                                                                              22
                     0   100000   200000        300000   400000   500000                             0        100000     200000        300000    400000   500000
                                   Household Income                                                                       Household Income

                                   Non-Remote   Remote                                                                    Non-Remote   Remote




                           (a) No Controls                                      (b) Adding control for household
                                                                                structure
                34                                                                              34




                30                                                                              30
 Transit Time




                                                                                 Transit Time
                26                                                                              26




                22                                                                              22
                     0   100000   200000        300000   400000   500000                                 0      100000    200000        300000   400000   500000
                                   Household Income                                                                       Household Income

                                   Non-Remote   Remote                                                                    Non-Remote   Remote




                          (c) Adding CZ FE                                                                   (d) Adding PUMA FE



                         Figure A.2: Average Commute Time versus Household Income
Notes. Average Commute time is on the y-axis and household income is on the x-axis. The sample
consists of all the households in the ACS, from 2013 to 2017. Households are weighted using ACS
sampling weights.




                                                                           27
 Average Hours Worked   45                                                                                      45




                                                                                         Average Hours Worked
                        40                                                                                      40




                        35                                                                                      35




                        30                                                                                      30
                             0   100000   200000        300000   400000   500000                                     0        100000     200000        300000    400000   500000
                                           Household Income                                                                               Household Income

                                           Non-Remote   Remote                                                                            Non-Remote   Remote




                                   (a) No Controls                                      (b) Adding control for household
                                                                                        structure
                        45                                                                                      45
 Average Hours Worked




                                                                                         Average Hours Worked
                        40                                                                                      40




                        35                                                                                      35




                        30                                                                                      30
                             0   100000   200000        300000   400000   500000                                         0      100000    200000        300000   400000   500000
                                           Household Income                                                                               Household Income

                                           Non-Remote   Remote                                                                            Non-Remote   Remote




                         (c) Adding Commuting Zone FE                                                                        (d) Adding PUMA FE



                                                   Figure A.3: Hours Worked versus Income
Notes. Average number of hours worked by each employed individual in a household is on the
y-axis and the household income is on the x-axis. The sample consists of all households in the
ACS, from 2013 to 2018. Households are weighted using ACS sampling weights.




                                                                                   28
               Table A.1: Estimates of Housing Expenditure Shares
                                   Unadjusted                          Adjusted
                             Non-Remote     Remote             Non-Remote      Remote
                HHI Decile    (1)   (2)   (1)    (2)            (1)   (2)    (1)    (2)

                                     Panel A: Renters - Share on Rent

                1            0.480    0.481   0.558    0.520   0.512   0.513   0.578   0.546
                2            0.391    0.390   0.465    0.442   0.485   0.485   0.536   0.520
                3            0.320    0.321   0.391    0.382   0.430   0.430   0.487   0.475
                4            0.273    0.273   0.333    0.326   0.374   0.373   0.434   0.419
                5            0.240    0.240   0.292    0.287   0.321   0.321   0.379   0.367
                6            0.214    0.214   0.260    0.259   0.276   0.276   0.329   0.322
                7            0.194    0.194   0.229    0.229   0.240   0.240   0.280   0.276
                8            0.174    0.174   0.201    0.200   0.206   0.205   0.236   0.232
                9            0.156    0.157   0.172    0.173   0.177   0.178   0.194   0.193
                10           0.128    0.126   0.142    0.141   0.140   0.139   0.156   0.153

                                Panel B: Owners - Share on Mortgage

                1            0.618    0.620   0.678    0.659   0.639   0.639   0.682   0.669
                2            0.483    0.483   0.551    0.534   0.547   0.547   0.594   0.584
                3            0.388    0.389   0.461    0.449   0.488   0.489   0.539   0.532
                4            0.321    0.322   0.385    0.376   0.437   0.438   0.492   0.480
                5            0.276    0.276   0.332    0.326   0.387   0.387   0.443   0.430
                6            0.238    0.238   0.275    0.273   0.334   0.335   0.377   0.369
                7            0.211    0.211   0.242    0.239   0.287   0.287   0.324   0.319
                8            0.189    0.189   0.212    0.211   0.246   0.246   0.272   0.270
                9            0.169    0.169   0.184    0.184   0.207   0.208   0.224   0.224
                10           0.135    0.135   0.141    0.140   0.153   0.153   0.158   0.158

Notes. This table displays average projected expenditure shares on housing from regressions by
deciles of household income. Unadjusted deciles use raw household income whereas adjusted deciles
remove $10,000 times the number of vehicles for each household. Regressions are run separately for
renters and owners. Columns numbered 1 have controls for household income, average household
adult age and year, whereas columns numbered 2 additionally control for household structure and
commuting zone fixed effects.




                                                      29
      Table A.2: Regression and Matching Estimates of Housing Choices
    Dependent Variable                               Regression Estimate   Matching Estimate
    Log Expend. Share on Rent                             0.0712***            0.0644***
                                                           (0.0041)             (0.0005)
    Log House Value                                       0.1566***            0.1475***
                                                           (0.0037)             (0.0004)
    Log Expend. Share on Flow Housing Costs               0.1335***            0.1221***
                                                           (0.0037)             (0.0004)
    Log Expend Share on Mortgage+Taxes                    0.0935***            0.0784***
                                                           (0.0025)             (0.0003)
    Rooms per Household                                   0.3255***            0.3269***
                                                           (0.0119)             (0.0010)
    Log Rent per Room                                     0.0116**             0.0103***
                                                           (0.0048)             (0.0006)
    Log Value per Room                                    0.1180***            0.1116***
                                                           (0.0043)             (0.0004)
    PUMA Expensiveness Index                              0.0327***            0.0355***
                                                           (0.0066)             (0.0001)
    Log PUMA Density                                     -0.0357***           -0.1252***
                                                           (0.0091)             (0.0004)
    Vehicles per Household                               -0.0170***           -0.0076***
                                                           (0.0043)             (0.0003)

     Household Income Decile*Household Income               Yes                  Yes
     Household Income Decile*Age                            Yes                  Yes
     Household Structure Control                            Yes                  Yes
     Commuting Zone Fixed Effect                            Yes                  Yes
     Education Fixed Effect                                 Yes                  Yes
Notes. Coefficients reported are for the remote household dummy. Dependent variable is displayed
in the first column. The second row in each panel is the standard error. Households are matched
exactly on commuting zone, ownership status (renters versus owners), household income decile,
bins of average age of adults in the household, household structure and educational qualifications.
The sample for matching estimates consists of 2,252,329 observations (households) in total, with
314,193 observations for renters and 1,600,757 observations for owners.




                                                30
Table A.3: Remote Work versus Stay-at-Home Spouse Effects on Consumption
of Space
   Dependent Variable                            (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)

                                                                   Dependent Variable: Rooms per Household

   Remote Household Dummy                     0.4097***   0.4390***    0.3467***   0.3656***   0.3255***   0.3557***   0.3167***
                                               (0.0271)    (0.0268)     (0.0228)    (0.0130)    (0.0119)    (0.0105)    (0.0099)
                                                 0.147       0.166        0.225       0.270      0.276        0.298       0.304

   Homemaker Household Dummy                  0.3426***   0.1374***    0.1127***   0.0846***   0.1148***   0.0844***   0.1101***
                                               (0.0203)    (0.0125)     (0.0150)    (0.0101)    (0.0097)    (0.0078)    (0.0077)
                                                 0.129       0.137        0.166       0.219      0.228        0.248       0.256

   Household Income Decile*Household Income     Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
   Household Income Decile*Age                  No          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
   Household Structure Control                  No          No           Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
   Commuting Zone Fixed Effect                  No          No           No          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
   State & PUMA Fixed Effect                    No          No           No          No          No          Yes         Yes
   Education Fixed Effect                       No          No           No          No          Yes         No          Yes
Notes. The second row in each panel is the standard error and the third row is the R-squared. For
the bottom panel, the sample consists of married households only. Homemaker Household Dummy
is an indicator that switches on if one of the spouses is either not in the labor force or stays at home
full time. ACS household sampling weights are used for all calculations. The sample consists of
10,943,512 observations (households) in total, with 2,427,258 observations for renters and 8,252,533
observations for owners. These numbers change based on the availability of the particular variable
of interest.




                                                             31
