                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 CULTURE, INSTITUTIONS & THE LONG DIVERGENCE

                                        Alberto Bisin
                                        Jared Rubin
                                        Avner Seror
                                       Thierry Verdier

                                     Working Paper 28488
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28488


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   February 2021




Thanks to participants at the 2019 CEPR Workshop on the Economics of Religion and the 2019
ASREC Conference. All errors are our own The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Alberto Bisin, Jared Rubin, Avner Seror, and Thierry Verdier. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Culture, Institutions & the Long Divergence
Alberto Bisin, Jared Rubin, Avner Seror, and Thierry Verdier
NBER Working Paper No. 28488
February 2021
JEL No. N34,N35,O10,O33,P16,P48

                                           ABSTRACT

Recent theories of the Long Divergence between Middle Eastern and Western European
economies focus on Middle Eastern (over-)reliance on religious legitimacy, use of slave soldiers,
and persistence of restrictive proscriptions of religious (Islamic) law. These theories take as
exogenous the cultural values that complement the prevailing institutions. As a result, they miss
the role of cultural values in either supporting the persistence of or inducing change in the
economic and institutional environment. In this paper, we address these issues by modeling the
joint evolution of institutions and culture. In doing so, we place the various hypotheses of
economic divergence into one, unifying framework. We highlight the role that cultural
transmission plays in reinforcing institutional evolution toward either theocratic or secular states.
We extend the model to shed light on political decentralization and technological change in the
two regions.

Alberto Bisin                                     Avner Seror
Department of Economics                           Aix Marseille School of Economics
New York University                               5 Boulevard Maurice Bourdet
19 West 4th Street, 5th Floor                     13001 Marseille
New York, NY 10012                                France
and NBER                                          avner.seror@univ-amu.fr
alberto.bisin@nyu.edu
                                                  Thierry Verdier
Jared Rubin                                       PSE
Argyros School of Business & Economics            and Ecole des Ponts-Paris Tech
Chapman University                                and PUC-Rio
338 N. Glassell St.                               48 Boulevard Jourdan
Orange, CA 92866                                  75014 Paris, France
jrubin@chapman.edu                                and CEPR
                                                  verdier@pse.ens.fr
    1     Introduction
    Around the year 1000 C.E., the Muslim Middle East was far ahead of Christian Western
    Europe in terms of socio-economic development. By the dawn of the industrial period (circa
    1750), however, the Middle East severely lagged behind along several dimensions, including
    technology, innovation, literacy, wages, and financial development (Bosker, Buringh and
                                                   ¨
    Van Zanden 2013; Kuran 2011; Mokyr 1990; Ozmucur         and Pamuk 2002). In the course of
    the medieval and early modern periods, economic institutions in the Middle East failed to
    keep pace with those of the West. This is what Timur Kuran calls the Long Divergence
    (Kuran 2011).
        Several attempts to explain the Long Divergence have recently been put forward. Kuran
    (2011) highlights the inability of the Muslim world to create or adopt those fundamental
    commercial and financial institutions which were responsible for significant socio-economic
    growth in the West, such as banking, the corporation (and corporate law), and institutions
    supporting impersonal exchange. Kuran (2011) identifies the root cause of Middle East
    stagnation in the religious legal system (Islamic law or Sharia) in governing all human
    activities, including economic activities. He argues that certain aspects of Islamic law,
    such as its inheritance system and partnership law, placed impediments that were difficult
    for economic actors to overcome, especially as the world changed and opportunities for long-
    distance exchange flourished. As Islamic law remained the law of the land in most of the
    Muslim world well into the 19th century, these religious proscriptions retarded the region's
    economic growth. Rubin (2017) stresses the role of the political power conceded to Muslim
    religious authorities due to their ability to provide legitimacy to rulers.1 He argues that
    this power was used to block important socio-economic advancements, a leading example
    being the printing press. In Europe, on the other hand, where the Catholic Church had a
    much weaker legitimating role, novel ideas and reforms spread more quickly (thanks also to
    the printing press), the economic elite developed laws and policies that portend economic



1
    Legitimacy is defined as the degree to which individual citizens believe they have a moral obligation to
    obey the ruler. The study of political legitimacy has a long history in the social sciences. Perhaps most
    famously, Weber (1947) defined political legitimacy as either charismatic, traditional, or legal-rational.
    Our definition follows more closely in the footsteps of the definition of political legitimacy employed by
    Lipset (1959, p. 86): "the capacity of a political system to engender and maintain the belief that existing
    political institutions are the most appropriate or proper ones for the society." For similar definitions of
    political legitimacy, see Levi, Sacks and Tyler (2009), Greif and Tadelis (2010), Rubin (2017), and Greif
    and Rubin (2020).

                                                        1
    success, and long-run economic growth resulted.2 Blaydes and Chaney (2013) concentrate
    on the different role of leadership in the Muslim world and Western Europe. In particular,
    they argue that the relative weakness of Western European rulers, who had to rely on
    feudal institutions for tax collection and military recruitment, led to a balance of power
    more favorable to local (feudal) elites, which turned out to promote economic growth in
    the long run. Muslim sultans, on the other hand, relied much more on centralized power,
    derived in large part due to their access to slave soldiers, to satisfy both fiscal and military
    needs. This limited the political power of economic elites and instead furthered the socio-
    economic power of religious elite.
        Several common themes underlie all these explanations. Fundamentally, economic
    growth in Western Europe and the Middle East is seen as the outcome of the development
    of institutional and technological progress brought about or hindered by the interactions
    between rulers and elites--clerical and secular elites in particular. These explanations have
    taken us far in explaining the reversal of economic fortunes between Western Europe and
    the Middle East. Yet, each of these explanations raises a new set of puzzles. Consider
    first Kuran's explanation of how the persistence of religious proscriptions and the use of
    religious law can slow economic growth. Muslim rulers must have understood this. Why,
    then, did they continue to use Islamic institutions (like courts) that promote inefficiencies?
    The answers to these questions are not obvious from Kuran's framework. Or, consider
    explanations focusing on the role religious legitimacy plays in dampening economic growth
    (Kuru 2019; Platteau 2017; Rubin 2017). Religious legitimacy is only effective if people
    are religious and thus care about what religious authorities dictate. Why then, given that
    religions carry with them economic proscriptions, do people remain religious, and thereby
    yield religious legitimacy effective? Is religiosity and religious identity a cause or a con-
    sequence of institutional arrangements? These questions are left unanswered in theories

2
    Platteau (2017) and Auriol and Platteau (2017) present a related theory of political divergence between the
    Christian and Islamic worlds, stressing the role of the centralization of Christian religious institutions and
    the decentralization of Islamic religious institutions. They argue that this entails that Islamic rulers have to
    co-opt the marginal cleric, leaving out the more radical clerics from the political decision-making process.
    Chaney (2016) makes a related argument, noting that the relative fall of Islamic science coincided with the
    rise of the madrasa system, which was a reflection of the increasing power of the religious establishment
    in politics. Kuru (2019) likewise argues for the importance of the religion-state alliance in determining
    long-run economic and political outcomes in the Middle East. He dates the rise of this alliance to the 11th
    century, when the madrasa system came to prominence. Relatedly, Iyigun (2015) argues that because Islam
    and Christianity are both monotheisms in which there is "one true god", existential (and political) conflict
    was more likely to arise between states following the two religions than between states with polytheistic
    gods.

                                                           2
focusing on legitimacy. Finally, consider the role that slave soldiers played in constraining
Middle Eastern rulers and, on the other hand, the greater constraint placed by the feudal
elite on European rulers (Blaydes and Chaney 2013). The logic of this argument is that
greater unchecked power of Muslim rulers meant they had less incentive to delegate power
to local elites, who could more effectively provide revenue but wanted rights in return. One
question that arises from this logic is that if Muslim rulers were sufficiently powerful, why
should they have been afraid to delegate tax collection to (non-religious) elites? A ruler
with a (near) monopoly on violence should not fear such elites, and he could increase tax
revenue by delegating power to them.
    In this paper we account for these puzzles, while generating new insights, with a styl-
ized model of the joint dynamics of culture and institutions. In doing so, we elucidate
the historical mechanisms which might have contributed to the divergent growth paths of
Western Europe and the Middle East since the late medieval period. The fundamental
abstract dynamics of culture and institutions in the model are the result of three basic
elements, as in Bisin and Verdier (2017). First, institutions represent the relative political
power of different groups in civil society to affect policy decisions, and institutional change
is a mechanism to internalize externalities and other distortions characterizing the equi-
librium. Second, the cultural profile of values and preferences in society evolves according
to socio-economic incentives. Third, interdependence between institutions and culture is
the fundamental factor determining their joint dynamics and their effects on economic
performance.
    The logic of our model is as follows. Legitimacy is an indirect choice of the ruler. She
might want to delegate part of her political power to clerics, obtaining in turn religious
legitimacy through the services provided by clerics to the religious component of civil so-
ciety. These services in turn shape and control civil society's moral beliefs. The ruler,
therefore, by delegating to the clerics and obtaining legitimacy, internalizes an externality
which facilitates her ability to govern civil society. Since this externality operates through
the religious component of civil society, its extent is related to the relative size of this
component, and hence to the religious composition of society. The ruler's incentive to
delegate to religious authorities also depends on the degree to which religious proscriptions
dampen economic activity. Although greater proscriptions decrease the size of the param-




                                              3
    eter space in which a theocratic equilibrium arises, they limit economic development in
    that equilibrium.3
        The socio-economic dynamics of society depend on the complementarity of culture and
    institutions. Institutional change delegating power to the clerics reinforces the incentives of
    religious individuals to transmit their cultural values, increasing their relative share in the
    population. A higher fraction of religious individuals in the population in turn augments
    the political incentives for the ruler to delegate power to clerics to increase legitimacy.
    The resulting joint dynamics of culture and institutions in this society display two types
    of stationary states: a theocratic regime where clerics have strong political power and the
    share of religious individuals in the population is high (in spite of religious proscriptions
    on economic activity); and a secular regime where clerics have little political power and
    the share of religious individuals is low.
        Projecting this general abstract framework into the most prominent accounts of the
    socio-economic dynamics of Western Europe and the Middle East in the period from ap-
    proximately 1000­1800 C.E., we model the socio-economic policy interactions of rulers,
    clerics, and civil society in a religious environment. Our base model accounts for two
    features central in the literature on the long divergence (and the economics of religion
    literature more generally): i) rulers derive legitimacy from the religious elite (Auriol and
    Platteau 2017; Co¸  sgel, Miceli and Rubin 2012; Co¸ sgel and Miceli 2009; Kuru 2019; Lewis
    1974, 2002; Platteau 2017; Rubin 2011, 2017); and ii) religious authorities impose proscrip-
    tions that impinge on economic development (Berman 2000; Carvalho 2013; Iannaccone
    1992; Kuran 2001, 2005, 2011; Seror 2018). In this context, we study whether different
    initial conditions and parameters of the model could generate distinct dynamic growth
    paths, converging to distinct stationary states, interpreted to represent Western Europe
    and the Middle East over the period 1000­1800 C.E. We also study whether the pattern of
    institutional formation and the spread of culture (religious beliefs) implied by the model
    is consistent with stylized facts which identify the histories of the regions in this period.
        We extend the model to account for a third key feature of Middle Eastern and Western
    European political and economic development: constraints on executive power and the de-

3
    Religious proscriptions can have welfare-enhancing features. For instance, Iannaccone (1992) shows how
    seemingly inefficient sacrifice and stigma common among religious groups can serve as a mechanism to
    enhance commitment within the group. For a theoretical treatment of religious proscriptions, see Seror
    (2018). However, these welfare-enhancing features are inherently limited to smaller religious groups, since
    this entails that the non-committed do not join the religious "club." In this paper, we are concerned with
    mainstream religions that do not have this feature.

                                                        4
    centralization of political power (Acemoglu and Robinson 2012, 2019; Acemoglu, Johnson
    and Robinson 2005b; Blaydes and Chaney 2013; Mann 1986; North and Weingast 1989;
    Tilly 1990). We show how a society's political centralization interacts with religious legit-
    imacy and religious proscriptions to determine its long-run economic and political paths.
    While political decentralization can increase tax revenue by placing constraints on exec-
    utive power (Besley and Persson 2009, 2010; Dincecco 2009; Johnson and Koyama 2017;
    North and Weingast 1989), it may come at the cost of undermining the efficacy of religious
    legitimacy. We further extend the model to consider the role of religion and religious legiti-
    macy in innovation and technological change. Our model is consistent with recent theories
    which argue that culture (Davids 2013; Mokyr 1990, 2010, 2016; White 1972, 1978), and
    religious proscriptions in particular (B´
                                            enabou, Ticchi and Vindigni 2015, 2020; Co¸      sgel,
                                                                                  4
    Miceli and Rubin 2012; Squicciarini 2020) can inhibit technological change.
        Our framework not only accounts for the long-run economic divergence between West-
    ern Europe and the Middle East, but it also accounts for the puzzles raised by each of the
    prevailing explanations. People remained religious in the face of religious proscriptions--a
    puzzle raised by the works of Kuran (2011) and Rubin (2017)--because there is feedback
    between religious institutions and cultural evolution. As institutions evolved so that re-
    ligious legitimacy became more important, cultural values spread (optimally) throughout
    the population that were complementary to these institutions. Likewise, the model ex-
    plains why Muslim rulers did not decentralize power to local elites, even though they had
    a near monopoly on violence and should not have feared these elites. Doing so would have
    reduced the power of religious authorities and could have triggered cultural evolution to-
    ward a more secular society. Given the significant legitimating power of Muslim religious
    authorities, this equilibrium was suboptimal from the perspective of Muslim rulers. In
    short, by combining the three prevailing theories in one unifying framework and by intro-
    ducing the interaction between cultural and institutional evolution, our model clarifies the
    logic underlying the primary puzzles raised by the literature while providing many new
    insights.
        The paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2 we lay out the basic model. Section 3 solves
    the model and presents key propositions. Section 4 presents extensions to the model, and
    Section 5 concludes.

4
    In is certainly not the case that religion and religious proscriptions always have a negative impact on
    economic development. See Barro and McCleary (2003) and McCleary and Barro (2019) for an overview
    of the literature and a theory of the positive associations between religion and economic development.

                                                      5
    2     Ruler, clerics, and civil society
    Consider a society populated by there are three types of agents: a ruler, clerics, and civil
    society. Civil society is composed of two types i of citizens: religious individuals (i = Re)
    in proportion q , and secular individuals (i = S ) in proportion 1 - q . Citizens work. Total
    production is qeRe + (1 - q )eS , where ei , i = Re, S is the per capita work effort generated
    by an individual of type i. The ruler lives off taxing civil society at a tax rate  . The tax
    base which the ruler has access to is the total production of citizens: E = qeRe + (1 - q )eS .
    The ruler also builds and maintains religious infrastructures, m, for the clerics to provide
    religious services. The total religious services provided for the society are c m, where c
    is the effort of the (representative) cleric. The building of religious infrastructures has cost
    C (m) that the ruler pays for. On the other hand the clerics pay for the daily maintenance
    costs F (m) of these infrastructures.5
        The fundamental mechanism in the model, which induces a role for legitimacy, is the
    assumption that the provision of religious services facilitates governance and obedience for
    religious individuals. We capture this by assuming that religious individuals, when taxed
                                                       e
    by the ruler, subjectively perceive a tax rate Re    smaller than the actual  chosen by the
    ruler and decreasing in the religious effort of the clerics, c :6

                                              e
                                              Re =  (1 - c ).                                                (1)

    The parameter  represents the efficiency of the "legitimizing" technology of the clerics.
    Likewise,  can be interpreted as the efficiency of religious legitimacy in encouraging com-
    pliance with authority (or, similarly, discouraging tax evasion) (Co¸  sgel and Miceli 2009;
                                                       e
    Greif and Rubin 2020). For secular individuals, S =  .
        On the other hand, religious services have an indirect cost, by imposing proscriptions
    (i.e., regulations and constraints) on individual behavior for both religious and secular
    individuals. We capture this effect by assuming that the cost of individual production



5
  These costs are assumed to be increasing in m and sufficiently convex to satisfy a regularity condition,
  needed to ensure that when religious clerics have a high political weight  in the institutional structure,
  the policy problem associated to institutional design is well behaved, and provides a finite equilibrium
  provision of m.
6
  See Wintrobe (1998) for a model of loyalty to the leader affecting taxation levels (via its affect on tax
  avoidance) and Co¸ sgel and Miceli (2009) for a model specifically focusing on the role of religious legitimacy
  on tax collection.

                                                        6
    effort is
                                          e2
                                           i
                     c(c )(ei ), with (ei ) =and c(c ) = 1 + c , i = Re, S.               (2)
                                          2
    The parameter  > 0 represents the degree of restrictiveness of religious prescriptions on
    economic activities.
       The ruler has utility
                                   Ur (m) =  E - C (m) .

    Clerics derive utility c m from religious services, at effort cost (c ). The utility of the
    clerics therefore is
                               Uc (m, c ) = m · c - (c ) - F (m).

    Finally, the utility of individuals in civil society is

                               Ui (ei ) = ei (1 - ie ) - c(c )(ei ), i = Re, S.

    increasing and convex in their argument. We assume the cost functions C (.), F (.) and (.)
    are increasing and convex in their argument.7 We denote  ¯ the maximum feasible tax rate
    which the government can impose.
        The model captures the key parameters of two of the three prevailing theories of the
    "Long Divergence": religious legitimacy () and religious proscriptions (). In Section 4.1,
    we will extend the model to account for the third theory: constraints on executive power
    (Blaydes and Chaney 2013). In what follows, we analyze how these parameters affect
    equilibrium outcomes and the joint dynamics of culture and institutions.


    3     Equilibrium and dynamics
    We study equilibrium in the society we have outlined in the previous section. We also
    study the joint dynamics of cultural values and institutions in this society, which we will
    define precisely and operationally.
        At any time t society reaches an equilibrium of a game between the ruler, clerics,
    and civil society. At equilibrium, (we postulate that) policy is chosen to maximize a
    social welfare function which weights the political power of the ruler, the clerics, and
    the civil society. The policy choice and the choices of the (representative) cleric and the
7
    We also assume that F (m) < C (m) for all m > 0 i.e., that the marginal cost of infrastructure maintenance
    is smaller than the marginal cost of building infrastructures.

                                                        7
    (representative) member of each type of civil society are taken non-cooperatively with
    respect to each other. This is to model a policy choice environment which is plagued
    by lack of commitment, whereby the policy maker is not allowed to pick the policy in
    advance of the choices of the economic agents. Formally, the societal equilibrium is a Nash
    equilibrium of the simultaneous game between agents and the policy maker.
       Institutional change is modeled as the outcome of commitment mechanism which, by
    delegating power across political groups in society, can affect future policies chosen to
    maximize social welfare (see Bisin and Verdier 2017). Cultural dynamics are modeled as
    purposeful inter-generational transmission through parental socialization and imitation of
    society at large (Bisin and Verdier 2001, 2017).


    3.1    Equilibrium
    The policy choice is the amount of religious infrastructures m. It is collectively chosen to
    maximize the social welfare function W , which encodes the relative power of the groups
                                                                1 8
    as weights. The relative power of the ruler is fixed (to 2    ). The power of the clerics and
    of civil society is, respectively, 2
                                         and 1-
                                              2
                                                
                                                 . The social welfare function to be maximized by
    the choice of policy m is then:

                   1                      1-
                W = Ur (m) + Uc (m, c ) +    [qURe (eRe ) + (1 - q )US (eS )] .                          (3)
                   2        2              2

    The ruler, clerics, and citizens choose, respectively,  , c , and ei , i = Re, S to maximize
    their utility.
       The policy choice m, and the choices of  , c , and ei , i = Re, S , constitute a Nash
    equilibrium, denoted { (), m(), c (), eS (), eRe ()}.9 At equilibrium, the optimal tax
    rate  () is equal to its maximum possible value  . As the ruler has a higher political
    weight that the citizens, taxation is fully extractive. In order to simplify notation, we write
     instead of    ¯ =  () in the rest of the paper. The comparative statics at equilibrium are
    summarized in the following Lemma.


8
  This is just for simplicity and concreteness. All that is needed is that the ruler has a large enough power
  with respect to the other members of society.
9
  The equilibrium is fully characterized in the Appendix. Since there is a complementarity between the
  provision of the religious good m and the investments of the clerics in religious infrastructures c , the
  uniqueness of the equilibrium is not guaranteed. Under mild conditions, however, the equilibrium is
  uniquely determined.

                                                      8
Lemma 1 Religious infrastructures: The optimal investment in religious infrastruc-
tures, m(), and the optimal effort of the clerics, c (), are increasing in  and independent
from  and .

    When the weight of the clerics in social choice increases, so does the marginal benefits
of provisioning the religious infrastructure m. In turn, the clerics increase their own effort
in provisioning religious services c (). Since the weight of the clerics in social choice is 2
                                                                                               ,
both c () and m() increase with .
    In the model, clerics do not derive utility from imposing proscriptions on economic
activity nor from legitimizing the ruler. Hence, the investment in religious infrastructure
m() and the provision of the religious services c () are independent from  and .

Lemma 2 Labor effort: The effort of secular individuals eS () is decreasing in  and 
                                                                - )
and is independent from . On the other hand, as long as   (1        , the effort of religious
individuals eRe () is increasing in  and , and is decreasing in .

    When the efficiency of the clerics to legitimize the ruler  increases, so does the effort of
religious individuals who subjectively perceive a lower tax rate. By contrast, the efficiency
of the legitimizing technology has no effect on the effort of secular individuals. An increase
in the degree of restrictiveness of religious proscriptions, , leads to lower efforts from both
the religious and secular individuals, as harsher proscriptions decrease individuals' labor
productivity.
    The political weight of the clerics affects the labor efforts through c (), the equilibrium
effort of the clerics. While more effort from the clerics c () makes secular individuals
reduce their own labor effort--through costly regulations and prohibitions --when  
(1- )
   
       , clerics have the opposite effect on the labor effort of religious individuals eRe . This
is because when clerics provide more effort, the religious individuals perceive a lower tax
rate. Despite the costly religious regulation, they increase their effort in the face of higher
investments in religious infrastructures. In order to make this key difference between secular
and religious individuals stark, we make the following Assumption:

                       (1- )
Assumption 1             
                             .

   We denote the tax base as E () = qeRe () + (1 - q )eS (). From the two previous
Lemmas, we deduce the following result:


                                               9
     Lemma 3 Tax base: The tax base is increasing in q and , and is decreasing in . It
                                      - )
     increases with  as long as q  (1
                                    
                                          .

         While religious infrastructures increase the scope of religious proscriptions, they also
     positively affect the effort of the religious individuals under Assumption 1. Hence, when
     religious individuals are sufficiently numerous, the latter effect dominates, and the tax base
     E () increases with the effort of the clerics c (), so it increases with . Similarly, since
      positively affects the labor effort of religious individuals, it also positively affects the
     tax base. Religious proscriptions  negatively affect the tax base, as they decrease labor
     efforts. The tax base increases with the fraction of religious q , who provide greater effort
     than their secular counterparts.


     3.2     Institutional Dynamics
     Institutional change at each time t is represented by the choice of the relative power to be
     delegated to clerics and civil society in the future; that is, the choice of t+1 from the point
     of view of the social welfare function with weight t .10 More formally, at any time t, given
     institutions t , future institutions t+1 are designed as the solution to:

           1             t
       max Ur (m(t+1 )) + Uc (m(t+1 ), c (t+1 ))+
       t+1 2             2
                                   1 - t
                                          [qt URe (eRe (t+1 )) + (1 - qt )US (eS (t+1 ))] . (4)
                                       2

         Institutional change operates as a commitment mechanism by delegation which internal-
     izes two externalities that are not taken into account by individual decisions in equilibrium.
     The first one relates to the fact that the provision of religious infrastructure m grants legit-
     imacy to the ruler by reducing the subjectively perceived tax rate for religious individuals.
     The second is the fact that it also has a depressing effect on labor productivity. Hence,
     more provision of the religious good m not only affects the utility of the clerics, but also
     feeds back into the utility of both the ruler and the citizens. Solving the optimization
     problem (4), we obtain the following result:
10
     We assume that institutional design is myopic. That is, institutions are designed for the future as if
     they would never be designed anew in the future. This implies that an institutional structure does not
     internalize institutional "slippery slopes," whereby moving to a different structure of decision rights may
     in turn trigger subsequent institutional changes leading to undesirable outcomes from the point of view of
     the initial structure. See Bisin and Verdier (2017) for a discussion of how this issue can be accounted in
     the model.

                                                         10
     Proposition 1 The optimization problem (4) admits a unique solution t+1  [0, 1]. The
     solution is characterized by a threshold q (t )  [0, 1] such that,

                                t+1 > t (resp. ), if qt > q (t )(resp. ).

     Furthermore, the threshold q (t ) is decreasing in  and increasing in .

         The uniqueness result follows from the convexity of the optimization problem. Whether
     more power is delegated to the clerics over time depends on the fraction of religious in-
     dividuals qt . If the religious are sufficiently numerous, then a larger weight to the clerics
     t+1 > t increases their effort c (t+1 ). This in turn increases both the utility of the ruler
     Ur --who benefits from a larger tax base (Lemma 3)--and the total welfare of the citizens
     qt URe +(1 - qt )US . Civil society can also benefit from higher effort from the clerics--despite
     religious proscriptions--as religious individuals are better off when they perceive a lower
     tax rate.
         Relative to the comparative static results, when the strength of religious proscriptions 
     increases, so does the cost for the ruler of using religious legitimacy as a means of extracting
     resources from the population. The parameter space over which t increases shrinks as q
     increases. On the other hand, when clerics are efficient at legitimizing the ruler, i.e. when
      increases, then delegating power to the clerics is more beneficial and q decreases.


     3.3     Cultural dynamics
     Cultural dynamics are modeled as purposeful inter-generational transmission (Bisin and
     Verdier 2001, 2017), through parental socialization and imitation of society at large. Direct
     vertical socialization to the parent's trait i  {Re, S } occurs with probability di . If a
     child from a family with trait i is not directly socialized, which occurs with probability
     1 - di , he/she is horizontally/obliquely socialized by picking the trait of a role model chosen
     randomly in the population.11 The probability Pij that a child in group i is socialized to
     trait j writes as:
                                           Pii = di + (1 - di )qi
                                                                                                  (5)
                                           Pij = (1 - di )qj ;
11
     See Bisin and Verdier (2011) for a survey of the economic literature on cultural transmission. Vertical,
     horizontal, and oblique transmission are the core mechanisms in the dual-inheritance theory of cultural
     evolution. For more, see Cavalli-Sforza and Feldman (1981), Boyd and Richerson (1985), and Henrich
     (2015).

                                                       11
with qRe = q and qS = 1 - q . We assume that the probability of direct socialization di is
the solution of a parental socialization problem in which: a) parents are paternalistic (i.e.,
imperfectly altuistic) and have a bias for children sharing their own cultural trait, b) such
paternalistic bias writes as Vi (t ) = Vii (t ) - Vij (t ), where Vij (t ) = Ui (ej (t )) is the
utility perceived by a type i parent of having a type j child, for i, j  {Re, S } and j = i, c)
parents of type i  {Re, S } have socialization costs that are increasing and convex in di ,
d) religious infrastructures mt may act as complementary inputs to the transmission effort
dRe of religious families in the socialization of children to the religious trait.
    As shown in the appendix, in such a set-up, the dynamics of the proportion of the
population with the religious trait is characterized by the following "cultural replicator"
dynamics:
                               qt+1 - qt = qt (1 - qt ){d      
                                                         Re - dS }.                          (6)

where d Re = DRe [(1 - qt )VRe (t ), m(t )] is the equilibrium socialization effort of a reli-
gious parent, and an increasing function both in (1 - qt )VRe (t ) and m(t ). Similarly
dS = DS [qt VS (t )] is the equilibrium socialization effort of a secular parent, and an
increasing function of qt VS (t ). In equation (6), the term

          D(qt , t ) = d      
                        Re - dS = DRe [(1 - qt )VRe (t ), m(t )] - DS [qt VS (t )]


can be interpreted as the relative "cultural fitness" of the religious trait in the population.
This term is frequency dependent (i.e., it depends on the state of the population qt ). It
is also affected by the institutional environment t , as this variable interacts with the
process of parental cultural transmission both through paternalistic motivations Vi (t ),
and through the provision of religious infrastructures mt = m(t ) as a complementary
input to religious family socialization. We deduce the following result:

Proposition 2 There exists a threshold q  (t ) such that

                         qt+1 < qt (resp. ) if qt > q  (t )(resp. ).

Furthermore, the threshold q  (t ) is increasing in  and t and decreasing in .

    Because the process of cultural transmission (5) is characterized by cultural substitution
between vertical and oblique transmission, the relative "cultural fitness" of the religious
trait D(qt , t ) is decreasing in the frequency qt of religious individuals in the population

                                              12
     (Bisin and Verdier 2001). Consequently, the proportion q  (t ) such that D(q  (t ), t ) = 0
     is the unique attractor of the cultural dynamics in (6). When the fraction of religious
     individuals qt is above (resp. below) q  (t ), then it decreases (resp. increases) in order to
     converge in the direction of q  (t ).
         The dependence of the threshold q  (t ) on the institutional environment t and com-
     parative statics on the parameters  and  depends on how the relative "cultural fitness"
     D(qt , t ) of the religious trait is affected by changes in such features.
         An increase in the political weight of the clerics t affects cultural transmission in two
     ways, through its effect on socialization incentives VRe (t ) and VS (t ) and through its
     effect on religious infrastructures, m = m(t ). On the one hand, an increase in t promotes
                                                                                      e
     the clerics' effort c (t ) and consequently leads to a lower perceived tax rate Re by religious
     individuals. The labor effort choice of religious and secular individuals is therefore further
     apart and, consequently, the incentives of parents to socialize their children to their own
     cultural trait, VRe (t ) and VS (t ), are larger in both groups.12 However when the
     socialization effort of religious parents is more sensitive to these incentives than the effort
     of secular parents, the religious trait is relatively more successfully transmitted than the
     secular trait, and D(qt , t ) is shifted up with an increase in t . On the other hand, an
     increase in t also increases the amount of religious infrastructures m = m(t ). When such
     infrastructures enter as complementary inputs in the socialization process of the religious
     trait, then again religious parents tend to socialize more intensively than secular ones when
     m increases. The religious trait has consequently higher cultural fitness than the secular
     trait and again D(qt , t ) is shifted up with t . In either situation, the diffusion of the
     religious trait is favored by an increase in t , and q  (t ) becomes larger.
         A change in the other parameters  and  affects the relative cultural fitness of the
     religious trait only through their induced changes on the paternalistic motives VRe (t )
     and VS (t ). For instance, a higher efficiency of the clerics  tends to widen the gap
     between the optimal work effort of a religious individual compared to that of a secular
     individual. As a consequence, an increase in  shifts up both VRe (t ) and VS (t ).
     As mentioned above, when religious parents are more sensitive to paternalistic motives
     than secular parents, these shifts lead religious parents to socialize more intensively than
     secular parents, and religious values are passed from generation to generation with a higher
     intensity. This results in a higher value of q  (t ). Conversely, a higher value of religious
12
     Given the quadratic specification of the utility function Ui (ei ), and substituting the optimal labor efforts
                                                                            ( c (t ))2
     in the utility of the citizens, one finds that Vre (t ) = Vs (t ) = 2(1+  c (t )) , which is increasing in t .


                                                          13
proscriptions  dampens the impact of work effort on economic outcomes. Consequently,
behavioral differences induced by cultural traits are less relevant from a utility point of
view. This in turn reduces the paternalistic motives VRe (t ) and VS (t ) of religious
and secular parents. The effect of a change in proscriptions  on cultural evolution is then
qualitatively the opposite of that of a change in .


3.4    Joint dynamics of culture and institutions
Under the conditions of Propositions 1 and 2, we can represent the joint cultural and
institutional dynamics in the phase diagram of Figure 1. The black line represents the
threshold of the institutional dynamics q (t ). The dotted line represents the threshold
q  () associated with the cultural dynamics. The arrows in Figure 1 depict the joint
dynamics of culture and institutions, given our results in Propositions 1 and 2.

                    Figure 1: Joint Dynamics of Culture and Institutions

              (t)
                                                                 A
                1



                               q (t )                        q  (t )
                                              I




                                                           III
                        II




                                             IV




                        B                                              1 q (t)




                                            14
    The joint dynamics of culture and institutions in this society display two steady states.
The first could be characterized as a theocratic regime represented by point A in Figure 1,
where the ruler is legitimized by religion, the clerics have significant political power ( is
high), taxation is high (the tax rate  is maximal and the tax base E is high), and the share
of religious individuals in civil society is high (q is high). The second steady state, point B
in Figure 1, could be characterized as a secular regime where the ruler is not legitimized
by religion, clerics have little political power ( is zero), taxation is limited (the tax rate
 is maximal but the tax base E is small), and civil society is secular (q is small). Two
mechanisms characterize the dynamics.

Complementarity. In regions I and IV of Figure 1, the ruler's option to rely on religious
legitimacy to increase tax capacity induces a fundamental complementarity of the dynam-
ics of culture and institutions. Committing to an institutional set-up delegating power
to the clerics reinforces the incentives of the religious individuals to transmit their values
inter-generationally. In turn, a predominance of religious individuals in civil society aug-
ments political incentives to commit and change the institutional set-up so as to empower
the clerics. Complementarity operates to produce dynamics converging to the theocratic
regime, as represented by point A in Figure 1 or to the secular regime, as represented by
point B .

Transitory paths. In regions II and III of Figure 1, the dynamics are not characterized
by a complementarity. In region II, for example, religious individuals are insufficiently nu-
merous and t decreases over time. At the same time, religious values grow: as the religious
trait is not widespread, religious individuals invest more in direct socialization (Bisin and
Verdier 2001). Depending on the speed of institutional change relative to cultural change,
the joint dynamics can either reach region I or region IV. Region II is a transitory path
to the theocratic equilibrium when the religious population grows fast despite the political
weight of the clerics decreasing over time. In this case, religious individuals become suffi-
ciently numerous at some point that the course of institutional change is reversed, and the
political power of religious clerics starts to grow after a transitory period.
    In region III, religious individuals are sufficiently numerous for the political power of
the religious clerics to increase over time. But the religious population is too large, so
secular individuals invest more in direct socialization. Again, depending on the speed
of institutional change relative to cultural change, either region I or region IV could be
reached by the joint dynamics. If the religious population decreases faster than religious

                                              15
institutions grow, we can expect the joint dynamics to reach region IV. In this case, the
religious population becomes so low after a transitory period that the political weight of
the clerics decreases over time and equilibrium B is reached in the long-run.

Proposition 3 Joint dynamics of culture and institutions: The likelihood of reach-
ing the theocratic equilibrium is increasing in religious legitimacy  and decreasing in the
level of religious proscriptions .

    Proposition 3 combines the results established in our analysis of the institutional
and cultural dynamics (Propositions 1 and 2). A higher efficiency of the clerics --by
definition--decreases the subjectively perceived tax rate of the religious. As a conse-
quence, religious parents have a higher willingness to transmit their cultural values inter-
generationally. At the same time, clerics become more important in the institutional
apparatus, as they increase social welfare by (i) lowering the perceived cost of effort and
(ii) increasing the rents extracted by the ruler. Therefore, the complementarity between
the spread of religious values and institutional changes delegating power to the clerics is
reinforced when  is higher.
    At the opposite end, when religious proscriptions  increase, the cost for the ruler from
using religious legitimacy as a means of extraction increases. The threshold q (t ) also
increases. Similarly, more religious proscriptions makes the religious trait less resilient,
as the threshold q  (t ) associated with the cultural dynamics decreases. This explains
why the complementarity between the spread of religious values and institutional changes
delegating power to the clerics is weakened.


3.5    The historical stylized pattern
In the historical context we study--Western Europe and the Middle East over the period
1000­1800--the literature has proposed three key differences between the regions. Our
model, so far, can account for two of these three differences. The first is that Muslim
religious authorities had greater capacity to legitimate (i.e., higher ) than their Christian
counterparts. This was due to the environment in which the religions were born. Chris-
tianity was born in the Roman Empire and was in no position to legitimate the emperor.
Early Christian doctrine is reflective of the low legitimating capacity of Christianity (Feld-
man 1997; Rubin 2011). For instance, Jesus famously said "Render unto Caesar the things
which are Caesar's, and unto God the things that are God's" (Matthew 22:21). Meanwhile,

                                             16
     Islam formed conterminously with expanding empire, and there are numerous important
     Islamic dictates specifying the righteousness of following leaders who act in accordance
     with Islam (Hallaq 2005; Rubin 2011, 2017). Although early Islamic rulers claimed to have
     religious authority vested in themselves (Crone and Hinds 1986), after the religious estab-
     lishment consolidated in the ninth century (Co¸  sgel, Miceli and Ahmed 2009), and certainly
     after the rise of the madrasa system in the 11th century (Kuru 2019), religious authorities
     were the primary agents capable of determining whether rulers acted in accordance with
     Islam.
          Second, economically-inhibitive religious proscriptions existed in both Christianity and
     Islam, but were more pervasive and persisted for much longer in the latter (i.e.,  is higher
     in Islam). For instance, Kuran (2005, 2011) cites how Islamic law regarding partnerships
     and inheritance combined to discourage long-lived or large business ventures. Partnerships
     would be split among numerous heirs upon the death of any partner, any of whom could
     dissolve the enterprise. Another well-known set of proscriptions are those related to usury,
     which existed in both Islam and Christianity, but persisted for much longer in the former
     (Noonan 1957; Rubin 2011, 2017). More generally, Islamic law covers numerous aspects of
     commercial life, but it was formulated in the first few centuries of Islam. While Islamic law
     did change over time to address economic exigencies, this change was slower than changes
     that occurred to secular law in Europe (Berman 1983; Hallaq 1984, 2005).
          Our model describes how differences in these two key parameters,  and , may have af-
     fected the institutional, cultural, and economic trajectories of the Middle East and Western
     Europe. These parameters affect the dynamics induced by the complementarity of culture,
     q , and institutions, . In one equilibrium, which as Proposition 3 states may arise from
     high  or low , the dynamics are characterized by the reinforcement over time of religious
     legitimacy, power of the clerics, and diffusion of religion in civil society. In the historical
     context we are interested in, this was roughly the situation in Western Europe following the
     fall of the Roman Empire. The Germanic "follower kingdoms" were not initially ruled by
     Christians, although the Roman population had largely become Christianized in the fourth
     and fifth centuries. This provided strong incentive for Germanic rulers to either convert to
     Christianity or promote Christianity.13 In other words, rulers seeking legitimacy in a high
     q environment chose to employ religious legitimacy as a key component of their right to
     rule (even if  was not as high as it was in the Islamic Middle East).

13
     One of the most important cases is the conversion of the Frankish king Clovis (r. 481­509), who employed
     Christianity to legitimize his Frankish expansion into new territory (Tierney 1970, Rubin 2017, pp. 62­63).

                                                         17
     The "high q , high " equilibrium characterized Western Europe until the 11th cen-
tury, when the re-birth of commerce gave rise to independent cities and increased tensions
between the religious and secular elite (Angelucci, Meraglia and Voigtl¨    ander 2020; Rubin
2011). The rebirth of commerce entailed that religious proscriptions ( in our model), such
as the ban on usury, were more economically harmful. In the absence of widespread trade
prior to the Commercial Revolution, such proscriptions had little dampening effect on the
economy. Yet, they became increasingly harmful as trade flourished (Rubin 2011). The
increase in  combined with the relatively low  of Christian religious authorities encour-
aged rulers to break with the Church as a key means of legitimation. The most important
event in this break was the Investiture Controversy (1075­1122), a conflict between various
secular rulers and the papacy over the role of the former in religious affairs. The Investiture
Controversy culminated in European rulers seeking alternative justifications for their rule
(i.e., lowering ) (Tierney 1988, pp. 33­95). They found these alternative justifications
in the universities, where leading scholars provided justification for secular rule based on
Aristotelian thought, while others helped codify various branches of secular law such as
merchant law, feudal law, and manorial law (Berman 1983; Cantoni and Yuchtman 2014;
Hollenbach and Pierskalla 2020). Indeed, Blaydes, Grimmer and McQueen (2018) find that
it was precisely in this period that European political advice texts began to de-emphasize
religious appeals. As a whole, these events helped place much of Western Europe on a path
towards the more "secular" equilibrium described in our model, in which there is little role
for religious authorities in legitimating political rule, with more political power resting in
civil society.
     The complementarity between culture and institutions was exacerbated by the Refor-
mation, which further decreased the political power of the clerical elites. In England, Greif
and Rubin (2020) find that following the Reformation, the political power of religious au-
thorities dropped significantly and the law (as formed in Parliament) became a key source
of royal legitimacy. In Germany, Cantoni, Dittmar and Yuchtman (2018) find that, fol-
lowing the Reformation, there was a massive reallocation of resources and education from
religious to secular purposes. In other words, where the Reformation undermined the po-
litical power of the Church (i.e., lowered ), less cultural capital was invested in religious
pursuits.
     In the Muslim Middle East, a "high q , high " equilibrium emerged a few centuries
after the initial spread of Islam and persisted (with ebbs and flows) until the present day.
Islam spread quickly, reaching Spain in the west and the Indian subcontinent in the east

                                              18
     within its first century. The "Islamic world" was not thoroughly Muslim for a century
     or two after the initial spread of Islam (i.e., it had low q ), and it first spread along trade
     routes before spreading into other Muslim-controlled territory (Michalopoulos, Naghavi and
     Prarolo 2016, 2018). After the first Caliphate (632­661), whose rulers were companions
     of the Prophet Muhammad, the Sunni successor empires (the Umayyad Empire (661­750)
     and the Abbasid empire (750­1258)) employed Islamic religious authorities to legitimate
     rule, provide jurisprudence, and administer imperial rule.
         In the context of our model, these early empires were in region II of Figure 1: they had
     relatively high  but low q . In this region, either a secular or theocratic equilibrium can
     arise in the long run, depending on the relative speeds of institutional and cultural change.
     In the historical context, institutional change away from a strong clerical class was slow
     to arise. The reason was that, despite the initially low q , religious authorities provided
     stability and essential services. After the religious establishment consolidated in the eighth
     and ninth centuries, they were able to provide legitimacy by providing judgments and new
     interpretations of law that supported the state (Hallaq 2005; Rubin 2017). Over time,
     the Muslim population grew (i.e., q increased), and the religious elite were also able to
     provide legitimacy by associating the ruler's name with piety. As a result, a "theocratic
     equilibrium" emerged in the long run.
         Two examples from two different periods and regions highlight the reinforcement of
     Muslim institutions and culture in a "high q , high " world. First, Chaney (2013) finds
     that Egyptian religious authorities were more secure in their rule (e.g., higher ) when the
     Nile flooded or there was a drought. This is precisely when a ruler would most need religious
     legitimacy, both because the tax base would be lower and because there was a greater threat
     of revolt. Moreover, this was a period of increasing Islamization of the Egyptian population
     (i.e., q was increasing). Saleh (2018) finds evidence of massive conversions of lower socio-
     economic status Copts into Islam: by 1200, Muslims were 80% of the Egyptian population,
     and by 1500 they were over 90% of the population.14 Combined, these two studies reveal a
     "high q , high " equilibrium, with cultural and institutional forces reinforcing each other.
         A second example comes from the Arab provinces of the Ottoman Empire, where the
     population had largely converted to Islam centuries prior to Ottoman expansion (i.e., q
     was high). In the late 15th century, the Ottomans brought the religious establishment into
     the state, establishing the office of the Grand Mufti (chief religious jurist). This gave the

14
     Saleh (2018) argues that negative selection among Copts was due to the poll tax that non-Muslims had to
     pay; those that could not afford it simply converted to Islam.

                                                       19
Ottomans significant power to formulate controversial decisions in a manner consistent with
Islam (Imber 1997). Meanwhile, the reinforcement of institutions and culture strengthened
after the Ottomans conquered the Egyptian Mamluk Empire (in 1517) and took control
over Mecca and Medina, the two holy cities of Islam. This further enhanced the capacity
of clerics to confer legitimacy by associating the ruler with Islamic piety (e.g., mentioning
the name of the legitimate ruler in each Friday sermon or supporting obedience to the ruler
in judicial rulings) (Hallaq 2005, ch. 8). Thus, the high level of religious legitimacy ()
provided by Muslim clerics resulted in a "high q , high " equilibrium for much of Ottoman
history.
    Hence, our model squares two of the leading theories of the "Long Divergence." It sug-
gests that the diverging long-run paths of these economies of the two regions--"high q , high
" in the Middle East and "low q , low " in Western Europe--were in part a result of the
relatively high efficacy of religious legitimacy () in the Islamic world. This meant that the
two regions had different responses to religious proscriptions (). In Western Europe, once
commerce revived in the 11th and 12th centuries, religious proscriptions were sufficiently
economically damaging to push society on the path that ultimately resulted in a low q , low
 equilibrium. On the other hand, in the Islamic world such religious proscriptions may
have been even more economically damaging at the time, given that the Islamic world was
ahead of Europe. However, the relatively high  in Middle Eastern societies meant that a
high q , high  equilibrium persisted in spite of the relatively high religious proscriptions
() of Islam. These insights therefore unify Kuran's theory emphasizing religious proscrip-
tions with theories emphasizing religious legitimacy (Kuru 2019; Platteau 2017; Rubin
2017). Kuran's theory is not just that religious proscriptions existed in Islamic law, but
that they persisted for so long after they were useful. Meanwhile, an emphasis on religious
proscriptions reveals why legitimating arrangements changed over time (in Europe). More
importantly, it sheds light on why the relative economic stagnation of the Middle East
occurred in spite of the welfare-enhancing properties of religious legitimacy.
    So far, our model does not account for the third major theory of the long divergence:
Middle Eastern rulers had more unconstrained power relative to other elites. Blaydes and
Chaney (2013) ascribe the relatively greater power of Middle Eastern rulers to their access
to slave soldiers, which gave rulers access to coercive power without ceding political power.
Meanwhile, weaker European rulers had greater incentive to negotiate with their economic
(i.e., feudal) elites for revenue and military power, since they had little capacity to rule
otherwise (Duby 1982). Throughout Europe, rulers also ceded power to urban burghers,

                                             20
who had relative freedom from imperial rule (Angelucci, Meraglia and Voigtl¨    ander 2020;
Mann 1986; Putnam, Leonardi and Nanetti 1994; Schulz 2020). More generally, this meant
that Muslim rulers had less constraint on their power, which a large literature suggests
is harmful for economic growth (Acemoglu and Robinson 2012; Acemoglu, Johnson and
Robinson 2005b; North and Weingast 1989; North, Wallis and Weingast 2009; van Zanden,
Buringh and Bosker 2012). Our model does not permit the ruler to share power with other
elites that may constrain her, so it cannot speak to the conditions under which this occurs
in a high q , high  environment. In the next section, we extend the model to consider how
political decentralization interacts with the various parameters of importance in our model
(namely,  and ).


4     Extensions
In this section we extend and enrich the model by considering the emergence of political
decentralization and technological progress. This will allow us to read more clearly the
historical evidence through the theoretical implications of our model.


4.1    Religious legitimacy and political decentralization
Pre-modern states tended to have little fiscal capacity or capacity to provide law and order
to regions far away from the capital. Administrative capacity tended to be quite weak
in most parts of the world, meaning that rulers could not easily implement their desired
policies (Gonz´ alez de Lara, Greif and Jha 2008; Greif 2008; Ma and Rubin 2019). As such,
there was a limit to the potential tax revenue available to rulers that was well below the
optima on a Laffer curve (Besley and Persson 2009, 2010; Dincecco 2009; Johnson and
Koyama 2017). This issue is (implicitly) central to the framework proposed by Blaydes
and Chaney (2013). Without the capacity to collect revenue on their own, pre-modern
rulers had to delegate tax collection to powerful people. Such powerful people could deter
tax evasion via force and more easily assess just how much taxable surplus an individual or
community had. The degree to which rulers had to delegate depended on their own power
vis-`
    a-vis other elites. According to Blaydes and Chaney (2013), Muslim rulers had to
delegate less because they had access to slave soldiers. This meant they did not need local
elites for military service or, oftentimes, tax collection. Meanwhile, the feudal arrangement



                                             21
     in medieval Europe was such that local taxes were collected by powerful people and in
     return rulers received military service and, occasionally, tax revenue.
         In this section, we model the interactions between rulers and powerful elites. We
     consider a modified version of the previous model where political power is divided between
     three groups: the ruler, religious clerics, and a secular elite (i.e., feudal lords, parliament,
     or the military). We study the conditions under which the ruler decentralizes political
     institutions by sharing political power with the secular elite, who has the capacity to
     collect taxes.
         We treat the secular elites as representatives of the citizenry. In terms of the distribution
     of power between groups, we assign the "ruling coalition" the combined weight of the ruler
     and the secular elites, 12
                                + 1-2
                                      
                                        = 1-   2
                                                 , in social welfare. This is similar to the baseline
     model, with the citizenry being replaced by the secular elites. In other words, if the ruler
     and the secular elites are the "ruling coalition" (as in North, Wallis and Weingast 2009),
     then 1 -  2
                 is the total weight of the coalition. The clerics have weight   2
                                                                                    and citizens have
     no political power, that is, zero weight.15
         The secular elite enforces tax compliance and it shares with the ruler the proceeds of
     tax collection. The share of the tax revenues accruing to the ruler vis-a-vis the secular
     elites is   [0, 1]. As a simple illustration, a regime where  = 1 can be interpreted as a
     theocracy, while  = 0 is a dictatorship when  = 1, and a republic when  = 0, as the
     ruler does not benefit from tax revenues. We denote l  [0, l ] the enforcement effort of
                                               2
     the secular elites, with l > 0. Let µ 2l , µ > 0, be a quadratic cost associated with this
     effort. The utility of the secular elites can be expressed as:
                                                                                2
                                                                               l
                                   Ul (m, l ) = (1 -  )[ E - C (m)] - µ           .                           (7)
                                                                               2

         Consider now the utility of the ruler. We assume the ruler faces a cost l when letting
     the secular elite enforce tax compliance l . For instance, medieval European rulers provided
     feudal lords with lands to administer. Tax enforcement was accompanied with the hiring
     and building up of a force of violence by these lords. These elements suggest that the more
     the ruler cedes to lords the power of tax enforcement, the larger is the military power of the
     lords, which may eventually be turned against the ruler herself. The cost l is a simple
     way to capture such threats. We maintain the assumption that the maintenance cost of
15
     This is a simplification to reduce the dimensionality of the dynamics of institutions while expanding the
     qualitative features of the narrative of the interactions between ruler, clerics, and citizens we analyzed in
     Section 3.

                                                          22
     religious infrastructures paid by the clerics is F (m). The utility of the ruler is then

                                        Ur (m) =  ( E - C (m)) - l ;

     and the utility of the clerics is

                                       Uc (m, c ) = mc - F (m) -  (c ).

        We assume that citizens do not necessarily comply with tax collection. Let (l ) be
     a measure of the capacity of tax enforcement on the part of the elites and c an (inverse)
     measure of the capacity of individuals to evade taxes; so that an individual who does not
     comply with tax collection faces an expected tax rate c (l ). Specifically, we assume that
      (l ) in increasing in l and c is drawn from a uniform distribution on a segment [0, c],
     with c > 0.16 The productivity of citizens is 1+1 c
                                                          , with  being religious proscriptions.
     The utility of an individual belonging to type i  {Re, S } with an evasion capacity c is
     then:
                                   1-i
                                  1+c
                                           if the individual complies, and
                          Ui =    1-c (l )                                                   (8)
                                   1+c
                                           otherwise,
     with Re =  (1 - c ) and S =  .

     Equilibrium: At any time t, society reaches an equilibrium of the game between the
     ruler, clerics, secular elite, and civil society. The religious infrastructures m are collectively
     chosen to maximize social welfare:

                                                                   
                                  1-        [Ur (m) + Ul (m, l )] + Uc (m, c )).                              (9)
                                       2                           2

     The clerics and the secular elite choose, respectively, c and l . We denote {m(), c (), l (,  )}
     the equilibrium. Solving the equilibrium, we obtain the following results:

     Lemma 4 Religious infrastructures: The optimal investments in religious infrastruc-
     tures m() and the optimal effort of the clerics c () are increasing in , and independent
     from  , , and .
16
     For analytical convenience, we assume (l ) = 1-0    l ; so that 0  (0, 1) is the enforcement level when
     the secular elites are not providing an effort (l = 0). For simplicity, we also assume that the maximum
     enforcement level that the secular elite can undertake l is less than 1 - 0 , so that (l ) always lies in the
     interval [ 0 , 1].

                                                          23
Lemma 5 Tax Enforcement: The optimal enforcement effort of the secular elite l (,  )
is decreasing in  , , q ,  and .

    Lemma 4 is similar to Lemma 1 in the previous model and has the same intuition.
Lemma 5 highlights several results. First, when the ruler receives a larger share of the
tax revenues  , the secular elite invests less in enforcing tax collection. Second, since
individuals subjectively perceive a lower tax rate when clerics provide more effort, they
also comply more with taxation, reducing the need for the secular elite to supply their
own enforcement effort. Additionally, more effort from the clerics implies more religious
proscriptions, which depress citizens' labor productivity, and decreases the proceeds of the
tax collection. This also decreases the effort provided by the secular elite in enforcing the
tax collection. Hence for both reasons, the clerics' legitimizing effort c , and the secular
elite tax enforcement effort l are strategic substitutes with respect to building up the tax
base of society. Consequently, given that clerics provide more effort when they are more
powerful (i.e. when  is higher), the secular elite is conversely less willing to enforce the
tax collection in such a case: (i.e l (,  ) decreases with ).
    The same intuition explains both the effect of a higher frequency q of religious individ-
uals and of more efficient clerics  on the effort of the secular elite l . Finally, when the
religious proscriptions  get stronger, then the proceeds of the tax collection are reduced,
so the secular elite also provides less tax enforcement effort.

Institutional Dynamics. We may now extend the main model with regards to the
structure of political weights across society. The ruler can delegate power to the clerics 
and also constrain herself to share more revenues with the secular elites by decreasing her
own fraction  of fiscal revenues.
    Institutional change internalizes two types of externalities that are not taken into ac-
count by equilibrium individual decisions. First, as in the previous model, the religious
provision m grants legitimacy to the ruler by reducing the subjectively perceived tax rate
of religious individuals, while at the same time depressing labor productivity because of
religious proscriptions. Second, institutions now also respond to the externality implied
by the enforcement effort l of the secular elite on the fiscal revenue received by the ruler.
By committing to share the proceeds of the tax collection, the ruler can indirectly induce
a higher fiscal capacity for his own benefit.




                                             24
    Hence, given the current institutional structure (t , t ), future institutions (t+1 , t+1 )
are designed as the solution to:

                   t
    max       1-       [Ur (m(t+1 ), l (t+1 , t+1 )) + Ul (m(t+1 ), l (t+1 , t+1 ))] +        (10)
   t+1 ,t+1        2
                                                             t
                                                               Uc (m(t+1 ), c (t+1 );
                                                             2

with {m(t+1 ), c (t+1 ), l (t+1 , t+1 )} denoting the equilibrium of period t, as evaluated
under an institutional set-up (t+1 , t+1 ). Solving this optimization problem, we deduce
the following results which characterize the institutional dynamics:

Proposition 4 When C (m) and F (m) are sufficiently convex, the optimization problem
(10) admits a unique solution (t+1 , t+1 )  [0, 1]2 and:

 There exists a threshold q d (t )  [0, 1] such that if qt > q d (t ), then t+1 > t . Otherwise,
     t+1  t . Moreover q d (t ) is decreasing in t .

                          ~d (t , t )  [0, 1] with q
 There exists a threshold q                        ~d (t , 1) = 1 such that if qt > q  ~d (t , t ),
     then t+1 > t . Otherwise, t+1  t . Morever the threshold q        ~d (t , t ) is decreasing
     in t and increasing in t .


   The uniqueness result follows from the convexity and the separability of the two di-
mensions of the optimization problem (10). As before, whether the ruler delegates more
power to clerics over time depends on the fraction of religious individuals qt . If the religious
are sufficiently numerous, then more weight to the clerics t+1 > t increases their effort
c (t+1 ). This will increase the utility of the ruler, who benefits from a larger tax base
(Lemma 4). Second, when the religious are sufficiently numerous, the political weight of
the secular elite relative to the ruler tends to decrease, t+1 > t . As the ruler becomes
more reliant on religious legitimacy to raise revenues, he also faces weaker incentives to
delegate power to the secular elite and to build fiscal capacity.

Cultural Dynamics. As before, cultural evolution is driven by some process of inter-
generational transmission emanating from paternalistic parents and oblique social role
models. The formal features of the cultural dynamics need, however, to be amended to
the new specification of citizens' preferences and the fact that parents now internalize
that their children will have their own evasion capacity c. Again one may compute the

                                                25
     paternalistic motives VRe and VS to transmit the religious and the secular trait in this
     context. As shown in the appendix, due to the quadratic specification of the expected
     payoff functions, these simply write as function of the state variables , , q such that
     VS = VRe = V (, , q ).17 The dynamics of the frequency of the religious trait is again
     characterized by the following "cultural replicator" dynamics:

                                      qt+1 - qt = qt (1 - qt )D(qt , t , t ).                              (11)

     where again

              D(t , t , qt ) = d      
                                Re - dS

                              = DRe [(1 - qt )V (t , t , qt ), m(t )] - DS [qt V (t , t , qt )]

     is the relative "cultural fitness" of the religious trait in the population, and in general
     depends now on the three state variables , , q. When the cultural substituability between
     vertical and oblique transmission is strong enough, the relative "cultural fitness" of the
     religious trait D(t , t , qt ) is decreasing in the frequency qt of religious individuals in the
     population and we deduce the following result:

     Proposition 5 With strong enough cultural substitution between vertical and horizontal
                                                             
     cultural transmission, there exists a unique threshold qd (t , t ) such that

                                                          
                              qt+1 < qt (resp. ) if qt > qd (t , t ) (resp. ) .


                                     
         As before, the threshold qd  (t , t ) is the unique attractor of the cultural dynamics (11).
     Hence, when the fraction of religious individuals qt is above (resp. below) the threshold
      
     qd (t , t ), it tends to decrease (resp. increase).

     Joint Dynamics.          The joint dynamics of culture and institutions in this society are
     now three dimensional: the two institutional parameters t , t and the cultural component
     qt , evolve jointly, as characterized in Propositions 4 and 5. A full characterization of
     this dynamic system is difficult. Still one can get some insights on the forces behind the

17
     Because the equilibrium tax collection effort l (, , q ) of the secular elite enters into the paternalistic
     motives, we may note that V (, , q ) now also depends on q and is actually an increasing function of q
     (see the appendix).

                                                         26
                                                                                    
joint dynamics by investigating how the thresholds q d (t ), q     ~d (t , t ) and qd (t , t ) that
characterize respectively the dynamics of t , t and qt are themselves affected by these
state variables.
    As in the benchmark model, there is again a fundamental complementarity between
the dynamics of culture and institutions. To see that, note first that because q d (t ) is
decreasing in t , from Proposition 4, the political weight of the religious clerics t keeps
increasing (resp. decreasing) over time as soon as it is above (resp. below) a threshold
(qt ) defined by q d () = qt . A strong (resp. weak) clerics' institutional representation is
reinforced (resp. weakened) over time. This feature creates a force towards an institutional
steady state characterized by a theocratic institutional regime with  = 1, or on the contrary
a secular institutional regime with  = 0. Also, given that the threshold (qt ) is decreasing
in qt , the reinforcing dynamics for the theocratic institutional regime are facilitated (resp.
weakened) when the religious (resp. secular) trait is already well disseminated in society.
                                        
    Conversely, from Proposition 5, qd   (t , t ) is increasing in the institutional weight t of
the clerics. As before, a theocratic institutional regime with a high value of t stimulates
more religious infrastructures and reinforces the incentive of religious individuals to pass
their values inter-generationally. Religious values are more widely diffused within a theo-
cratic institutional regime, while secular values widely prevail under an secular institutional
regime.
    With respect to the dynamics of political centralization t , Proposition 4 reveals that
t is more likely to increase as qt and t become larger. Indeed, as the threshold q        ~d (t , t )
is increasing in t and t , the condition for t+1 - t  0 rewrites as t  d (t , qt ) with
d (t , qt ) increasing both in t and qt . This feature underlines a force for the system to
                                                                               
move in the direction of a steady state level of political centralization d     that is increasing
both in the level of institutional power  of the clerics, and the extent q of religious values
prevailing in the society. The more theocratic the state and the more diffused the religious
values in the population, the larger the religious legitimacy enjoyed by the ruler, and the
lower the need to empower the secular elite for fiscal consolidation.
    Qualitatively, the previous discussion indicates that the joint dynamics of culture and
institutions entails to the possibility of two steady states. The first is a theocratic regime
with political centralization, where the ruler has a strong say on fiscal revenues ( is high)
and is legitimized by religion, while the clerics have significant political power ( = 1).
Fiscal capacity is low, as the secular elite have minimal incentives to enforce tax collection.
The share of religious individuals in civil society is also high (q is high). The second steady

                                                 27
state is a secular regime with political decentralization. The ruler is fiscally weak while
the secular elite is strong ( is low). The clerics have little political power ( = 0), while
fiscal capacity is high given that secular elites have now strong incentives to enforce tax
collection. At the same time, the share of religious individuals is low (q is low).
    In the appendix, we show that the previous discussion can be made analytically more
                                                                       
precise in the case where the threshold of the cultural dynamics qd     (t , t ) does not depend
on t . The dynamics of t and qt are then decoupled from the dynamics of t and follow
the same pattern as in the benchmark model. Depending on the initial conditions (0 , q0 ),
                                                                                       
(t , qt ) converge towards a theocratic regime (1, qd  (1)) or a secular regime (0, qd  (0)) . As-
sociated with these dynamics, political centralization then converges towards strong state
                                                                                               
centralization with 1    = d (1, qd (1)), or weak state centralization 0   = d (0, qd (0)) < 1  .
    As in the benchmark model, a ruler's option to rely on religious legitimacy induces a
fundamental complementarity between the dynamics of culture and institutions. When a
ruler relies more on religious legitimacy to raise revenues, she also faces increasingly lower
incentives to delegate power to the secular elite and to consolidate fiscal capacity. As she
becomes fiscally stronger relative to the secular elite, she also commits to an institutional
set-up delegating more power to the clerics, leading to an increased diffusion of religious
values in the society. In turn, the predominance of religious individuals augments the
political incentives to bias the institutional structure towards both the clerics and the
ruler. This dynamic complementarity between institutions and culture then operates to
produce a process converging towards a theocratic regime with political centralization.
    Alternatively, when a ruler relies less on religious legitimacy to raise revenues, she
also faces stronger incentives to delegate power to the secular elite, who consequently
consolidates fiscal capacity. As the ruler becomes more reliant on her secular elite to collect
taxes, she accordingly faces lower incentives to commit to an institutional set-up where
religious clerics are powerful. Both the political weight of the clerics and the value of passing
religious values inter-generationally decrease. A lower predominance of religious individuals
in society and a lower legitimacy to raise taxes directly further augments the political
incentives to consolidate fiscal capacity by empowering the secular elite. Eventually, the
joint dynamics of culture and institutions converge towards a secular regime with political
decentralization.




                                               28
4.2    The historical stylized pattern
This extension allows us to unify the three main theories of the "long divergence." It takes
seriously the idea that rulers can be constrained by other powerful elites in society and
searches for the conditions under which this is likely to happen. Importantly, it does so
in the context of the previously-established framework in which religious legitimacy and
religious proscriptions play a role in determining the joint evolution of institutions and
culture. But how do our findings accord with the historical record?
    We first consider the relationship between constraint on executive power and fiscal
capacity. This relationship is central to the extension proposed in Section 4.1. There is a
large literature claiming that states in which fiscal capacity and the "power of the purse" are
held by groups outside of the central executive are able to collect more taxes due to greater
constraints on executive power (Besley and Persson 2009; Dincecco 2009; Karaman and
Pamuk 2013; Ma and Rubin 2019; North and Weingast 1989; Stasavage 2011). Our model
adds additional insight to this literature by shedding light on the process through which
political decentralization, as we define it, engenders cultural change (i.e., secularization)
that reinforces the state's fiscal capacity. One of our primary insights is that rulers will only
decentralize political authority when the returns from religious legitimacy (via taxation)
are sufficiently low. This in turn triggers cultural change to a more secular society. On
the contrary, when society is religious, the returns from religious legitimacy may be high
even when religious proscriptions impinge on productive effort. In this case, culture and
institutions evolve in tandem and society becomes more religious over time.
    Section 4.1 highlights multiple reasons why European political institutions became de-
centralized in the medieval period. First, following the fall of the Western Roman Empire,
European rulers had relatively little fiscal power relative to other elites. In the terms of
our model, their initial level of  was low. This also follows from the framework of Blaydes
and Chaney (2013). They argue that European rulers were weak relative to other elites
because they lacked access to independent sources of military power, unlike Muslim rulers
who could employ slave soldiers.
    However, as we noted in the introduction, an explanation relying solely on executive
constraint leaves a major question unanswered. If Muslim rulers were so strong relative
to other elites, why should they have feared decentralizing some of their power to those
"secular" elites, which could have yielded more tax revenue? Even as late as the early
modern period, Ottoman tax collection was notoriously low (Karaman and Pamuk 2013).


                                               29
Why did the Ottomans not give more power to local notables, who would have almost
certainly had more capacity to collect taxes? These elites should not have been a threat
to Muslim rulers. After all, rulers had slave soldiers and local elites did not.
    Our model provides insights which help solve this puzzle. It suggests that the ruler's
fiscal power relative to other elites ( ) interacted with the greater legitimating capacity
of Muslim religious authorities. Muslim rulers failed to decentralize political power not
because they feared that other elites would become too strong. They did so because
political decentralization would result in a weakening of the efficacy of religious legitimacy.
Granting more power to secular authorities would have encouraged a cultural shift to a
more secular state, yielding religious legitimacy less effective. Given the relative efficacy
of religious legitimacy, this would not have been an optimal strategy for a Muslim ruler.
This was exacerbated by access to slave soldiers, which gave the ruler more initial power
vis-`
    a-vis other elites. However, as the model indicates, this relative power ( ) changes
endogenously over time. Just because Muslim rulers had an initial advantage vis-`          a-vis
other elites does not explain why it persisted.
    The opposite is true in medieval Western Europe. The relatively weak initial power of
rulers combined with the relatively weak legitimating capacity of the Church incentivized
rulers to decentralize political power. This ultimately yielded a secular equilibrium in
which religious proscriptions barely impinged on economic development.
    These insights accord well with the historical record. Medieval European economic and
political institutions were highly decentralized. Feudal institutions gave lords--secular
lords as well as powerful bishops--great power over their local domains, and in return the
lords provided military service and tax revenue to their sovereign (Duby 1982). Over the
course of the late medieval and early modern periods, parliaments became the primary
institution which bargained with European rulers (Angelucci, Meraglia and Voigtl¨         ander
2020; van Zanden, Buringh and Bosker 2012). Parliaments allowed the economic elite to
gain representation at the political bargaining table, and they generally included three
classes: the landed nobility, powerful churchmen, and commercial/urban elite. As warfare
became more expensive, European rulers ceded more to these elites, who could provide
them with revenue (Gennaioli and Voth 2015; North and Weingast 1989; Stasavage 2011;
Tilly 1990). Ultimately, parliaments became the main tool for constraining rulers, which




                                              30
     resulted in a massive increase in fiscal capacity (Dincecco 2009; Johnson and Koyama 2017;
     North and Weingast 1989; Tilly 1990; van Zanden, Buringh and Bosker 2012).18
         On the other hand, in the Middle East economic power was decentralized but political
     power remained centralized (Co¸  sgel and Miceli 2005; Karaman and Pamuk 2013; Karaman
     2009). For instance, at the height of Ottoman power in the fifteenth and early sixteenth
     centuries, the sultan derived two-thirds to three-quarters of his revenue through the timar
     system, a military lease contract whereby the provincial cavalry collected agricultural taxes
     directly from the peasantry as remuneration for their military services to the state (Co¸ sgel
     and Miceli 2005). The timar system was similar to the tax collection system of feudal
     Europe, where local feudal lords controlled revenues in return for military service. However,
     a key difference between the two is that European feudal lords also had political power:
     their families ruled over their domains for generations, providing local law and order,
     collecting taxes, and representing them in parliament. On the other hand, timar holders
     were rotated every few years precisely so that they would not acquire local political power.
     All political power remained vested in the sultan and key religious authorities, not timar
     holders. Unlike European elites, who were ultimately able to constrain their rulers and
     receive concessions in return for revenue, timar holders never organized collectively in
     any manner close to resembling a parliament, and Ottoman rulers remained relatively
     unconstrained (Balla and Johnson 2009). As a result, the economic elite rarely had any real
     political power in the Ottoman Empire (Pamuk 2004a,b). Meanwhile, religious legitimacy
     remained important (as discussed in Section 3.5), and as a result sultans ceded purview
     over commercial law to religious authorities, and the associated proscriptions dampening
     economic activity lasted for centuries (Kuran 2011).
         This raises the question of how our model squares with Kuran's insight that religious
     proscriptions associated with Islamic law held the Middle East back. After all, Proposition
     3 indicates that greater proscriptions should lead to a secular equilibrium, not a theocratic
     one. While it is true that in some instances, religious proscriptions can strengthen religious
     groups (Abramitzky 2008; Berman 2000; Iannaccone 1992), such groups are naturally lim-
     ited in size. The mechanisms highlighted in this literature only work for smaller religious
     groups like Protestant sects or ultra-Orthodox Jews. These are not the groups of interest
     in the present paper. We are interested in the cultural evolution of the primary religious
     groups in medieval Western Europe and the Middle East. So how do we square the fact that

18
     For a theoretical treatment of the rise of state capacity and its affect on economic development, see
     Acemoglu (2005) and Besley and Persson (2009, 2010).

                                                      31
Islam had relatively strong religious proscriptions with the fact that the historical equilib-
rium was closer to what we describe as "theocratic"? This is where the other parameters
in the model have bite. Our model suggests that the "theocratic" equilibrium that arose
in the Islamic world arose in spite of the relatively strong religious proscriptions imposed
by Islam. In a society with high , religious proscriptions were not enough to discourage
rulers from decentralizing power and thereby weaken religious authorities. This insight is
therefore consistent with Kuran, who focuses both on the religious proscriptions placed
by Islamic law and their persistence over time. Once the theocratic equilibrium became
established, religious proscriptions dampened economic activity in numerous unforeseeable
ways, as Kuran shows in great detail.


4.3    Religious legitimacy and technological progress
Another key driver of the long divergence was technological and scientific progress. Al-
though this is not highlighted in the central theories of the long divergence, nearly every
theory of Britain's (and eventually Europe's) industrialization asks why Britain eventually
became technologically advanced beginning of the 18th century (Allen 2009; Mokyr 1990,
2010, 2016). Although not all the advancements of the Industrial Revolution were science
based--especially inventions in textile production--many were (including the quintessen-
tial invention of the period, the steam engine). That Europe pulled ahead in science and
technology is puzzling: for centuries after the spread of Islam, the Middle East had a mas-
sive technological and scientific lead on Western Europe (Chaney 2016). What happened?
Why was there a reversal of scientific and technological fortunes between the two regions?
    In this section, we extend the model to account for the role that the various parameters
of interest may have played in encouraging or stifling technological and scientific develop-
ment. Again, we consider an extended version of the model where political power is divided
between religious clerics and the ruler. But now, we study the conditions under which the
ruler allows an endogenous technological choice or adoption of a scientific innovation, which
is a source of productivity gains although it sometimes erodes religious beliefs.
    More specifically, let the ruler and the clerics have political weights 1 -  and  respec-
tively. Let also the parameter I  [0, max ] denote a variable characterizing the technology
level of the society. We assume that the level of technology is a policy instrument bounded
by the knowledge frontier max .




                                             32
         Given that our primary interest is to study the joint evolution of culture, institutions,
     and technology, we consider again a reduced form model where the political power of the
     citizens is set to zero. The ruler now has utility

                                             Ur =  E - C (m);

     and religious clerics have utility

                                   Uc (m, c ) = mc - F (m) -  (c ).

         We now consider religious legitimacy as a function of technology. Specifically, the
     religious legitimacy of the ruler, (I ) = 0 - kI , is a decreasing function of the level
     of technology I .19 In other words, adoption of innovative and sophisticated technologies
     erodes traditional religious beliefs where the ruler is seen as legitimate. This can be inherent
     to the process of innovative or scientific discoveries, which question the relationship between
     people and the natural world (B´  enabou, Ticchi and Vindigni 2020; Mokyr 1990; Squicciarini
            20
     2020). Finally, we assume that labor productivity is proportional to the technology level:
     a = I .
         As in the previous section, citizens do not necessarily comply with tax collection and
     differ in their (inverse) evasion capacity c. We fix now the taxation enforcement measure
     to 0 < 1.

     Equilibrium: At any time t, society reaches an equilibrium of the game between the ruler,
     the clerics, and civil society. Following the same line of reasoning as in the previous section
     (see the Appendix) the tax base of the economy is:

                                                   I        (1 - qt (I ) · c )
                        E = E (I , c , qt ) =         {1 -                     }
                                                1 + c               0c




19
   To avoid some cumbersome taxonomy, we assume that kmax < 0 < 2kmax . The first inequality ensures
   that religious legitimacy can always be produced at any potential technological level. The second inequal-
   ity ensures that maximum knowledge max is sufficiently large not to always constrain the equilibrium
   technology choice by society.
20
   Religious precepts are not always antithetical to scientific advancement. Indeed, White (1972, 1978) and
   Davids (2013) argue that certain medieval European technologies were complementary to the Church's
   interest. For the sake of this extension, we focus on technologies that are antithetical to the interests of
   religious authorities. Mokyr (1990) argues that this more often than not the case with new and disruptive
   technologies.

                                                       33
The policy choices, that is the religious infrastructure m and the technology level I are
collectively chosen so as to maximize social welfare:

                       W = (1 - t )Ur (m, I , c , qt ) + t Uc (m, c );                   (12)

while the clerics choose c . Solving the equilibrium:

                               c = m, - C (m) + c = 0,                                   (13)

                                            0c   -  (1 - qt 0 c )
                       I (c , qt ) = min                          , max                  (14)
                                                   2 qt kc
The optimal choice of technology reflects the trade-off on the tax base of an increase in
labor productivity and the erosion of religious legitimacy provided by the clerics. It can
also be seen that the optimal level of technology I (c , qt ) is decreasing in qt and in c .
When the religious are more numerous and/or clerics undertake higher religious efforts,
the ruler is more reliant on religious legitimacy to raise revenues. Consequently, he is also
more reluctant to adopt innovative activities that may erode such legitimacy.
    The solution to (13) and (14) provides the equilibrium values m (t ), such that C (m) =
t m, c (t ) = m (t ), and I (t , qt ) = I (m () , qt ).

Institutional Dynamics. We allow the ruler to delegate power to the clerics . Institu-
tional change again internalizes the externality that is not taken into account by individual
decisions in equilibrium. As in the benchmark model, the provision of religious infrastruc-
tures m grants legitimacy to the ruler by reducing the subjectively perceived tax rate of
religious individuals, while at the same time depressing labor productivity because of in-
creased religious proscriptions. As will be clear below, this interacts with the choice of
optimal technology adopted by society.
    More specifically, given institutions t , future institutions t+1 are designed as the
solution to:

     max(1 - t ) [Ur (m(t+1 ), I (t+1 ), c (t+1 ) , qt )] + t Uc (m (t+1 ) , c (t+1 ))   (15)
      t+1


with {m(t+1 ), c (t+1 ), I (t+1 )} the equilibrium of period t + 1, as evaluated under the
institutional set-up t . Solving this optimization problem, we deduce that:




                                              34
Proposition 6 The optimization problem (15) admits a unique solution (t+1 )  [0, 1].
Furthermore, there exists a threshold q I (t ) such that

                        t+1 > t (resp. ) if qt > q I (t ) (resp. ).

   As in the previous extension, the uniqueness result follows from the convexity of the
optimization problem (15). Whether the ruler delegates more power to the clerics over time
depends again on the fraction of religious individuals qt . If the religious are sufficiently
numerous, then religious legitimacy matters relatively more than technology for the ruler's
tax base. Consequently, more weight to the clerics t+1 > t is provided, as this increases
their effort c (t+1 ). The ruler consequently benefits from a larger tax base.

Cultural Dynamics. As in the previous section, cultural dynamics are driven by inter-
generational transmission decisions from the citizens. Following the steps of the previous
section, we find the following result:
                                               
Proposition 7 There exists a unique threshold qI (t ) such that

                                                    
                        qt+1 < qt (resp. ) if qt > qI (t ) (resp. ).
                            
Furthermore, the threshold qI (t ) is increasing in t .
                                                                         
    The cultural dynamics are still as in (6) and the threshold value qI  (t ) is their unique
                                                                                         
attractor. Hence, when the fraction of religious individuals qt is above (resp. below) qI (t ),
it tends to decrease (resp. increase).

Joint Dynamics. There are two steady states. In the theocratic regime equilibrium, the
ruler is legitimized by religion. The clerics have significant power ( is high) and religious
beliefs are widespread (q is high). For both reasons, the technology level implemented
in society is low, as this threatens the religious legitimacy generated in this theocratic
state. Because, innovation adoption and scientific activity is limited, labor productivity
is low, as are fiscal revenues despite extractive taxation. The second steady state is a
secular innovative regime where a high level of technology close to the knowledge frontier
is adopted. Clerics are weak, given that innovations limit their capacity to legitimate the
ruler ( is zero) and the share of religious individuals is low (q is low). Fiscal revenues can
be substantial, given that a process of scientific innovation leads to an overall increase in
labor productivity.

                                              35
Complementarity. Again, a ruler's option to rely on religious legitimacy induces a fun-
damental complementarity of the dynamics of culture and institutions. Along the path
towards a theocratic steady state, the ruler relies more on religious legitimacy to raise rev-
enues. She also faces increasingly lower incentives to adopt efficient innovations that erode
her legitimacy. The ruler then commits to an institutional set-up delegating an increasingly
large share of power to the clerics, reinforcing the incentive of religious individuals to pass
their values inter-generationally. In turn, this further decreases the incentive of the ruler
to adopt innovative technologies. Labor productivity stays low, given that technology is
limited. Finally, taxes are increasingly more extractive given that the population becomes
more religious but labor productivity remains low.
    On the other hand, as a ruler relies less on religious legitimacy to raise revenues, she
also faces stronger incentives to adopt innovations that increase labor productivity and
consequently the fiscal base. As the ruler becomes more reliant on innovative activities to
raise revenues, her religious legitimacy erodes, so she faces less incentive to commit to an
institutional set-up where the religious clerics are powerful. Both the political weight of
the clerics and the value of passing religious values inter-generationally decrease. A lower
predominance of religious individuals further augments the political incentives to commit
and change the institutional set-up so as to adopt more efficient technologies, leading to
a substantial increase over time in labor productivity and fiscal revenues. Eventually, the
joint dynamics of culture and institutions converge to a secular regime where the imple-
mented technology is not constrained by political forces, but only by the existing knowledge
frontier.



4.4    The historical stylized pattern
One of the great mysteries of the long divergence is the reversal of fortunes between Middle
Eastern and Western European science and technology. Data presented in Chaney (2016)
reveals that not only were scientific topics among the most ubiquitous in the corpus of
Islamic writings up through the 11th century, but up to that point the Islamic world well
out-paced Europe in scientific output. At some point in the 11th and 12th centuries,
however, a reversal of fortunes occurred. Islamic scientific production began to wane
around the 12th century. This was not simply a matter of the Islamic world falling behind
relative to Europe; it fell behind in absolute terms relative to what it had once been. At


                                              36
the same time, scientific works became much more prevalent in Western Europe. By the
end of the medieval period, Western Europe had a technological and scientific lead, and
this would only grow in subsequent centuries. Can this reversal of fortunes be explained
by our model?
    Our model, along with the history overviewed in Section 3.5, suggests that the rever-
sal of technological and scientific fortunes was a consequences of a changing equilibrium
in which Muslim religious authorities became increasingly important for legitimating the
state while European rulers sought alternative forms of legitimacy. In the Middle East,
the 11th century saw the rise of the madrasa system (Chaney 2016; Kuru 2019). This
institutionalized the political role that had increasingly been played by religious author-
ities since their consolidation under the Abbasids in the 9th and 10th centuries (Co¸     sgel,
Miceli and Ahmed 2009; Rubin 2017). In this equilibrium, as we describe in Section 4.3,
religion played an important role in legitimating rule ( was large), society was largely
religious (q was large), and science and technology were impeded. As in B´     enabou, Ticchi
and Vindigni (2020), technological stagnation mutually benefited religious authorities and
the state: the former lost power when alternative means of discovering truths or inter-
preting the world were present, and the latter was harmed when one of its key sources of
legitimacy was undermined. In the context of Middle Eastern history, this logic sheds light
on both why madrasas were allowed to thrive in spite of their negative effects on scientific
production and why rulers throughout the Muslim world banned one of the most impor-
tant technologies of the late medieval period: the printing press. Co¸ sgel, Miceli and Rubin
(2012) argues that the Ottomans banned the press for over 240 years after first hearing of it
precisely because it threatened the religious establishment. By the 15th century, religious
authorities across the Islamic world (not just in the Ottoman Empire) had set up high
barriers to entry. The largest of these barriers was the years of training required to know
various religious texts and interpretations of those texts. These barriers raised the status
of the religious elite, further entrenching the "high-, high-q " equilibrium. The printing
press threatened to undermine these barriers and the equilibrium they helped uphold. Had
printing become widespread, a much larger share of the population would have had access
to the great religious and non-religious texts of the Islamic world (and beyond). This would
have undermined one of the very features that gave Muslim religious authorities the power
to legitimate in the first place. Hence, as our model predicts, heavy restrictions were placed
on this vastly important technology.



                                              37
    Muslim religious authorities had good reason to fear the spread of printing. They only
needed to look to Europe, where the press helped facilitate one of the great movements
against Church power in the history of Christianity: the Protestant Reformation (Boerner,
Rubin and Severgnini 2020; Dittmar and Seabold 2020; Rubin 2014). Unlike Ottoman
religious authorities, the Church was not able to stop the spread of the printing press. The
reason why this was the case follows from the logic of the model. As noted in Section 3.5,
the Church had already lost much of its legitimating power in Europe prior to the spread of
printing. Alternative sources of legitimacy had emerged in the form of universities (which
provided a theoretical justification for monarchical rule) and parliaments (which brought
together elites who could legitimate rule in return for a seat at the political bargaining
table). By 1200 or so, religious authorities had lost their monopoly over the printed word
as well; book demand and supply was increasingly found in university towns and urban
centers (Buringh and Van Zanden 2009). As a result, there was little the Church could
have done to stop the spread of printing had it wanted to. By the mid-15th century,
Europe was in a "low-, low-q " equilibrium. Our model suggests that this should also
entail few restrictions on technology--at least those technologies that damage the capacity
of religious authorities to legitimate. The history of printing suggests that this was the
case.
    The Christian world was hardly uniform in the degree to which religious legitimacy was
part of the broader political equilibrium. This was especially true after the Reformation,
which fundamentally undermined the role of religious authority in the ruling coalition (Ru-
bin 2017). This had consequences for the spread of science and technology. B´ enabou, Ticchi
and Vindigni (2020) summarize many of the scientific and technological advances blocked
or suppressed by the Church, including the works of Galileo, the Copernican Revolution,
Newtonism, the Scientific Revolution, and technical education in schools. These restric-
tions were much more widely applied in Catholic areas than Protestant ones. According
to Mokyr (2016), it was the "culture of growth" supported by the Republic of Letters that
permitted the spread of the new, rational thinking of those like Bacon and Newton. While
the Republic of Letters was a pan-European phenomenon, there was little resistance in
the leading Protestant lands (England and the Dutch Republic). Meanwhile, even after
the first wave of industrialization, the Church attempted to limit secular education and
curriculum in schools (Squicciarini 2020).
    In short, this extension helps explain both the technological and scientific reversal
of fortunes between Western Europe and the Middle East as well as the the divergence

                                            38
within Europe. In Protestant Europe, new inventions and scientific ideas were allowed
to spread relatively unimpeded. This is what the model predicts would be the case in a
"low-, low-q " equilibrium. The equilibrium in Catholic Europe was one of higher  and q ,
and as a result some (though certainly not all) scientific and technological advances were
suppressed. In the "high-, high-q " equilibrium that pervaded most of the medieval and
early modern Middle East (at least, after the 11th century), scientific and technological
advancements were even more restricted. Our model explains these outcomes not solely as
reflecting the desires of religious authorities, but also their place in their society's broader
political-economy and cultural equilibria.


5     Conclusion
In this paper we provide an explanation for an important historical phenomenon: the long
divergence between Middle Eastern and Western European economies from the year 1000
C.E. to the beginning of the Industrial Revolution. We provide an explanation in terms of
a model of institutional and cultural change. In doing so, we unify prevailing theories based
on religious legitimacy, religious proscriptions, and decentralization of political power. In
the process, our model resolves many puzzles left unaddressed in the literature.
    In the context of the long divergence, the model centers on the power dynamics of
rulers, clerics, and secular elites in framing institutions in a religious environment. It high-
lights three central historical features of these power dynamics: rulers derive legitimacy
from the religious elites, religious authorities impose proscriptions that impinge on eco-
nomic development, constraints on executive power and the decentralization of political
power have a fundamental role in inducing economic growth. Most importantly, the model
highlights how the institutions resulting from the power dynamics of rulers, clerics, and
secular elites interact with the spread of culture (religious beliefs) in civil society. Political
centralization interacts with religious legitimacy and religious proscriptions to determine
its long-run economic and political paths. Citizens remain religious or not, in the face
of religious proscriptions, depending on the feedback between religious institutions and
cultural evolution. Religious legitimacy to the political system depends crucially on the
prominence of religious values in society.
    We intend this as an illustration of the explanatory power of a class of models centered
on some simple general and yet minimal components: institutions as the relative politi-
cal power of different groups in society to affect policy decisions, institutional change as

                                               39
     a mechanism to internalize externalities and other distortions characterizing the equilib-
     rium. in society, and the cultural profile of values and preferences in society as evolving
     according to various socioeconomic incentives.21 The interdependence between institutions
     and culture is a fundamental factor, jointly (along with technology) driving socio-economic
     change in these models. Our model reveals how such interdependence has played a central
     role in determining the long-run economic, religious, and institutional paths of societies.




21
     See Acemoglu, Egorov and Sonin (2021); Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2005a); Bisin and Verdier
     (2021); Persson and Tabellini (2021) for surveys of this class of models.

                                                   40
References
Abramitzky, Ran. 2008. "The Limits of Equality: Insights from the Israeli Kibbutz."
 Quarterly Journal of Economics 123(3):1111­1159.

Acemoglu, Daron. 2005. "Politics and Economics in Weak and Strong States." Journal of
  Monetary Economics 52(7):1199­1226.

Acemoglu, Daron, Georgy Egorov and Konstantin Sonin. 2021. Institutional change and
  institutional persistence. In Handbook of Historical Economics, ed. Alberto Bisin and
  Giovanni Federico. Amsterdam: Elsevier North Holland.

Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson. 2012. Why Nations Fail: The Origins of Power,
  Prosperity, and Poverty. New York: Crown.

Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson. 2019. The Narrow Corridor: States, Societies,
  and the Fate of Liberty. New York: Penguin.

Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson and James A Robinson. 2005a. "Institutions as a fun-
  damental cause of long-run growth." Handbook of economic growth 1:385­472.

Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson and James A. Robinson. 2005b. "The Rise of Europe:
  Atlantic Trade, Institutional Change, and Economic Growth." American Economic Re-
  view 95(3):546­579.

Allen, Robert C. 2009. The British Industrial Revolution in Global Perspective. Cambridge:
  Cambridge University Press.

Angelucci, Charles, Simone Meraglia and Nico Voigtl¨
                                                   ander. 2020. "How Merchant Towns
 Shaped Parliaments: From the Norman Conquest of England to the Great Reform Act."
 Working Paper.

Auriol, Emmanuelle and Jean-Philippe Platteau. 2017. "Religious Co-option in Autocracy:
 A Theory Inspired by History." Journal of Development Economics 127:395­412.

Balla, Eliana and Noel D. Johnson. 2009. "Fiscal Crisis and Institutional Change in the
  Ottoman Empire and France." Journal of Economic History 69(3):809­845.

Barro, Robert J. and Rachel M. McCleary. 2003. "Religion and Economic Growth across
  Countries." American Sociological Review 68(5):760­781.

                                           41
B´
 enabou, Roland, Davide Ticchi and Andrea Vindigni. 2015. "Religion and Innovation."
  American Economic Review 105(5):346­51.

B´
 enabou, Roland, Davide Ticchi and Andrea Vindigni. 2020. "Forbidden Fruits: The
  Political Economy of Science, Religion and Growth." Working Paper.

Berman, Eli. 2000. "Sect, Subsidy, and Sacrifice: An Economist's View of Ultra-Orthodox
  Jews." Quarterly Journal of Economics 115(3):905­953.

Berman, Harold J. 1983. Law and Revolution: The Formation of the Western Legal Tra-
  dition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Besley, Timothy and Torsten Persson. 2009. "The Origins of State Capacity: Property
  Rights, Taxation, and Politics." American Economic Review 99(4):1218­44.

Besley, Timothy and Torsten Persson. 2010. "State Capacity, Conflict, and Development."
  Econometrica 78(1):1­34.

Bisin, Alberto and Thierry Verdier. 2001. "The Economics of Cultural Transmission and
  the Dynamics of Preferences." Journal of Economic Theory 97(2):298­319.

Bisin, Alberto and Thierry Verdier. 2011. The Economics of Cultural Transmission and
  Socialization. In Handbook of Social Economics, ed. Jess Benhabib, Alberto Bisin and
  Matt Jackson. Vol. 1 Elsevier pp. 339­416.

Bisin, Alberto and Thierry Verdier. 2017. "On the Joint Evolution of Culture and Institu-
  tions." NBER Working Paper 23375.

Bisin, Alberto and Thierry Verdier. 2021. Phase Diagrams in Historical Economics: Culture
  and Institutions. In Handbook of Historical Economics, ed. Alberto Bisin and Giovanni
  Federico. Amsterdam: Elsevier North Holland.

Blaydes, Lisa and Eric Chaney. 2013. "The Feudal Revolution and Europe's Rise: Political
  Divergence of the Christian West and the Muslim World before 1500 CE." American
  Political Science Review 107(1):16­34.

Blaydes, Lisa, Justin Grimmer and Alison McQueen. 2018. "Mirrors for Princes and Sul-
  tans: Advice on the Art of Governance in the Medieval Christian and Islamic Worlds."
  Journal of Politics 80(4):1150­1167.

                                           42
Boerner, Lars, Jared Rubin and Battista Severgnini. 2020. "A Time to Print, a Time to
  Reform." Working Paper.

Bosker, Maarten, Eltjo Buringh and Jan Luiten Van Zanden. 2013. "From Baghdad to
  London: Unraveling Urban Development in Europe, the Middle East, and North Africa,
  800­1800." Review of Economics and Statistics 95(4):1418­1437.

Boyd, Robert and Peter J. Richerson. 1985. Culture and the Evolutionary Process. Chicago:
  University of Chicago Press.

Buringh, Eltjo and Jan Luiten Van Zanden. 2009. "Charting the "Rise of the West":
  Manuscripts and Printed Books in Europe, a long-term Perspective from the Sixth
  through Eighteenth Centuries." Journal of Economic History 69(2):409­445.

Cantoni, Davide, Jeremiah Dittmar and Noam Yuchtman. 2018. "Religious Competition
  and Reallocation: The Political Economy of Secularization in the Protestant Reforma-
  tion." Quarterly Journal of Economics 133(4):2037­2096.

Cantoni, Davide and Noam Yuchtman. 2014. "Medieval Universities, Legal Institutions,
  and the Commercial Revolution." Quarterly Journal of Economics 129(2):823­887.

Carvalho, Jean-Paul. 2013. "Veiling." Quarterly Journal of Economics 128(1):337­370.

Cavalli-Sforza, Luigi Luca and Marcus W. Feldman. 1981. Cultural Transmission and
  Evolution: A Quantitative Approach. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Chaney, Eric. 2013. "Revolt on the Nile: Economic Shocks, Religion, and Political Power."
 Econometrica 81(5):2033­2053.

Chaney, Eric. 2016. "Religion and the Rise and Fall of Islamic Science." Working Paper.

Co¸sgel, Metin M. and Thomas J. Miceli. 2005. "Risk, Transaction Costs, and Tax As-
  signment: Government Finance in the Ottoman Empire." Journal of Economic History
  65(3):806­821.

Co¸
  sgel, Metin M., Thomas J. Miceli and Jared Rubin. 2012. "The Political Economy of
  Mass Printing: Legitimacy and Technological Change in the Ottoman Empire." Journal
  of Comparative Economics 40(3):357­371.



                                           43
Co¸
  sgel, Metin M., Thomas J. Miceli and Rasha Ahmed. 2009. "Law, State Power, and
  Taxation in Islamic History." Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 71(3):704­
  717.

Co¸
  sgel, Metin and Thomas J. Miceli. 2009. "State and Religion." Journal of Comparative
  Economics 37(3):402­416.

Crone, Patricia and Martin Hinds. 1986. God's Caliph: Religious Authority in the First
  Centuries of Islam. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Davids, Karel. 2013. Religion, Technology, and the Great and Little Divergences: China
  and Europe Compared, c. 700­1800. Leiden: Brill.

Dincecco, Mark. 2009. "Fiscal Centralization, Limited Government, and Public Revenues
  in Europe, 1650­1913." Journal of Economic History 69(1):48­103.

Dittmar, Jeremiah and Skipper Seabold. 2020. "New Media and Competition: Printing and
  Europe's Transformation After Gutenberg." Journal of Political Economy forthcoming.

Duby, Georges. 1982. The Three Orders: Feudal Society Imagined. Chicago: University of
 Chicago Press.

Feldman, Stephen M. 1997. Please Don't Wish Me a Merry Christmas: A Critical History
  of the Separation of Church and State. New York: NYU Press.

Gennaioli, Nicola and Hans-Joachim Voth. 2015. "State Capacity and Military Conflict."
 Review of Economic Studies 82(4):1409­1448.

Gonz´
    alez de Lara, Yadira, Avner Greif and Saumitra Jha. 2008. "The Administrative
 Foundations of Self-enforcing Constitutions." American Economic Review 98(2):105­09.

Greif, Avner. 2008. The Impact of Administrative Power on Political and Economic Devel-
  opments: Toward a Political Economy of Implementation. In Institutions and Economic
  Performance, ed. E. Helpman. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press pp. 17­63.

Greif, Avner and Jared Rubin. 2020. "Political Legitimacy and the Institutional Founda-
  tions of Constitutional Government: The Case of England." Working paper.

Greif, Avner and Steven Tadelis. 2010. "A Theory of Moral Persistence: Crypto-morality
  and Political Legitimacy." Journal of Comparative Economics 38(3):229­244.

                                          44
Hallaq, Wael B. 1984. "Was the Gate of Ijtihad Closed?" International Journal of Middle
  East Studies 16(1):3­41.

Hallaq, Wael B. 2005. The Origins and Evolution of Islamic Law. Cambridge: Cambridge
  University Press.

Henrich, Joseph. 2015. The Secret of our Success: How Culture is Driving Human Evo-
  lution, Domesticating our Species, and Making us Smarter. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
  University Press.

Hollenbach, Florian M. and Jan H. Pierskalla. 2020. "State-Building and the Origin of
  Universities in Europe, 800-1800." Working Paper.

Iannaccone, Laurence R. 1992. "Sacrifice and Stigma: Reducing Free-riding in Cults,
  Communes, and other Collectives." Journal of Political Economy 100(2):271­291.

Imber, Colin. 1997. Ebu's-su`ud: The Islamic Legal Tradition. Stanford, CA: Stanford
  University Press.

Iyigun, Murat. 2015. War, Peace, and Prosperity in the Name of God: The Ottoman Role
  in Europe's Socioeconomic Evolution. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Johnson, Noel D. and Mark Koyama. 2017. "States and Economic Growth: Capacity and
  Constraints." Explorations in Economic History 64:1­20.

Karaman, K. Kivanc and S ¸ evket Pamuk. 2013. "Different Paths to the Modern State in
 Europe: The Interaction between Warfare, Economic Structure, and Political Regime."
 American Political Science Review 107(3):603­626.

Karaman, Kivan¸c. 2009. "Decentralized Coercion and Self-Restraint in Provincial Tax-
 ation: The Ottoman Empire, 15th­16th centuries." Journal of Economic Behavior &
 Organization 71(3):690­703.

Kuran, Timur. 2001. "The Provision of Public Goods under Islamic Law: Origins, Impact,
 and Limitations of the Waqf System." Law and Society Review 34(4):841­898.

Kuran, Timur. 2005. "The Absence of the Corporation in Islamic law: Origins and Persis-
 tence." American Journal of Comparative Law 53(4):785­834.



                                          45
Kuran, Timur. 2011. The Long Divergence: How Islamic Law Held Back the Middle East.
 Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Kuru, Ahmet T. 2019. Islam, Authoritarianism, and Underdevelopment: A Global and
 Historical Comparison. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Levi, Margaret, Audrey Sacks and Tom Tyler. 2009. "Conceptualizing Legitimacy, Mea-
  suring Legitimating Beliefs." American Behavioral Scientist 53(3):354­375.

Lewis, Bernard. 1974. Islam: From the Prophet Muhammad to the Capture of Constantino-
  ple. New York: Harper and Row.

Lewis, Bernard. 2002. What Went Wrong?: The Clash between Islam and Modernity in
  the Middle East. New York: Harper Collins.

Lipset, Seymour Martin. 1959. "Some Social Requisites of Democracy: Economic Devel-
  opment and Political Legitimacy." American Political Science Review 53(1):69­105.

Ma, Debin and Jared Rubin. 2019. "The Paradox of Power: Principal-Agent Problems and
 Administrative Capacity in Imperial China (and other Absolutist Regimes)." Journal of
 Comparative Economics : Forthcoming.

Mann, Michael. 1986. The Sources of Social Power: A History of Power from the Beginning
 to A.D. 1760. Vol. 1 Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

McCleary, Rachel M. and Robert J. Barro. 2019. The Wealth of Religions: The Political
 Economy of Believing and Belonging. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Michalopoulos, Stelios, Alireza Naghavi and Giovanni Prarolo. 2016. "Islam, Inequality and
 Pre-industrial Comparative Development." Journal of Development Economics 120:86­
 98.

Michalopoulos, Stelios, Alireza Naghavi and Giovanni Prarolo. 2018. "Trade and Geogra-
 phy in the Spread of Islam." Economic Journal 128(616):3210­3241.

Mokyr, Joel. 1990. The Lever of Riches: Technological Creativity and Economic Progress.
 Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Mokyr, Joel. 2010. The Enlightened Economy: An Economic History of Britain, 1700-1850.
 New Haven: Yale University Press.

                                           46
Mokyr, Joel. 2016. A Culture of Growth: The Origins of the Modern Economy. Princeton:
 Princeton University Press.

Noonan, John T. 1957. The Scholastic Analysis of Usury. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
 University Press.

North, Douglass C. and Barry R. Weingast. 1989. "Constitutions and Commitment: The
  Evolution of Institutions Governing Public Choice in Seventeenth-century England."
  Journal of Economic History 49(4):803­832.

North, Douglass C., John Joseph Wallis and Barry R. Weingast. 2009. Violence and Social
  Orders: A Conceptual Framework for Interpreting Recorded Human History. New York:
  Cambridge University Press.

¨
Ozmucur,  S¨
           uleyman and S
                       ¸ evket Pamuk. 2002. "Real Wages and Standards of Living in
  the Ottoman Empire, 1489­1914." Journal of Economic History 62(2):293­321.

Pamuk, S
       ¸ evket. 2004a. "The Evolution of Financial Institutions in the Ottoman Empire,
  1600­1914." Financial History Review 11(1):7­32.

Pamuk, S
       ¸ evket. 2004b. "Institutional Change and the Longevity of the Ottoman Empire,
  1500­1800." Journal of Interdisciplinary History 35(2):225­247.

Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini. 2021. Culture, Institutions, and Policy. In Handbook
  of Historical Economics, ed. Alberto Bisin and Giovanni Federico. Amsterdam: Elsevier
  North Holland.

Platteau, Jean-Philippe. 2017. Islam Instrumentalized: Religion and Politics in Historical
  Perspective. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Putnam, Robert D., Robert Leonardi and Raffaella Y. Nanetti. 1994. Making Democracy
  Work: Civic Traditions in Modern Italy. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Rubin, Jared. 2011. "Institutions, the Rise of Commerce and the Persistence of Laws:
 Interest Restrictions in Islam and Christianity." Economic Journal 121(557):1310­1339.

Rubin, Jared. 2014. "Printing and Protestants: An Empirical Test of the Role of Printing
 in the Reformation." Review of Economics and Statistics 96(2):270­286.



                                           47
Rubin, Jared. 2017. Rulers, Religion, and Riches: Why the West Got Rich and the Middle
 East Did Not. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Saleh, Mohamed. 2018. "On the Road to Heaven: Taxation, Conversions, and the Coptic-
  Muslim Socioeconomic Gap in Medieval Egypt." Journal of Economic History 78(2):394­
  434.

Schulz, Jonathan. 2020. "Kin Networks and Institutional Development." Working Paper.

Seror, Avner. 2018. "A Theory on the Evolution of Religious Norms and Economic Prohi-
  bition." Journal of Development Economics 134:416­427.

Squicciarini, Mara. 2020. "Devotion and Development: Religiosity, Education, and Eco-
  nomic Progress in 19th-Century France." American Economic Review forthcoming.

Stasavage, David. 2011. States of Credit: Size, Power, and the Development of European
  Polities. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Tierney, Brian. 1970. Western Europe in the Middle Ages, 300-1475. New York: Knopf.

Tierney, Brian. 1988. The Crisis of Church and State, 1050­1300. Toronto: University of
  Toronto Press.

Tilly, Charles. 1990. Coercion, Capital, and European States, AD 990­1990. Cambridge:
  Blackwell.

van Zanden, Jan Luiten, Eltjo Buringh and Maarten Bosker. 2012. "The Rise and Decline
  of European Parliaments, 1188­1789." Economic History Review 65(3):835­861.

Weber, Max. 1947. The Theory of Social and Economic Organization. New York: Simon
 and Schuster.

White, Lynn. 1972. "Cultural Climates and Technological Advance in the Middle Ages."
 Viator 2:171­202.

White, Lynn Townsend. 1978. Medieval Religion and Technology: Collected Essays. Berke-
 ley, CA: University of California Press.

Wintrobe, Ronald. 1998. The Political Economy of Dictatorship. Cambridge: Cambridge
 University Press.

                                          48
    Appendices

A      Mathematical Appendix

A.1       Proofs of Lemmas 1, 2 and 3
In order to prove the three Lemmas of the main text, we solve the equilibrium, where the
ruler chooses the amount of religious infrastructures m so as to maximize the social welfare
W , with eRe ()

                   1                      1-
                W = UR (m) + Uc (m, c ) +    [qURe (eRe ) + (1 - q )US (eS )] .       (A.1)
                   2        2              2

The clerics and the individuals choose, respectively, c and ei , i = Re, S to maximize their
utility. The equilibrium is denoted { (), m(), c (), eS (), eRe ()}. Since   1,  () is
equal to    and the remaining first-order conditions are:
                              
                               -C (m) - F (m) +  · c = 0
                              
                              m -  ( ) = 0
                              
                                         c
                                                                                      (A.2)
                               (1 - Re ) - (1 + c )eRe = 0
                              
                              (1 -  ) - (1 +  )e = 0,
                              
                                                c S


or after substitution:            
                                   C (m) + F (m) = c
                                   ( ) = m
                                       c
                                                                                      (A.3)
                                   eRe = 1-  + c
                                           1+c
                                  
                                  e = 1-
                                  
                                    S    1+c

Assuming that the marginal cost functions C (.), F (.) and  (.) are increasing convex
functions (ie. C (.)  0, F (.)  0 and  (.)  0) with at least one of these cost
derivatives strictly convex), and the limit condition limx F (x) > 1, and F (0) (0) <
1, then the first two equations of (A.3) simply characterize a unique equilibrium couple
                                     C (0) (0)
m() > 0 and c () > 0 when 1-           F (0) (0)
                                                 < , while m() = c () = 0 for  
 C (0) (0)
1-F (0) (0)
            .


                                              49
   Lemma 1: Differentiating the previous first-order conditions, it is easy to note that
the optimal provision of religious infrastructure m() > 0 and the effort of the clerics
c () > 0 are both increasing in  and independent from  and . This concludes the
proof of Lemma 1.
   Lemma 2: The equilibrium production efforts are obtained as
                                 
                                 e () =       1- + c ()
                                  Re            1+c ()
                                                                                      (A.4)
                                 e () =        1-
                                    S        1+c ()


The equilibrium secular effort e                                         
                                S () is decreasing in clerics activities c and thus, it is
decreasing in . It is independent from  and 
    Additionally, from the equation above, eRe () increases with  and decreases with .
The effect of c () on eRe (, ) is ambiguous. By deriving eRe () with respect to c , we
find that when  > 1-  
                       
                        , then eRe () increases with c (), in which case eRe () increases
with . This concludes the proof of Lemma 2.
    Lemma 3: The equilibrium tax base of the ruler writes as

                            E () = q · eRe () + (1 - q ) · es (),                     (A.5)

so
                                        1 -  +  q · c ()
                               E () =                    .                            (A.6)
                                            1 + c ()
    By deriving the previous expression with respect to c (), we find that the tax base is
                                                     -
increasing in the clerics' effort if and only if q  1 
                                                       . Hence, when the previous condition
is satisfied, E () is increasing in . Finally, from (A.6), E () is increasing in q and , and
decreasing in . This concludes the proof of Lemma 3.




                                             50
A.2          Proof of Proposition 1
- First, we demonstrate that the optimization problem (4) rewritten below admits a unique
solution t+1  [0, 1]:

           1               t
     max     Ur (m(t+1 )) + Uc (m(t+1 ), c (t+1 ))+
     t+1   2               2
                                   1 - t
                                            [qt Ure (eRe (t+1 )) + (1 - qt )Us (es (t+1 ))] . (A.7)
                                       2

   In order to solve this maximization problem, we consider the following related opti-
mization problem:

                  1
           max W = {Ur (m) + t Uc (m) + (1 - t ) qt Ure (m) + (1 - qt )Us (m) },             (A.8)
            m     2

with                        
                             c (m) =  -1 (m)
                            
                             E (m) = 1-1+
                                        + q c (m)
                            
                                          c (m)
                            
                            U (m) =  E (m) - C (m)
                            
                              r
                                                                                             (A.9)
                             Uc (m) = c (m)m -  (c (m)) - F (m)
                            
                             URe (m) = 1-  + c (m)
                            
                                         1+c (m)
                            
                            U (m) = 1- .
                            
                                S       1+c (m)

In the optimization problem (A.8), the choice of the religious infrastructure m is made by a
ruler able to commit to the provision of m, and therefore internalizing the two externalities
detailed in the main text. We find that:

     dW
 2      = t [c (m) - F (m)] - C (m) +  E (m) + (1 - t )[q URe (m) + (1 - q )US (m)]. (A.10)
     dm

When C (.) and F (.) are sufficiently convex, the function W is concave in m, and the
previous optimization admits a unique solution m ~ (t )  0.
    Note that c () = c (m()), Ui (ei ()) = Ui (m()) for i = {Re, S }, and Uc (m(), c ()) =
Uc (m()). Given that m ~ (t ) maximizes the social welfare when the externalities are inter-
nalized, the solution t+1 of the optimization problem (4), should be such as to induce an




                                                  51
     equilibrium choice m (t+1 ) as close to m
                                             ~ (t ) as possible:
                               
                                 s.t m() = m
                                           ~ (t )              ~ (t )  (m(0), m(1))
                                                            if m
                               
                        t+1   = 1                           if m
                                                               ~ (t ) > m(1)                        (A.11)
                               0                            if m
                                                               ~ (t ) < m(0).

     When the clerics have power t+1 given by (A.11), institutions are designed for t + 1 so
     as to induce a choice m(t+1 ) in that period that maximizes the social welfare of period
     t. Given that m() is increasing in ,this solution t+1 of problem (4) is unique and the
     institutional dynamics are well defined.
         - In the second step of the proof, we demonstrate that there exists a threshold q (t )
     such that if qt > q , then t+1 > t . Otherwise, t+1  t .
         In order to demonstrate this claim, we first show the following intermediary result:

     Lemma 6 t+1 > t if and only if m
                                    ~ (t ) > m(t ).

         Proof: Indeed, m ~ (t ) > m(t ) means that if the ruler had the capacity to commit,
     in period t, to provide religious infrastructures m, then he would chooses a level m    ~ (t )
     strictly above what he actually provides in equilibrium. Since m(.) is an increasing function
     (Lemma 1), we deduce that t+1 is such that t+1 > t .22 QED.


             ~ (t ) > m(t ) if and only if q > q (t ), with:
     Lemma 7 m

                                  1  (1 -  )  + (1 - t ) 1-
                                                          2
                                                            
                                                             + t F (m(t ))
                       q (t ) =                                                                     (A.12)
                                     + (1 - t ) 1 -  +  c (t ) 1 + 
                                                                     (t )
                                                                   2 c


        Proof: From the proof of Lemma 1 above, the first-order condition associated with
     the determination of m() is:

                                           t c (m) - C (m) = 0,                                     (A.13)

     given that c (m) =  -1 (m).




22
     When an interior solution exists, t+1 solves m
                                                  ~ (t ) = m(t+1 ). Hence, if m
                                                                              ~ (t ) > m(t ) then t+1 > t .

                                                      52
                                                                          dW
   The first order condition for the determination of m
                                                      ~ (t ) writes as    dm
                                                                               = 0, with

 dW     1
     =     t [c (m) - F (m)] - C (m) +  E (m) + (1 - t )[q URe (m) + (1 - q )US (m)] .
 dm     2
                                                                                 (A.14)
Consider the expression

                 H (m) =  · E (m) + (1 - )[q URe (m) + (1 - q )US (m)]}.

    Given the two FOCs above, we deduce that m~ (t ) > m(t ) if and only if H (m(t )) > 0.
We show that condition H (m(t )) > 0 is equivalent to a condition over the possible values
of q .


                                         deRe              deS
                            E (m) = q ·       + (1 - q ) ·                                 (A.15)
                                         dm                dm
                                     q  - (1 -  ) dc (m))
                                   =                           ,                           (A.16)
                                      [1 + c (m)]2       dm


                                    eRe (m) dc (m)
          URe (m) = eRe (m)  -  ·                                                          (A.17)
                                       2      dm
                      1 -  +  c (m)          1 1 -  +  c (m) dc (m)
                    =                 -  ·                                                 (A.18)
                        1 + c (m)            2 1 + c (m)      dm

and

                                   (eS (m))2 dc (m)
                       Us (m) = -                                                          (A.19)
                                       2      dm
                                                         2
                                     1     1-                    dc (m)
                               = - ·                         ·                             (A.20)
                                     2 1 + c (m)                  dm

Thus,
                          dW
                      2      = c (m) - C (m) + H (m) - F (m),
                          dm
with
                              H (m)
               [1 + c (m)]2   dc (m)
                                       =  · (q  - (1 -  )) + (1 - )G(m)
                               dm




                                             53
and

                                                            
        G(m) = q (1 -  +  c (m))  (1 + c (m)) -               (1 -  +  c (m))
                                                            2
                             
                    -(1 - q ) [1 -  ]2
                             2
                                                                 
                = q  (1 -  ) +  c (m) 1 +           c (m)    -     [1 -  ]2
                                                  2              2

   Then the condition H (m) - F (m)  0 writes as

                                  q  (1 -  ) +  c (m) 1 +     (m)
                                                            2 c
  · (q  - (1 -  )) + (1 - )                               2                   - F (m)  0
                                              - 2 [1 -  ]

or using c () = c (m()) =  -1 (m()) and rearranging terms:

                           1  (1 -  )  + (1 - ) 1-
                                                 2
                                                   
                                                    + F (m())
                  q () =                                      ,                     (A.21)
                              + (1 - ) 1 -  +  c () 1 +   ()
                                                        2 c

and c () is an increasing function of . We conclude that m
                                                         ~ (t ) > m(t ) if and only if
q > q (t ).QED.

   Combining the results established in Lemmas 6 and 7, it follows that t+1 > t if and
only if q > q (t ).
   Finally, from (A.21), we deduce that q (t ) is decreasing in  and . This concludes the
proof of the first point of Proposition 1.


A.3      Proof of Proposition 2
As mentioned in the main text, cultural dynamics are modeled as purposeful inter-generational
transmission (Bisin and Verdier (2001), Bisin and Verdier (2017)), through parental social-
ization and imitation of society at large. Direct vertical socialization to the parent's trait
i  {Re, S } occurs with probability di . If a child from a family with trait i is not directly
socialized, which occurs with probability 1 - di , he/she is horizontally/obliquely socialized
by picking the trait of a role model chosen randomly in the population. The probability




                                            54
Pij that a child in group i is socialized to trait j writes as:
                                    
                                    P = d + (1 - d )q
                                     ii  i        i i
                                                                                           (A.22)
                                    P = (1 - d )q
                                     ij       i j


    with qRe = qt and qS = 1 - qt . Let Vij (t ) = Ui (ej (t )) denote the utility to a cultural
trait i parent of a type j child, with i, j  {Re, S }. We denote the paternalistic bias
of a parent of type i as Vi (t ) = Vii (t ) - Vij (t ), for j = i. The socialization cost
hRe (dRe , m) of a parent of type Re (respectively S ) is assumed to be a smooth function
                         2 hRe (dRe ,m)
with hRe   (dRe ,m)
           dRe
                     0;      d2
                                        > 0 (ie. hRe (dRe , m) is increasing convex in dRe ) and
                              Re

the Inada conditions hRe (0, m) = hRe  dRe
                                          (0,m)
                                                = 0, limd1 hRe (d, m) = limd1 hRe     (d,m)
                                                                                    dRe
                                                                                              = +
Similarly, the socialization cost hS (dS ) of a parent of type S satifies hS (dS )  0; hS (dS ) > 0
(ie. hS (dS ) is increasing convex in dS (ie. ), and hS (0) = hS (0) = 0, limd1 hS (d) =
limd1 hS (d) = +.
    Furthermore, to reflect the fact religious infrastructures may enter as a complementary
input to parental effort for transmission of the religious trait, we assume that hRem   (dRe ,m)
                                                                                                 0
       2
      hRe (dRe ,m)
and dRe m  0, (ie. m affects negatively the cost and the marginal cost of socialization
of religious parents). Following Bisin and Verdier (2001), direct socialization d   Re of religious
parents is the solution to the following socialization problem:

                  max -hRe (dRe , mt ) + PReRe · VReRe (t ) + PReS · VRe S (t ),           (A.23)
                   dRe

while direct socialization dS of secular parents is the solution to the following socialization
problem:
                       max -hS (dS ) + PSS · VSS (t ) + PSRe · VSRe (t ),                (A.24)
                         dS

   The FOCs of the previous programs determine the optimal socialization efforts as:

                 hRe (dRe , mt )
                                 = (1 - qt )VRe (t ) and hS (dS ) = qt Vs (t )
                    dRe

which can be rewritten as d                                                   
                           Re (qt , t ) = DRe ((1 - qt )VRe (t ), m(t )) and dS (qt , t ) =
DS (qt VS (t )).




                                                55
  Note that by the Inada conditions on hRe (·, ·), d Re  [0, 1] , and DRe (0, m) = 0. As well
DRe (·, ·) is an increasing function of both arguments (1 - qt )VRe (t ) and m, as we have:

                                                                         2h
                       d  Re                1              dRe
                                                                     Re
                                                                  dRe m
                                    =      2 hRe
                                                   > 0 and     = - 2h   >0
                 (1 - qt )VRe (t ))       d2
                                                           mt      d2
                                                                     Re
                                              Re                            Re



   Similarly the Inada conditions on hS (·) ensure that d  S  [0, 1] , DS (0) = 0. As well
 
dS = DS (qt VS (t )) is an increasing function of qt VS (t ) as

                                         dS          1
                                                  =    >0
                                     (qt VS (t ))   hS

   Using the Law of Large Numbers, one easily obtains the intergenerational evolution of
the frequency of the religious trait qt in the population as

                               qt+1 = qt · PReRe + (1 - qt ) · PSRe

or after substitution of (A.22) and the values of d        
                                                   Re and dS ,



                       qt+1 - qt = qt (1 - qt ){d                
                                                 Re (qt , t ) - dS (qt , t )}.         (A.25)

As mentioned in the main text, in equation (A.25), the term

               D(qt , t ) = d                
                             Re (qt , t ) - dS (qt , t )

                          = DRe [(1 - qt )VRe (t ), m(t )] - DS [qt VS (t )]

can be interpreted as the relative "cultural fitness" of the religious trait in the popu-
lation. This term is frequency dependent (ie. depends on the state of the population
qt ). Moreover simple inspection shows that D(qt , t ) is a decreasing function of qt , with
D(0, t ) = DRe [VRe (t ), m(t )] > 0 and D(1, t ) = -DS [VS (t )] < 0. From this it
follows that there exists a unique threshold q  (t )  (0, 1) such that

                                        D(q  (t ), t ) = 0                             (A.26)

Inspection of equation (A.25) and the fact that D(qt , t ) is a decreasing function of qt
provides immediately that qt+1 < qt if and only if qt > q  (t ), proving therefore proposition
in the main text. QED.

                                                   56
A.4        Comparative statics on the cultural threshold q (t)
The relative "cultural fitness" of the religious trait D(qt , t ) is affected by the institutional
environment t , as this variable interacts with the process of parental cultural transmission
both through paternalistic motivations Vi (t ), and through the provision of religious
infrastructures mt = m(t ) as a complementary input to religious family socialization.
Therefore the dependence of the threshold q  (t ) on the institutional environment t and
the comparative statics on the parameters  and  depends on how the relative "cultural
fitness" D(qt , t ) of the religious trait is affected by changes in such features.
     It is first useful to note that with the quadratic specification for the utility functions
Ui (.) of workers, the paternalistic motives .VRe (t ) and VS (t ) are equal and take a
simple form. Indeed we have:
                 
                 V                   (1-Re )2
                     ReRe ()   =   2(1+c ())
                                                                                             (A.27)
                                         1-     1              (1- )2
                   Re S () = (1 - Re ) 1+c () - 2 (1 + c ()) (1+c ())2 .
                 V

Hence,
                                                             ( c ())2
                      VRe () = VReRe () - VRe S () =                    .                    (A.28)
                                                            2(1 + c ())
Similarly, we find that
                  
                  V () = (1- )2
                   SS   2(1+c ())
                  V () = (1 -  ) 1-Re - 1 (1 +  ()) (1-Re )2 .
                   SRe          1+c ()  2      c   (1+c ())2


and
                                                           ( c ())2
                          VS () = VSS () - VSRe () =                                         (A.29)
                                                          2(1 + c ())
                             ( c ())    2
   Thus posing V () = 2(1+       c ())
                                       , we get VRe () = VS () = V () and the relative
"cultural fitness" of the religious trait D(qt , t ) rewrites as:

                   D(qt , t ) = DRe [(1 - qt )V (t ), m(t )] - DS [qt V (t )]

   Now, considering the functions DRe (x, y ) and DS (z ) that respectively characterize the
optimal socialization behavior of religious parents as

         d                                                   
          Re (qt , t ) = DRe [(1 - qt )V (t ), m(t )] , and dS (qt , t ) = DS (qt VS (t ))


                                                57
define the sensitivity of parents' socialization to paternalistic motives by the following
elasticities:
                             DRe (x, y )    x                  DS     z
                  Re (q, ) =             ·      and S (q, ) =      ·
                                 x         DRe                  z DRe
evaluated respectively at x = (1 - q )V () and y = m(), and z = q VS ().
   Differentiation of (A.26) then provides with d (t ) = d                       
                                                          Re (q (t ), t ) = dS (q (t ), t )

                                                                              V (t )       DRe
               
                         [   Re (q      , t ) -   S (q      , t )] d (t ) ·   V (t )
                                                                                       +   m
                                                                                                 · m (t )
              q (t ) =                                                                                      (A.30)
                                                            - D
                                                              q
                                                                (q  (t ), t )

                                           
Given that D  q
                 (q  (t ), t ) < 0, q
                                    t
                                       has the sign of the numerator. This numerator is com-
posed of two terms reflecting the two channels through which the institutional environment
t affects cultural transmission. The first term K (t ) = [ Re (q  , t ) - S (q  , t )] d (t ) ·
V (t )
 V (t )
         is the paternalistic motive channel. As V (t ) > 0, both types of parents in-
crease the intensity of socialization to their own traits. The sign of K (t ) depends on the
relative sensitivity of parents' socialization to paternalistic motives. It is positive when
                                                                                      
 Re (q , t ) > S (q , t ), namely when the socialization rate of religious parents dRe is more

sensitive to paternalistic motives than the one of secular parents d   S.
                          DRe
    The second term m · m (t ) is positive. It reflects the fact that by promoting reli-
gious infrastructures that enter as complementary inputs in the socialization process of the
religious trait, an increase in the clerics weight t makes the religious trait to be relatively
more successfully transmitted than the secular trait.
    From this discussion it follows that when religious parents' socialization efforts are more
sensitive to paternalistic motives than secular parents (ie. Re (q, t ) > S (q, t )) , and (or)
when religious infrastructures are strong enough complementary inputs to socialization to
the religious trait, then the numerator of (A.71) is positive and q  (t ) is increasing in t .
    As can be seen from (A.28) and (A.29), a change in the other parameters  (the effi-
ciency of the clerics) and  (the restrictiveness of religious proscriptions) affects the relative
cultural fitness of the religious trait only through their induced changes on the paternalistic
motive V (t ), with V () increasing in ,and decreasing . It follows that

                  q  (t )  K (t ) ·  V
                                     
                                       (t )
                                                q  (t )  K (t ) ·  V (t )

                          = D               and         = D 
                           - q (q (t ), t )              - q (q (t ), t )




                                                               58
When religious parents are more sensitive to paternalistic motives than secular parents,
one has K (t ) > 0 and a positive shift in  (negative shift of ) leads to a higher value of
q  (t ). This provides the comparative statics discussion on q  (t ) in the main text. QED.


   · Example with constant elasticity socialization cost functions:

   Consider the following socialization cost functions:
                                  
                                  h (d) = d1+re ·           1
                                                                and
                                   Re       1+re           m
                                                                                                     (A.31)
                                  h (d) = d1+s ,
                                      s         1+s


with s  re > 0 and  > 0. The optimal socialization efforts are such that:
                                                              
                                                   1
                      d (q ,  ) = ((1 - q )V ( )) re · m (t ) re
                       Re  t  t          t       t
                                                                                                     (A.32)
                      d (q ,  ) = (q V ( )) 1s .
                          S   t   t        t      t


                                                                                 1        1
and in this constant elasticity specification Re (q, ) -           S (q, )   =   re
                                                                                      -   s
                                                                                               0. Rewriting
the cultural dynamics equation (6), we deduce that:

                                                       1                                  1
       qt+1 - qt = qt (1 - qt ){((1 - qt )V (t )) re · m (t ) re - (qt V (t )) s },                  (A.33)

which admits two unstable steady states q = 0 and q = 1, and a unique interior attractor,
which we denote q  (t ) such that:
                                      1
                              q  (t ) s                    S -re             

                                          1    = V (t )    S re
                                                                   · m (t ) re                       (A.34)
                         (1 - q  (t ))    re




   given that S  re , we deduce that q  (t ) is increasing in , t , and decreasing in .


A.5       Proof of Proposition 3
The likelihood of reaching the theocratic equilibrium is increasing in : From Proposition
1, q (.) is decreasing in . From Proposition 2, q  (.) is increasing in . Hence, the measure of
parameters for which there is a complementarity between the spread of religious values and
an increase in the political weight of the clerics is larger. This explains why the likelihood
of reaching the theocratic equilibrium increases.

                                                  59
    The likelihood of reaching the theocratic equilibrium is decreasing in : From Propo-
sition 1, q (.) is increasing in . From Proposition 2, q  (.) is decreasing in . Hence, the
measure of parameters for which there is a complementarity between the spread of religious
values and an increase in the political weight of the clerics is lower.


A.6      Proof of Lemmas 4 and 5:
In order to prove the two Lemmas, we first derive the tax base E . Since an individual of
type i  {re, s} complies only when

                                       1 - i    1-c
                                             >       ,                              (A.35)
                                      1 + c    1 + c

with =     0
         1-l
               , the fraction of individuals of type i that comply is:

                                      c
                                          dc     i (1 - l )
                                             =1-            .                       (A.36)
                                      /   c           0c


Summing the taxes that are collected in the two cultural groups, we find that the tax base
is:
                                1           (1 - qc )(1 - l )
                       E=            {1 -                     }.                    (A.37)
                             1 + c                  0c

   We are now able to solve the equilibrium. As a matter of simplification, we assume
                                                                2
throughout the extension that  (c ) is quadratic with  (c ) = c   /2.
   The first-order conditions associated with the determination of m(), l (, , q ), and
c () are respectively:
                          
                          
                           -(1 - 2
                                   )C (m) +  2
                                               (c - F (m)) = 0,
                          
                                          E                                         (A.38)
                           -l + (1 -  )    l
                                               0, and
                          
                          m -  = 0.
                          
                                  c


The equilibrium is unique, when the marginal cost functions F (.) and C (.) are strictly
increasing convex functions and limm F (m) > 1 > F (0) + C (0). Typically m() =
                          C (0)
c () = 0 when   2 C (0)+1    -F (0)
                                    , and m() = c () > 0 is the positive solution of

                                                    
                               (1 - )C (m) + F (m) = m,                             (A.39)
                                   2        2       2

                                                60
                    C (0)
     when  > 2 C (0)+1 -F (0)
                              . From this, we deduce that m() and c () are increasing in ,
     when F (m) < C (m) and is independent from  , , and . This concludes the proof of
     Lemma 4.
        Substituting (A.37) in the the second FOC above, we find
                           
                           (1 -  )  2 (1-qc ()) if (1 -  )  2 (1-qc ()) <  and
                                   (1+c ())c 0             (1+c ())c 0    l
              l (, , q ) =                                                                        (A.40)
                            otherwise.
                                  l


     We deduce that l (, , q ) is decreasing in  ,  q ,  and . This concludes the proof of
     Lemma 5.


     A.7        Proof of Proposition 4
     As in the related proof of Proposition 1, we first demonstrate that the optimization, prob-
     lem (10) ­ rewritten below ­ admits a unique solution (t+1 , t+1 )  [0, 1]2 :

                        t
          max (1 -        ){Ur (m(t+1 ), l (t+1 , t+1 , qt )) + Ul (m(t+1 ), l (t+1 , t+1 , qt ))}
       (t+1 ,t+1 )      2
                                                                            t
                                                                        + Uc (m(t+1 ), c (t+1 )),
                                                                             2

        In order to solve this maximization problem, we solve the following related optimization
     problem:

                                               t                             t
                max W (m, l , t ) = (1 -         ){Ur (m, l ) + Ul (m, l )} + Uc (m).             (A.41)
                m,l                            2                             2

     The solution, denoted (m  ~ (t , qt ), ~ l (t , qt )),23 maximizes the social welfare when the exter-
     nalities are internalized, with

                                                                     1
                          Uc (m) = mc (m) -  (c (m)) - F (m) = m2 - F (m)
                                                                     2
                      Ur (m, l ) = t ( E (m, l , qt ) - C (m)) - l
                                                                       2
                      Ul (m, l ) = (1 - t )( E (m, l , qt ) - C (m)) - l
                                                                       2


23
     making now explicit the dependence on the state variables (t , qt ).

                                                         61
and
                                             1        (1 - qt m)(1 - l )
                       E (m, l , qt ) =         {1 -                     }.                     (A.42)
                                          1 + m               0c

The previous optimization problem can be rewritten:

                              t                                2     t 1
 max W (m, l , t ) = (1 -       ){ E (m, l , qt ) - C (m) - l - l } + { m2 - F (m)}, (A.43)
  m,l                         2                                 2    2 2

In this optimization problem, the choices of both the religious provision m and of the effort
of the secular elite l are made by a ruler who can commit, and hence that internalizes
the externalities detailed in the main text. We find that the solution (m ~ (t , qt ), ~ l (t , qt ))
of (A.41) solves the following equations:
  
   W                                                            -              (1-qm)(1-l )
  
   m
       = 2
          t
            (m - F (m)) - (1 - 2
                                t
                                  )C (m) + (1 -         t
                                                        2
                                                          ){ (1+ m)2
                                                                     [1   -        0c
                                                                                            ]
                q(1-l )
       + 1+1            } = 0,
  
            m     0c
                                                                                                (A.44)
   and
  
   W = - -  +  2 (1-qt m) = 0.
  
   l         l       c 0 (1+m)


We deduce the following lemma which characterizes the solution (m
                                                                ~ (t , qt ), ~ l (t , qt )) of
(A.41)


Lemma 8 the solution (     ~l (t , qt ), m
                                         ~ (t , qt )) is uniquely determined when C (.), and F (m)
are sufficiently convex (ie W (m, l , t ) is concave in m, l ).


   Proof: Specifically, it is a simple matter to see that

            2W          t                   t
                   =      (1 - F (m)) - (1 - )C (m)
           m2           2                   2
                                                          -l )
                              t      2            -[  q(1
                                                        0c
                                                               ]
                        +(1 - )                          (1- qm   )(1-l )
                               2 (1 + m)2 + (1+m)
                                                  [1 -                    ]
                                                                 0c

                        t                   t             t    22
                   <      (1 - F (m)) - (1 - )C (m) + (1 - )         <0
                        2                   2             2 (1 + m)3

when F (m) > 1 and C (m) > 22 , while:

                        2W                2W      2 qt  + 
                         2
                           = - 1 < 0 and     = -              <0                                (A.45)
                       l                 ml      c 0 (m + 1)2

                                                  62
     Therefore the Hessian of W (m, l , t ) is given by:


                                                          2
                           2W  2W                  2W
                  =          ·  2
                                  -
                          m2 l                    ml
                                                                                        -l )
                            t                   t              C (m) +      2
                                                                         (1+m)2
                                                                                {[  q(10c
                                                                                             ]
                      =       (F (m) - 1) + (1 - )
                            2                   2              - (1+m)
                                                                       [1 -  (1-qm  )(1-l )
                                                                                   0c
                                                                                            ]}
                               4 (qt  + )2
                          -
                            (c 0 )2 (m + 1)4
                            t                   t             22
                      >       (F (m) - 1) + (1 - ) C (m) -          ]
                            2                   2          (1 + m)3
                                 4 (qt  + )2
                          -
                              (c 0 )2 (m + 1)4
                                                  2                             2
     and  > 0 when F (m) > 1 + ((c+))2 and C (m) > 22 + ((c+))2 . Therefore W (m, l , t ) is
                                              0                             0
                                                                                                     2
     concave in m, l when C (.), and F (m) are sufficiently convex. (ie. when F (m) > 1+ ((c+))2
                                                                                                 0
                              (+)2
     and C (m) > 22 +          (c 0 )2
                                       )   QED.

        Now consider (m0 (qt ) , l 0
                                     (qt )) = arg maxm,l W (m, l , 0) and m1 = arg maxm,l W (m, l , 1).
     m0 respectively the optimal level of religious infrastructure of (A.41)when the secular elite
     (and the ruler) have full political power (ie.  = 0), and when the society is in a theocracy
     (the religious clerics weight is  = 1). It is reasonable to make the following assumption:24

                              Assumption M: m0 (qt ) < m1 for all qt  [0, 1]

         namely that the clerics group always wish to have a higher level of religious infras-
     tructures than the secular fraction of society (ruler and secular elite). We have then the
     following result:

     Lemma 9 Under assumption M , m
                                  ~ (t , qt ) is increasing in t and qt .and l (t , qt ) is
     decreasing in t and qt .

24
     A sufficient condition for assumption M to be satisfied is :
                                                      
                                                          < C (m1 )
                                                      0 c

     where m1 is determined by the condition m1 =  (m1 ).

                                                          63
   Proof: Partial differentiation yields:


                   W   m - F (m) C (m)
                     =          +                                                               (A.46)
                   m       2          2
                              -          (1-qm)(1-l )
                         1 (1+m)2 [1 -         0c
                                                      ]
                       -            1    q(1-l )
                                                                                                (A.47)
                         2      + 1+m       0c

                   W        t    1   (1 - l )       1
                      = (1 - )                {         }>0
                   mq       2 1 + m    0c       (1 + m)

and
                           2W          2W          2 m
                              = 0 and     =-             <0                                     (A.48)
                          l           l q    c 0 (1 + m)
Substitution of the FOC (A.44) into (A.46),one obtains when evaluated at the optimal
point m,
      ~  ~l :

                                W                   1
                                             =              ~ - F (m
                                                           (m      ~ ))                         (A.49)
                                m                (1 - 2
                                                       t
                                                         )
                             ~ (t , qt )  m1 . Moreover differentiation of the FOC in (A.44),
which is positive as long as m
provides

                                 2W                2
                                                   W               W2        2W
             dm
              ~         1         2
                                                - m             - m  dt -    mq
                                                                                 dqt
                      =            l
                                  2W             2W
                                                     l
                                                                   W2        2
                                                                              W
             d~l                - m                             -     dt -       dqt
                                     l           m2                l         l q
                                    2       2               2       2
                                                                                             
                                                                          2W 2W
                           1    - W  W
                                 2 m
                                       dt + -  W  W
                                              2 mq
                                                    +                     ml l q
                                                                                       dqt
                      =                 l                       l                            
                                 2W 2W                     2        2     2W 2W
                                 ml m
                                       dt              + - W  W
                                                          m2 l q
                                                                 +        ml mq
                                                                                       dqt

with all derivatives evaluated at m,
                                  ~  ~ l . Hence using (A.45), (A.46) and (A.48), one gets

                                            m
                                            ~   1  2W
                                              =  ·
                                            t    m

                                                  W    2
the sign of which is the same as the sign of m       . Now under assumption M, one can see
from (A.49) that m                                            ~ (t , qt ) < m1 . Note first that
                    ~ (t , qt ) is increasing in t as long as m
m~ (1, qt ) = m1 . Suppose then that there exists a value  < 1 such that m       ~ (, qt ) = m1 .
From (A.44), and noting that

                     W (m, l , ) = W (m, l , 1) + (1 - )W (m, l , 0)

                                                    64
at this point m
              ~ (, qt ) , l (, qt ) , one should have

                    W                   W (m, l , 1)          W (m, l , 0)
                                    =                + (1 - )              =0
                    m                      m                     m
                          ~ 1 ,
                          m    ~1
                                l


                                                                         W (m,l ,1)
    ~ (, qt ) = m1 = arg maxm,l W (m, l , 1) , implies that
But m                                                                       m
                                                                                     = 0 at such
point. Hence to satisfy the previous equation, we should also          have W (m
                                                                               m,l ,0)
                                                                                       = 0, which
in turn implies that m~ (, qt ) = m0 (qt ), a contradiction with assumption M . From this we
conclude that m ~ (, qt ) < m1 for all  < 1 or m   ~ (, qt ) > m1 for all  < 1. The only case
consistent with assumption M is obviously that m     ~ (, qt ) < m1 for all  < 1. From this we
                                         2W
conclude that under assumption M, m            evaluated at m   ~ (, qt ) , l (, qt ) is positive and
          m ~
therefore t > 0 (ie. religious infrastructures m  ~ (t , qt ) is increasing in the clerics' political
weight t ).
    Similarly, using (A.45), (A.46) and (A.48), we have:

                                        ~l   1    2W  2W
                                           =   ·
                                        t     ml m
                                                 ---
                                                      -


Hence   t
          ~l
              < 0 under assumption M (ie. the tax enforcement effort of the secular elite
l (t , qt ) is decreasing in the clerics' weight t ).
   Finally, substituting (A.45), (A.46) and (A.48),we obtain
                                                                   
                           m
                           ~   1   2W    2W    2W 
                              =       +     ·     >0
                           qt    mq ml l q 
                                  - -   ---   - -
                                            +         -       -

                                                                        
                      ~l  1   2W  2W        2W     2W 
                         = -
                                2
                                  ·      +      ·     <0
                      qt     -m
                              --     l q   m   l mq
                                                      
                              +
                                    --     -
                                            --    - -
                                                          -        +

      QED.

      In order to simplify the problem, we make the following assumption on the higher bound
l :



                                                 65
                                                           2    1 - m(1)
                        Assumption A: l <
                                                       1 + m(1)     0c

   Before going further with the proof, we establish this intermediary result:

Lemma 10 Under Assumption A, l (,  = 0) = l for any (, q )  [0, 1]2 .

    Proof: In order to prove Lemma 10, we need to write the first-order derivative of the
utility of the secular elites with respect to l is:

                             Ul                 2 (1 - qm)
                                = -l + (1 -  )             .                             (A.50)
                             l                 (1 + m) 0 c

Hence, when  = 0, under Assumption A, U             l
                                                      l
                                                        > 0 for any l  [0, l ] and for any
(, q )  [0, 1] , so l (,  = 0, q ) = l for any (, q )  [0, 1]2 . This concludes the proof of
              2

the Lemma. QED.
   Since (~l (t , qt ), m
                        ~ (t , qt )) maximizes the social welfare when the externalities are in-
ternalized, (t+1 , t+1 ) solves the optimization problem (10) when:
                               
                               m~ ( , q ) = m(
                                      t   t            t+1 ),   and
                                                                                         (A.51)
                               ~ ( , q ) =  (
                                  l   t   t       l    t+1 , t+1 , qt )


Indeed, when the clerics and the ruler have power t+1 and t+1 , institutions are designed
for t +1 so as to induce a choice m(t+1 ) and l (t+1 , t+1 , qt ) in that period that maximizes
the social welfare under the institutional framework of period t. It remains to be proven
that the solution (t+1 , t+1 ) of the system (A.51) is unique. Consider the following system
with two unknown variables x and y :
                                 
                                 m~ (t , qt ) = m(x), and
                                                                                         (A.52)
                                  ~ ( , q ) =  (x, y, q ),
                                      l   t   t        l         t


Consider first the case where an interior solution exists. Since the function m(.) is increasing
in its argument, from Lemma 4, there exists a unique value x(t , qt )  [0, 1] such that
m~ (t , qt ) = m(x). Substituting x(t , qt ) in the second equation, we find:

                                ~ l (t , qt ) = l (x(t , qt ), y, qt ),                  (A.53)


                                                  66
    By definition,      ~ l (t , qt )  [0, l ]. Furthermore, as l (x(t , qt ), y, qt ) is decreasing in
y from Lemma 5, under Assumption A, l (x(t , qt ), 1, qt ) = 0  l (x(t , qt ), y, qt ) 
l (x(t , qt ), 0, qt ) = l . Hence, applying the theorem of intermediate values, there exists
a single vector (x(t , qt ), y (t , qt ))  [0, 1]2 such that (A.51) holds. We have demonstrated
that the system (A.51) admits a unique interior solution, when this solution exists.
    An interior solution does not always exists, as it can be that m               ~ (t , qt ) > m(t+1 )
or m~ (t , qt ) < m(t+1 ) for any t+1  [0, 1]. In these two cases, there is a single solution
(t+1 , t+1 ) to the optimization problem (10), which is the unique vector such that (m(t+1 ),
l (t+1 , t+1 , qt )) maximizes (A.41). Indeed, when m          ~ (t , qt ) > m(t+1 ), then t+1 = 1, and
t+1 solves
                                         ~ l (t , qt ) = l (1, t+1 , qt )                         (A.54)

for t+1  [0, 1]. As l (1, t+1 , qt ) is decreasing in t+1 from Lemma 5, under Assump-
tion ??, l (1, 1, qt ) = 0  l (1, t+1 , qt )  l (1, 0, qt ) = l . Applying the theorem of
intermediate values, there exists a single t+1  [0, 1] such that       ~ l (t , qt ) = l (1, t+1 , qt )
    The reasoning is similar when m ~ (t , qt ) < m(t+1 ) for any t+1  [0, 1]: t+1 = 0 and
there is a unique solution t+1  [0, 1] to the equation   ~ l (t , qt ) = l (0, t+1 , qt ). From this
we conclude that the optimization problem (10) admits a unique solution (t+1 , t+1 ).

    We are now going to demonstrate that there exists a threshold q d (t ) such that if
qt > q d (t ), then t+1 > t . Otherwise, t+1  t . In order to demonstrate this claim, we
will show the following intermediary result:

Lemma 11 t+1 > t if and only if m
                                ~ (t , qt ) > m(t ).

   Proof: Indeed, m       ~ (t , qt ) > m(t ) means that in (A.41), the ruler would want to
commit to a provision level m      ~ (t , qt ) strictly above what is provided in equilibrium. Since
m(.) is increasing in  (Lemma 4), we deduce that when the political weight t+1 , that
decentralizes m ~ (t , qt ) is such that m   ~ (t , qt ) = m(t+1 ), one has that t+1 > t . A similar
reasoning can be applied for the corners when t+1 = 1 when m             ~ (t , qt ) > m(1) or t+1 = 0
when m~ (t , qt ) < m(0). QED.

Lemma 12 m    ~ (t , qt ) > m(t ) if and only if q > q d (t ), with qd (t ) is defined as the
threshold the value of q  [0, 1] such that

                                                1              1
                       q = max min        {                  -    }, 1 , 0 .                    (A.55)
                                           (1 - ~l (t , q ))   0c


                                                  67
   Proof: Given that m      ~ (t , qt ) is increasing in qt , the condition m
                                                                            ~ (t , qt ) > m(t ) is
equivalent to qt > q d (t )  [0, 1] with q d (t ) defined such

                 m                             ~ (t , 0)  m(t )  m
                 ~ (t , q d (t )) = m(t ) when m                 ~ (t , 1)
                         q d (t ) = 0 when m
                                           ~ (t , 0) > m(t )
                         q d (t ) = 1 when m
                                           ~ (t , 1) < m(t )

More specifically, the first-order condition associated with the determination of m() is:

                                                   
                                 (m - F (m)) - (1 - )C (m) = 0.                                       (A.56)
                               2                   2

     The first-order condition for the determination of m
                                                        ~ (, q ) writes as

                                                           -        (1-qm)(1-      ~l (,q ))
                                                        (1+m)2
                                                               [1   -         0c
                                                                                             ]
   (m - F (m)) - (1 - )C (m) + (1 - )                               q (1- ~  ( ,q ))
                                                                                                 = 0. (A.57)
 2                   2             2                         + 1+1
                                                                 m       0c
                                                                           l




     Given the two FOCs above, we deduce that m
                                              ~ (t , qt ) > m(t ) if and only if:

        t    -           (1 - qt m)(1 - ~l (t , qt ))        1   qt (1 -  ~l (t , qt ))
 (1 -     ){       [1 -                               ] +                               } > 0,
        2 (1 + m)2                  0c                    1 + m          0c
                                                                                         (A.58)
or


                     (1 - qt m)(1 -   ~l (t , qt ))               qt (1 -       ~l (t , qt ))
             [1 -                                   ] < (1 + m)
                                0c                                            0c
                               (1 - ~l (t , qt ))        qt (1 -  ~l (t , qt ))
                        1-                            <
                                      0c                         0c
                                 0c
                                              - 1 < qt
                        (1 -    ~l (t , qt ))

     which rewrites
                                                  0c
                                   qt >    {                   - 1}.                                  (A.59)
                                            (1 - ~l (t , qt ))
Denote  (, q ) the function

                                                       0c
                               (, q ) = q -      {                - 1}
                                                  (1 - ~l (, q ))


                                                   68
Given that ~l (, q ) is a decreasing function of q,  (, q ) is an increasing function of q . Now
condition (A.59)is equivalent to qt > qd (t ) with

                                                         0c
               qd (t ) = 0 when  (t , 0) = - {                        - 1} > 0
                                               (1 -      ~l (t , 0))
                                                             0c
               qd (t ) = 1 when  (t , 1) = 1 - {                        - 1} < 0
                                                 (1 -        ~l (t , 1)
               qd (t ) = q  (0, 1) such that  (t , q ) = 0 otherwise

Compactly, qd (t ) is defined as the threshold the value of q  [0, 1] such that

                                                 0c
                         q = max min       {                  - 1}, 1 , 0 .                     (A.60)
                                            (1 - ~l (t , q ))

and m~ (t ) > m(t ) if and only if q > q d (t ). We deduce that q d (t ) is increasing in  and
decreasing in  and t . Combining the results established in Lemma 11 and Lemma 12,
we get that t+1 > t if and only if q > q d (t ). QED.

    Finally, we demonstrate that there exists a threshold q   ~d (t , t ) such that if qt >
~d (t , t ), then t+1 > t . Otherwise, t+1  t . In order to demonstrate this claim,
q
we proceed in two steps. First, we show the following result:

Lemma 13 t+1 > t if and only if ~ l (t , t ) < l (t+1 , t ), with
                          
                            s.t m() = m
                                      ~ (t )               ~ (t )  (m(0), m(1))
                                                        if m
                          
                   t+1   = 1                            if m
                                                           ~ (t ) > m(1)                        (A.61)
                          0                             if m
                                                           ~ (t ) < m(0).

   Proof: Indeed,   ~ l (t , qt ) < l (t+1 , t , qt ) means that ­ given that the clerics have an
optimal weight t+1 ­ if the ruler could, he would wish the secular elite to provide a lower
enforcement effort. Since l (t+1 , qt , .) is a decreasing function of t , the ruler increases his
own political weight t , so that the secular elite provides less effort: t+1 > t . QED.


Lemma 14 There exists a threshold q      ~d (t , t )  [0, 1] such that ~ l (t , qt ) < l (t+1 , t , qt )
if and only if q > q
                   ~d (t , t ), with q
                                     ~d (t , 1) = 1 and t+1 given in (A.61).



                                                  69
    Proof: The first-order condition associated with the determination of ~ l (t , qt ) is:

                                                 2 (1 - qt c ( m
                                                               ~ (t , qt )))
                          -~ l (t , qt ) -  +                                =0                     (A.62)
                                                c 0 (1 + c ( m ~ (t , qt ))

Given that m
           ~ (t , qt ) = m(t+1 ), this rewrites as

                                                  2 (1 - qt c (m(t+1 ))
                           -~ l (t , qt ) -  +                          =0                          (A.63)
                                                 c 0 (1 + c (m(t+1 ))

The first-order condition associated with the determination of l (t+1 , t , qt ) is:

                                                        2 (1 - qt c (m(t+1 ))
                      - l (t+1 , t , qt ) + (1 - t )                          =0                    (A.64)
                                                       c 0 (1 + c (m(t+1 ))

Hence, the inequality ~ l (t , qt ) < l (t+1 , t , qt ) is verified when

                                            2 (1 - qt c (m
                                                         ~ (t , qt ))
                                     > t                              ,                             (A.65)
                                           c 0 (1 + c (m ~ (t , qt ))

    Now the RHS of (A.65) is decreasing in qt as m         ~ (t , qt ) is an increasing function of qt so
there exists a unique threshold q      ~d (t , t ) such that if q > q ~d (t , t ), then (A.65) is satisfied.
Otherwise, it is not satisfied. Moreover given that the RHS of (A.65) is decreasing in t
(as m
    ~ (t , qt ) and c (m  ~ (t , qt ) are increasing in t ), and increasing in t , it follows that the
threshold q ~d (t , t ) is decreasing in t and increasing in t . QED.

  Combining the results established in Lemmas 12 and 14, we have demonstrated that
t+1 > t if and only if q > q
                           ~d (t , t ).
  Summarizing, we have demonstrated the followings:

    · The optimization problem (10) admits a unique solution (t+1 , t+1 )  [0, 1]2 .

    · there exists a threshold q
                               ~d (t , t ) such that if q > q
                                                            ~d (t , t ) then t+1 > t . Otherwise,
      t+1  t .

    · There exists a threshold q d (t ) such that if qt > q d (t ), then t+1 > t . Otherwise,
      t+1  t .

    · q
      ~d (t , t ) is decreasing in t and increasing in t . and q d (t ) is decreasing in t .



                                                    70
   Finally, q  ~d (t , 1) = 1 because in equilibrium, the secular elite provides no effort,
l (t , 0, qt ) = 0 and have zero utility. Hence, an epsilon increase in their political weight
1 - t will increase the social welfare by increasing both the utility of the ruler, and of the
secular elite. This concludes the proof of Proposition 4. QED.


A.8       Proof of Proposition 5
As in the proof of Proposition 2, we first deduce from the maximization program (A.23)
that dRe = DRe ((1 - qt )VRe , m) with DRe (0, m) = 0, and DRe (·, ·) an increasing function
of both arguments (1 - qt )VRe and m. Also from (A.24) d   S = DS (qt VS ) is an increasing
function of qt VS .
    Parents do not know the realization of their children's capacity c to escape taxation
when cultural transmission occurs. Consequently, the paternalistic motives have to be
amended to involve expectations of the induced utilities with respect such capacity c.
More precisely we have:
                    
                                              (1-Re ) c    dc     /    (1-c ) dc
                    V
                        ReRe (, , q )   =    1+c () Re / c
                                                              + 0 Re 1+ c () c
                                                        c dc    /
                                                                                          (A.66)
                    V                         (1-Re )               (1-c ) dc
                        Re S (, , q ) =     (1+c ())  / c
                                                             + 0 1+c () c ,

with =    0 /(1   - l (, , q )). Hence,

                                         ( c ())2 (1 - l (, q,  ))
                          VRe (, , q ) =                           .                      (A.67)
                                           2c 0 (1 + c ())

Similarly, we find that

                                                            ( c ())2 (1 - l (, , q ))
     VS (, , q ) = VRe (, , q ) = V (, , q ) =                                        .   (A.68)
                                                              2c 0 (1 + c ())

Again the result that Vs (, , q ) = Vre (, , q ) follows from the quadratic specification
of the expected payoff functions. Note as well that because l (, , q ) depends on q (ie. is
a decreasing function in q ), V (, , q ) also depends on q and is an increasing function of
q
    Now, the cultural dynamics write as

                                qt+1 - qt = qt (1 - qt )D(t , t , qt ).                   (A.69)


                                                    71
     with

           D(t , t , qt ) = d      
                             Re - dS = DRe [(1 - qt )V (t , t , qt ), m(t )] - DS [qt V (t , t , qt )]


     can be interpreted as the relative "cultural fitness" of the religious trait in the population.
     Again simple inspection shows

                                 D(t , t , 0) = DRe [V (t , t , 0), m(t )] > 0

     and
                                      D(t , t , 1) = -DS [V (t , t , 1)] < 0
                                                         
     From this it follows that there exists a threshold qd (t , t )  (0, 1) such that

                                                            
                                                 D(t , t , qd (t , t )) = 0                            (A.70)

     Compared to the benchmark model, D(t , t , qt ) may not be always decreasing function
                                                                                         
     in qt , as V (t , t , qt ) is increasing in qt and the uniqueness of the threshold qd (t , t ) is
     not necessarily ensured. When however (1 - q )V (, , q ) is a decreasing function of q,25
     simple inspection shows that D(t , t , qt ) is a decreasing function of qt and that qt+1 < qt
                           
     if and only if qt > qd (t , t ), as stated in proposition 5.
         In such a case, defining again the sensitivity of parents' socialization to paternalistic
     motives by the following elasticities:

                                          DRe (x, y )    x                        DS   z
                                Re    =               ·     and           S   =      ·
                                            x           DRe                       z DRe

     evaluated respectively at x = (1 - q )V (, , q ) and y = m(), and z = q V (, , q ), we
     obtain

                                                                      V (t ,t )
                         
                        qd (t , t )   [     Re    -   S] d
                                                          
                                                             (t , t ) ·
                                                                      V (t ,t )
                                                                                  + D  Re
                                                                                       m
                                                                                            · m (t )
                                    =                                                                  (A.71)
                                                             - D
                                                               q
                                                                           
                                                                 (t , t , qd (t , t ))
     with d (t , t ) = d                                            
                          Re ((t , t , qd (t , t )) = dS ((t , t , qd (t , t )), the equilibrium commun
                                             
     socialization rate at the threshold qd    (t , t ). Again the numerator is composed of two terms
     reflecting the two channels through which the institutional environment t affects cultural

25                              2           
     This is ensured when 1 >   c 0   max   , 1


                                                                72
                                                                               V ( , )
transmission. The first term K (t ) = [ Re - S ] d (t , t ) · V(tt,tt) is the paternalistic
motive channel. As V (t , t ) > 0, the sign of K (t ) depends on the relative sensitivity
of parents' socialization to paternalistic motives. It is positive when Re > S , namely when
the socialization rate of religious parents dRe is more sensitive to paternalistic motives than
the one of secular parents dS . The second positive term D
                               
                                                               m
                                                                 Re
                                                                    · m (t ) reflects the positive
effect of promoting religious infrastructures as complementary inputs in the transmission
process of the religious trait.
    As in the benchmark model, it follows again that when religious parents' socialization
efforts are more sensitive to paternalistic motives than secular parents (ie. Re > S ) , and
(or) when religious infrastructures are strong enough complementary inputs to socialization
                                                                           
to the religious trait, then the numerator of (A.71) is positive and qd     (t , t ) is increasing
in t .




   · Example with constant elasticity socialization cost functions

   Consider the following socialization cost functions:
                                    
                                    h (d) = d1+re ·            1
                                                                      and
                                     Re       1+re            (m)
                                                                                                    (A.72)
                                    h (d) = d1+s ,
                                      s       1+s


with s  re > 0 and  (m) > 0. The optimal socialization efforts are such that:
                    
                                                        1             1
                    d (q ,  ) = ((1 - q )V ( ,  , q )) re · [  (   )] re
                     Re  t  t          t      t    t  t          t
                                                                                                    (A.73)
                    d (q ,  ) = (q V ( ,  , q )) 1s .
                        S   t   t      t      t   t    t


                                                                      1
and in this constant elasticity specification     Re      -   S   =   re
                                                                            - 1s  0. Cultural dynamics are
described as:

                                                      1                    1                   1
 qt+1 - qt = qt (1 - qt ){((1 - qt )V (t , t , qt )) re · [ (t )] re - (qt V (t , t , qt )) s }, (A.74)




                                                  73
which admits two unstable steady states q = 0 and q = 1, and in general a unique interior
                            
attractor, which we denote qd (t , t ) such that:
                   1
                                                             
        qd (t , t ) s            ( c (t ))2 (1 - l (t , t , qd (t , t ))  S -re          1
                        1   =[                                          ] S re · [ (t )] re   (A.75)
          
    (1 - qd (t , t )) re                2c 0 (1 + c (t ))

                                                                   
   From the last equation, and given that S > re , we deduce that qd (t , t ) is increasing
in , t and t and decreasing in . This concludes the proof of Proposition 5.


   · Joint dynamics with qd
                          
                            (t , t ) independent from t .

    Consider the case where the socialization cost functions of religious and secular parents
are given by the following form

                                       d1+ 1               d1+
                        hRe (d, m) =            , hs (d) =     with  > 0
                                       1 +  (m)            1+
                                                 
from (A.75), it is immediate that the threshold qd (t , t ) is given by:

                                                               [ (t )]
                                   qd (t , t ) = qd (t ) =
                                                             1 + [ (t )]

and is therefore independent from t . In such a case the dynamics of t and qt are such
                                                                                  
that: t+1 > t if and only if qt > q d (t ), and qt+1 > qt if and only if qt < qd   (t ) They are
then decoupled from the dynamics of t and follow the same pattern as in the benchmark
model. Consequently, depending on the initial conditions (0 , q0 ), (t , qt ) converge towards
                                                         
a theocratic regime (1, qd (1)) or a secular regime (0, qd (0)) . Associated to these dynamics,
the dynamics of political centralization then converges towards strong state centralization
                                                                               
with 1  = d (1, qd (1)), or weak state centralization 0     = d (0, qd (0)) < 1 . QED.



A.9       Proof of Proposition 6
We consider that the policymaker chooses the amount of religious infrastructures m, and
level of technology I  [0, max ] to maximize

                   W (m, I , c , , q ) = (1 - ) [Ur (m, I , q )] + Uc (m, c )

                                                    74
while the cleric maximizes Uc (m, c ) with respect to c with

                          Ur (m, I , q ) =  E (I , c , q ) - C (m)
                                                   2
                            Uc (c , m) = mc - c - F (m)
                                                   2

(we assume for convenience that the cost of the religious infrastructures C (m) is paid as a
lump-sum cost by all segments of society) with

                                               I        (1 - qt c )
                         E (I , c , q ) =         {1 -              }
                                            1 + c           0c


where religious legitimacy is decreasing in the innovation effort:  = (I ) = 0 - kI . We
assume kmax < 0 < 2kmax Given the institutional framework , one immediately gets

                      c = m, - (1 - )C (m) + (c - F (m)) = 0

and I determined by the FOC:

                                                      (1-q0 c )
                                                1-         0c
                           I (c , q ) = min          2 qkc
                                                                , max
                                                        0c



This gives the equilibrium values m () such that (1 - )C (m) + F (m) = m. (As
usual we assume that C (m) > 0, F (m) > 0, C (0) = F (0) = 0 and limm F (m) >
1 > F (0) to ensure the existence of a unique equilibrium for all   [0, 1] . Note that
                                   C (0)
m () > 0 if and only if  > C (0)+1    -F (0)
                                              ). This provides also c () = m (), and
I (, q ) = I (m () , q ). When positive, it is also easy to see that m () is an increasing
function of  (as we assume that C (m) > F (m)).

   As in the related proofs of Propositions 1 and 4, we first demonstrate that the opti-
mization problem (15) admits a unique solution t+1  [0, 1]:

         max(1 - t ) [Ur (m(t+1 ), I (t+1 ), qt )] + t Uc (m (t+1 ) , c (t+1 )))     (A.76)
         t+1


   In order to solve this maximization problem, we solve the following related optimization
problem:
                 max W (m, I , t , qt ) = (1 - t ) [Ur (m, I , qt )] + t Uc (m),     (A.77)
                m,I



                                                75
where the solution, denoted (m  ~ (t , qt ), I (t , qt )) maximizes the social welfare when the
                                                                               1 2
externalities are internalized, so given that Uc (m) = Uc (m, c (m)) = 2        m - F (m), as
c (m) = m. Ur (m, I , qt ) =  E (m, I , qt ) - C (m), with

                                             I         (1 - qt [0 - kI ] m)
                     E (m, I , qt ) =            {1 -                       }.                               (A.78)
                                           1 + m                0c


We also assume that in the previous optimization problem, the choices of both the re-
ligious provision m and of the effort of the innovators I are made by a ruler who has
a policy commitment capacity, internalizing the externalities associated with the policy
choice problem described in the main text. We find that (m ~ (t , qt ), I (t , qt )) solves the
following equations:

  W = t (m - F (m)) - (1 - t )C (m) + (1 - t ) I                            -            (1-q [[0 -kI ]]m)         q [0 -kI ]
 m                                            1+m                          1+m
                                                                                   1-            0c
                                                                                                              +         0c
                                                                                                                                = 0,
 W =     (1-t )            (1-qt m)          kI  qt m
 I       1+m
                {I   1-       0c
                                         -      0c
                                                      }   = 0.
                                                                                                             (A.79)
From the second FOC equation we again get the optimal level of technology:

                                                              (1-qt 0 m)
                                                        1-         0c
                            I (m, qt ) = min                 2 qt km
                                                                           , max
                                                                0c



which rewrites as
                                      0c
                                  - 1 0
                                               op               A
                 I (m, qt ) =          +    = I   (m, qt ) when    m
                                2kqt m   2k                     qt
                                            A
                              = max when       m
                                            qt

with
                                                     0c
                                                    -1
                                                     
                                           A=             >0
                                                2kmax - 0
Note that I (m, q ) is decreasing in qt and m. Now the characterization of m
                                                                           ~ (t , qt ) is
obtained from
                            W
                    (m) =        (m, I (m, qt ) , t , qt )  0 and m  0
                            m




                                                        76
When C (m) and F (m) are sufficiently convex,  (m) is decreasing in m. Moreover given
that
                                                      qt [0 - kmax ]
               (0) = (1 - t )max - 1 -            +
                                              0c            0c

we have  (0) > 0 when
                                                                  0c
                                 qt > q =                              -1
                                             [0 - kmax ]          
     ~ (t , qt ) = 0 for qt  q and m
Thus m                             ~ (t , qt ) > 0 for qt > q . Substitution provides I (t , qt ) =
I (m
   ~ (t , qt ), qt ).
   Moreover as

            2W               I      -      [[0 - kI ]] m    [0 - kI ]
               = (1 - t )                                +
           mq             1 + m 1 + m            0c            0c
                              I     [0 - kI ]
               = (1 - t )        2            >0
                          [1 + m]      0c


     Then m                                         ~ (t , qt )  m (t ) if and only if
          ~ (t , qt ) is increasing in qt . As well m

                             -                (1-qt [[0 -kI (m(t ),qt )]]m)
                           1+m(t )
                                       1-                 0c
                                          qt [0 -kI (m(t ),qt )]
                                                                              0
                                       +             0c


or
                                  0c
                                       - 1  qt [0 - kI (m (t ) , qt )]                        (A.80)
                                  
qt [0 - kI (m (t ) , qt )] is an increasing function of qt and decreasing function of t . Con-
dition (A.80) can be rewritten as a threshold condition qt  q I (t ) for q I (t )  (0, 1] with
q I (t ) is a decreasing function of t .
     Summarizing we get m       ~ (t , qt )  m (t ) if and only if qt  q I (t ) for q I (t )  (0, 1] .
     Since (m ~ (t , qt ), ~I (t , qt )) maximizes the social welfare when the externalities are in-
ternalized, t+1 solves the optimization problem (15) when:
                                 
                                 m~ ( , q ) = m(
                                         t   t           t+1 ),   and
                                                                                              (A.81)
                                 ~ I (t , qt ) = I (m(t+1 ), qt )

Given the first equality, it is immediate to see that the second equality is automatically
satisfied from the definition of I (m, qt ) . Given this the institutional dynamics of t is
uniquely determined. Observe as well that m    ~ (t , qt )  m (t ) if and only if qt  q I (t ).

                                                    77
This can be rewritten as m(t+1 )  m (t ) if and only if qt  q I (t ). Given the fact that
m () is increasing in , we deduce the following result:

                              t+1  t if and only if qt  q I (t )

   This concludes the proof of Proposition 6.


A.10        Proof of Proposition 7
The paternalistic motives have to be amended to take into account the fact that produc-
tivity is optimally determined by the endogenous choice of technology: More precisely we
have:
                 
                                        (1-Re )I (,q ) c      dc     /     (1-c 0 ) dc
                 V
                     ReRe (, q )   =       1+c ()      Re / 0 c
                                                                 + 0 Re 0 1+  c () c
                                                                                           (A.82)
                 V                     (1-Re )I (,q ) c    dc      / 0 (1-c 0 ) dc
                     Re S (, q ) =        (1+c ())     / 0 c
                                                              + 0      1+c () c
                                                                                   ,
Hence,
                                             ( c ())2 I (, q )
                              VRe (, , q ) =                   .                           (A.83)
                                              2c 0 (1 + c ())
Similarly, we find that

                                                                  ( c ())2 I (, q )
         VS (, , q ) = VRe (, , q ) = V (, , q ) =                                  .      (A.84)
                                                                   2c 0 (1 + c ())

Again the result that Vs (, , q ) = Vre (, , q ) follows from the quadratic specification
of the expected payoff functions. Note as well that because I (, q )) depends on q (ie. is
a decreasing function in q ), V (, , q ) also depends on q and is decreasing function of q
    Now, the cultural dynamics write as

                                   qt+1 - qt = qt (1 - qt )D(t , qt ).                     (A.85)

with

         D(t , qt ) = d      
                       Re - dS = DRe [(1 - qt )V (t , qt ), m(t )] - DS [qt V (t , qt )]




                                                     78
     can be interpreted as the relative "cultural fitness" of the religious trait in the population.
     Again simple inspection shows

                                      D(t , 0) = DRe [V (t , 0), m(t )] > 0

     and
                                            D(t , 1) = -DS [V (t , 1)] < 0
                                                         
     From this it follows that there exists a threshold qI (t )  (0, 1) such that

                                                          
                                                   D(t , qI (t )) = 0                          (A.86)

     Compared to the benchmark model, D(t , qt ) may not be always decreasing function in qt ,
                                                                             
     as V (t , qt ) is decreasing in qt and the uniqueness of the threshold qd (t ) is not necessarily
                                                                        26
     ensured. When however q V (, q ) is increasing function of q, simple inspection shows
                                                                                             
     that D(t , qt ) is a decreasing function of qt and that qt+1 < qt if and only if qt > qI (t , t ),
     as stated in proposition 7. QED.




26                              2            
     This is ensured when 1 >   c 0   max    , 1


                                                          79
