                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      SEARCHING FOR JOB SECURITY AND THE CONSEQUENCES OF JOB LOSS

                                        Gregor Jarosch

                                      Working Paper 28481
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28481


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2021




I'd like to thank Robert Shimer and Steven Davis for advice and guidance, and the editor as well
as four anonymous referees for improving the paper. Thanks also to Fernando Alvarez, Stéphane
Bonhomme, Maryam Farboodi, Veronica Guerrieri, Erik Hurst, Thibaut Lamadon, Rafael Lopes
de Melo, Laura Pilossoph, Richard Rogerson, Isaac Sorkin, David Strauss, Christopher Tonetti,
Rasool Zandvakil, and seminar participants at various conferences and universities for their
thoughts and comments. Dorisz Albrecht and Hugo Lhullier provided outstanding research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Gregor Jarosch. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Searching for Job Security and the Consequences of Job Loss
Gregor Jarosch
NBER Working Paper No. 28481
February 2021
JEL No. E24,J3

                                         ABSTRACT

Job loss comes with large present value earnings losses which elude workhorse models of
unemployment and labor market policy. I propose a parsimonious model of a frictional labor
market in which jobs differ in terms of unemployment risk and workers search off- and on-the-
job. This gives rise to a job ladder with slippery bottom rungs where unemployment spells beget
unemployment spells. I allow for human capital to respond to time spent out of work and estimate
the framework on German Social Security data. The model captures the joint response of wages,
employment, and unemployment risk to job loss which I measure empirically. The key driver of
the "unemployment scar" is the loss in job security and its interaction with the evolution of
human capital.


Gregor Jarosch
Department of Economics
Princeton University
195 Julis Rabinowitz Building
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
gregorjarosch@gmail.com
1       Introduction
Job loss is a highly persistent negative shock to future labor market outcomes. A large
body of empirical work going back at least to Jacobson et al. (1993) documents that job
loss depresses a worker's future wages and employment, resulting in large present value
earnings losses. Arguably, the adverse consequences of job loss are the reason the aggregate
unemployment rate receives such widespread attention. Understanding these outcomes and
capturing them in models of the labor market is hence important for properly assessing the
damage caused by aggregate downturns and the debate around unemployment policy. Yet,
as Davis and von Wachter (2011) point out, the magnitude and persistence of these earnings
losses elude the workhorse models used in the study of job loss, unemployment, and labor
market policy. This paper offers a model of wage and employment dynamics in a frictional
setting that quantitatively accounts for the consequences of job loss which I measure in
German social security data.
    There are three key ingredients to the model. First, jobs differ in terms of unemployment
risk. Second, employed workers search on-the-job for better positions. Jointly, this gives rise
to a job ladder with slippery bottom rungs where workers on lower rungs are particularly
exposed to unemployment risk. It follows that unemployment spells beget unemployment
spells. Third, worker's human capital may fall when out of work, in the spirit of Mincer and
Ofek (1982).
    I estimate the framework on German social security data and show that it quantitatively
captures the response of earnings to job loss in the German labor market. Furthermore,
I show that the model also tracks the breakdown of the earnings response into wages and
employment, the response of future job loss to current job loss, as well as the cross-sectional
dispersion of the earnings losses. I use model simulations to argue that the loss in job security
and its interaction with the evolution of human capital lie at the heart of the "unemployment
scar".
    More specifically, I model a frictional labor market in which both employed and unem-
ployed workers sample jobs that differ along two dimensions. First, each job comes with
a level of productivity that governs the output produced by the worker. Second, each job
comes with a level of security that governs the rate at which the employment relationship
ends and the worker becomes unemployed. Both these features are exogenously assigned and
observable to all parties.1
    1
    Among other things, one might suspect that size, industry, management practice, unionization sta-
tus, and the legal form of the business may give rise to differences in job security across firms. Pinheiro
and Visschers (2015), who introduce a job security ladder to study compensating differentials, microfound
heterogeneity in unemployment risk across firms building on heterogeneous organizational capital.



                                                    1
    Whenever an employed worker receives an outside offer from a job that is more attractive,
she moves from job to job. Wages are set according to the sequential auction bargaining
protocol (Cahuc et al. (2006)) where workers use outside offers to extract rents from their
employers. I show that, as workers climb the job ladder, they move--under plausible restric-
tions on the job offer distribution--towards increasingly productive and secure jobs. This
process gets reset whenever a worker experiences job loss. Unemployment spells are there-
fore serially correlated. It follows that job loss, in particular for workers high up on the job
ladder, can come with large cumulative employment losses.
    In addition, I allow for human capital to evolve stochastically, depending on a worker's
employment status. In particular, if skill tends to increase during times of employment and
to fall during times of nonemployment, as is the case in my estimated model, time spent
in nonemployment reduces future wages. Correlated unemployment spells amplify future
employment losses from job loss which in turn gets picked up by human capital dynamics,
amplifying the long run response of wages. Thus, the basic framework can generate a highly
persistent response of both employment and wages to an unemployment spell which makes
it an ideal laboratory to study the labor market consequences of job loss.
    I finish the characterization of the model briefly discussing the efficiency properties of
my framework which features a standard search externality (Diamond (1982), Mortensen
(1982)). Workers, in their mobility decisions, do not take into account the gains from future
employment relationships that accrue to future employers. This externality manifests itself
along a novel margin in a setup where workers frequently need to trade off the security
and productivity of a job opportunity. This can lead to inefficient mobility decisions where
workers may either over- or under-value job security relative to a socially efficient benchmark.
    I estimate the framework on longitudinal German Social Security data covering the period
from 1975 to 2010 via indirect inference. Most importantly, the estimation targets how the
rate of job loss evolves with tenure to inform the shape of the distribution of job security
faced by workers. The additional targets are primarily cross-sectional features of the wage
distribution, short-run wage dynamics, and worker flows.
    The estimated model captures these targets well and features empirically plausible human
capital dynamics, worker sorting, and firm productivity dispersion. Most importantly, I offer
direct evidence on the extent of heterogeneity in job security across employers. Specifically, I
show that some German establishments churn workers into unemployment at a persistently
higher pace than others, even when controlling for worker types. I contrast this untargeted
evidence with its model counterpart to verify that the heterogeneity the model requires to
match duration dependence in the rate of job loss is reasonable. If anything, the estimated
model understates the extent to which job security differs across employers in the data


                                               2
when measured directly. This grounds the quantitative force of the mechanism I build on
empirically. I also document that, through employment-to-employment transitions, workers
move toward establishments that provide more job security. This evidence suggests that,
indeed, an important aspect of the career ladder is the search for stable employment, where
job security is a key primitive of a job.2
    To measure the consequences of job loss in the data and in model simulations, I follow the
approach of a large empirical literature on job displacement following Jacobson et al. (1993).
The empirical specification and sample construction, in particular a restriction to workers
with job tenure of at least three years, are designed to address unobserved heterogeneity
and selection. Much like in the US, job separation in Germany results in large and long-
lasting reductions in earnings. Workers in the baseline sample lose, on average, 21.3% of
counterfactual present value earnings over the next 20 years upon job displacement.
    I further decompose the empirical earnings reduction into the response of wages and
employment rates. Wages drop substantially and hardly recover over the next two decades.
Likewise, the employment rate is sharply reduced and only slowly recovers. It stays depressed
for over a decade and accounts for roughly 45% of the total earnings losses. Crucially, I show
that the reduction in the employment rate due to job loss reflects a large and sustained
increase in the risk of future job loss. These findings are robust to a large number of
robustness checks. I conclude the empirical part with a set of quantile regressions which
show that there is vast heterogeneity in the earnings response to job loss. The estimated
model quantitatively captures all of these empirical results.
    I then use the setup to sort out the drivers underlying the unemployment scar. Beyond
the future employment rate, the loss in job security also keeps a worker's wage depressed
through its interaction with three distinct mechanisms. First, it repeatedly sets back the
search for higher paying employers. Second, it repeatedly sets back rent extraction through
the sampling of outside offers. And third, because the employment rate is reduced, human
capital keeps diverging from its counterfactual path. Model simulations suggest a small role
for the bargaining channel whereas the other two channels explain a roughly equal portion,
with human capital becoming increasingly important in the long run.
    I complement this with a second exercise where I separately shut down heterogeneity in
terms of job security and human capital which results in a counterfactually rapid recovery
of earnings and wages from job loss. This likewise emphasizes that the complementarity be-
tween job security and the evolution of human capital is key for capturing and understanding
the size and persistence of the scarring effect of job loss in the German data.
   2
    Similarly, Burgess et al. (2000) document large and persistent heterogeneity in terms of worker churn
across employers (see also Davis et al. (2013)).



                                                   3
    The final exercise asks to which extent the earnings losses of job losers with high tenure
overstate the "average" unemployment scar which is empirically more elusive than the one
of workers with high tenure. The model implies that even the average job lost comes with a
drastic 17.7% present value earnings loss implying that unemployment is generally a scarring
event.
    The paper is organized as follows. The next section briefly reviews related work. I
introduce the basic model in section 2, characterize the job ladder, and discuss efficiency.
Section 3 estimates the framework on German social security data, discusses model fit,
and offers direct evidence on heterogeneity in unemployment risk. Section 4 studies the
consequences of job loss empirically and shows that the model accounts for the empirical
patterns. It then uses the model to assess the composition and size of the scarring effect of
unemployment. Section 5 concludes.


Related Literature
This paper is related to a large empirical literature that measures the cost of job loss for
workers with high tenure (Jacobson et al. (1993), Couch and Placzek (2010), Davis and
von Wachter (2011), Flaaen et al. (2019)) from micro data.3 Most closely related to the
empirical parts of this paper is recent work by Lachowska et al. (2020), studying US data, and
Schmieder et al. (2020), studying the German labor market. Both these papers separately
estimate the response of employment and wages to job loss. A few empirical papers have
noted the role of recurring job loss in explaining the cost of job loss (Hall (1995), Stevens
(1997)).
    The paper is part of a growing literature that attempts to reconcile models of individual
wage and employment dynamics in a frictional setting with this micro evidence. Huckfeldt
(2016) builds a model with two types of jobs, skill-intensive and skill-neutral, and focuses
on how the present value earnings losses from job loss vary with the aggregate state (Davis
and von Wachter (2011), Schmieder et al. (2009)). Krolikowski (2017) builds a job ladder
where repeated unemployment spells arise because newly employed workers have low match
quality and are hence close to an endogenous separation threshold (see also, Jung and Kuhn
(2019)). Burdett et al. (2020) emphasize the importance of human capital for the cost of job
loss which they measure in the same date, but work with a model where the employment
rate recovers rapidly. Pries (2004) offers a model of recurring job loss but focuses on the
consequences for aggregate unemployment dynamics.
  3
    Even earlier work includes Ruhm (1987) and Topel (1990). The earlier studies used survey data while
the literature since Jacobson et al. (1993) has primarily relied on administrative data.


                                                  4
    Relative to these papers, I offer an empirical decomposition of the empirical earnings
losses into wages and employment, relate the employment response to the response of future
job loss, and document the heterogeneity in the cost of job loss. I also confront my model
with the data along all these dimensions and offer a distinct mechanism to capture repeated
spells and persistent wage losses--loss in job security, where a job's security is a primitive of
the job rather than a by-product of its productivity. Finally, I offer direct evidence on the
mechanism, namely persistent and substantial heterogeneity in terms of the unemployment
risk associated with an employer.
    My framework is most closely related to Bagger et al. (2014) who study individual wage
dynamics in a frictional setting with human capital dynamics but do not study the conse-
quences of job loss. The most important distinction is that job security is heterogeneous in
my setup and that I solve for fixed wages rather than piece rates. The model in Pinheiro
and Visschers (2015) has differential unemployment risk and on-the-job search which they
show gives rise to correlated unemployment spells.
    At the heart of this paper is a mechanism that gives rise to duration dependence, where
the risk of unemployment declines with time since unemployment. I therefore offer an alter-
native narrative to that of Jovanovic (1979) where learning about match quality leads to a de-
clining hazard into unemployment with tenure.4 Importantly, my mechanism--heterogeneity
in unemployment risk across employers--is directly observable in the data.


2         Model
I now construct a discrete-time partial equilibrium model of wage and employment dynamics
in a frictional labor market where jobs differ along two dimensions: productivity and security.
Its three key ingredients with respect to the consequences of job loss are 1) on-the-job search,
2) heterogeneity in unemployment risk across jobs, and 3) human capital that responds to
recent work experience.


2.1         Primitives
Agents

I denote a firm-type by a vector  = (y ,  ), where y  y, y
                                                         ¯ denotes productivity and
  [0, 1] denotes the exogenous probability at which an employment relationship ends.
    4
        Jovanovic (1984) combines learning about match quality with on-the-job search.




                                                       5
Both elements of  are observable. Thus, jobs differ in productivity and security.5
    On the other side of the labor market are infinitely lived workers with linear preferences
over the single good. Workers are either employed at some firm  or unemployed. When
unemployed, they receive a value of z per period, independent of their type. Workers'
general human capital evolves stochastically, along the lines of Mincer and Ofek (1982) and
Ljungqvist and Sargent (1998). Specifically, workers have observable skill s  S = [s, s      ¯],
the evolution of which is first order Markov and depends on a worker's employment status.
While a worker is employed, the conditional distribution of her skill next period, s , is given
by Ge (s |s). A potentially different conditional distribution Gu (s |s) governs the evolution
of ability during unemployment.

Matching, Production, and Bargaining

Unemployed workers encounter job openings with probability 0 while employed workers
encounter job openings at other employers with probability 1 . Search is random and all
workers, employed and unemployed, sample from the same exogenous job offer distribution
F (). I assume throughout that F () is not degenerate along either dimension.
    Once a worker and a firm form a match, the worker's ability s and the firm's productivity
y jointly govern the per-period output of the pair, p (y , s), strictly increasing in both argu-
ments. With probability  , the worker flows into unemployment and the job disappears.6
If a worker meets a firm and the pair decides not to consummate the match the job opening
has no continuation value to the employer.
    The timing is as follows: After output is produced the worker may become unemployed.
After that, her human capital gets updated and, if she did not lose her job, she might receive
an outside offer. Unemployed workers similarly find jobs after observing the shock to human
capital.
    Wages are restricted to fixed wage contracts which can only be renegotiated when either
party has a credible threat. Let   ^ denote the firm a worker used as outside option during
her last wage bargain and let s                                                          ^s
                               ^ denote the skill she had at that point. I will refer to , ^ as
"negotiation benchmark". In a slight abuse of notation, let    ^ = u if a worker last bargained
with unemployment as her outside option.
   5
     For the theoretical exposition it is not necessary to take a stance on whether the heterogeneity is job-,
or firm-specific and I use firm, employer, and job interchangeably. In the empirical sections, I interpret the
heterogeneity as explicitly at the establishment-level.
   6
     Since preferences are linear over the wage, workers only care about job security because it affects expected
earnings and not because they are risk averse. They also do not value job security per se, i.e. as an amenity
(Bonhomme and Jolivet (2009)). I emphasize that job security here is explicitly treated as (one minus) the
probability of a relationship-level shock that results in unemployment. The empirical section treats the data
accordingly.


                                                       6
    Let W , ,  ^ s, s
                    ^ and J , ,^ s, s
                                    ^ denote the value of an employed worker and the value
of a filled job to an employer, respectively. Let U (s) denote the value of unemployment.
Let S (, s)  max 0, W , ,   ^ s, s
                                 ^ - U (s) + J , , ^ s, s
                                                        ^ denote joint surplus, the private
net value of an employment relationship.7 Only matches with strictly positive surplus are
formed and sustained.
    Wages are pinned down in the tradition of the sequential auction framework of Cahuc et
al. (2006) which extends earlier work by Postel-Vinay and Robin (2002a,b).8 Specifically, if
an unemployed worker with ability s1 and a firm with features 1 choose to form a match,
the wage implements a surplus split with worker share   [0, 1],

                                W (1 , u, s1 , s1 ) - U (s1 ) = S (1 , s1 ) .                               (1)

   Next, consider a worker with current ability s1 , employed at firm 1 , with negotiation
benchmark (0 , s0 ). If such a worker receives an offer from outside firm 2 , there are three
cases. First, if S (2 , s1 ) > S (1 , s1 ), she moves to 2 . In that case, her old employer 1 and
current skill s1 become her negotiation benchmark. Her new wage allocates her a net value

                W (2 , 1 , s1 , s1 ) - U (s1 ) = S (1 , s1 ) +  (S (2 , s1 ) - S (1 , s1 )) .               (2)

Thus, she receives the full surplus of her outside option (her former job) plus a share  of
the net gains from the move to firm 2 . I denote the set of firms that correspond to this first
case as M1 (1 , s1 ). That is, x  M1 (1 , s1 ) iff S (x, s1 ) > S (1 , s1 ).9
   Second, if S (2 , s1 )  S (1 , s1 ), the worker stays with her current employer, but may
use the outside offer to renegotiate her wage according to

                W (1 , 2 , s1 , s1 ) - U (s1 ) = S (2 , s1 ) +  (S (1 , s1 ) - S (2 , s1 )) .               (3)

I denote the set of firms that belong to the second case by M2 (1 , 0 , s1 , s0 ). The worker
will only renegotiate if doing so makes her better off. Therefore, x  M2 (1 , 0 , s1 , s0 ) iff
S (1 , s1 )  S (x, s1 ) and W (1 , x, s1 , s1 ) > W (1 , 0 , s1 , s0 ). That is, she stays if the outside
opportunity is dominated in terms of joint surplus but renegotiates with a new benchmark
if doing so makes her better off. In the third case, the worker just discards the offer and
   7
      The definition reflects that unfilled jobs have no value. To avoid cumbersome notation, I already use a
result derived later, namely that the joint surplus only depends on  and s.
    8
      Cahuc et al. (2006) microfound the following surplus splitting rules using an alternating offer game along
the lines of Rubinstein (1982).
    9
      Equation (2) nests equation (1) if one treats unemployment as current employment at firm u with
S (u, s) = 0. Therefore, let M1 (u, s) denote the set of firms an unemployed worker is willing to work for, and
so x  M1 (u, s) iff S (x, s) > 0.


                                                       7
continues to work at 1 .
    Let M3 (1 , 0 , s1 , s0 )  M1 (1 , s1 )  M2 (1 , 0 , s1 , s0 ) be the set of firms that lead to
either a move or a renegotiation for an employed worker.10
    If the worker does not use an outside offer, one of three cases arises. First, she may
continue at an unchanged wage. Second, either party may force a renegotiation when surplus
is positive yet W (1 , 0 , s1 , s0 ) < U (s1 ) (or J (1 , 0 , s1 , s0 ) < 0). In this case, the wage gets
re-set according to (1). Third, a match might dissolve endogenously when the joint surplus
drops to zero. These cases might arise due to human capital shocks. To simplify notation in
the next subsection, I let I1 , I2 , I3 indicate each of these cases, which are mutually exclusive.


2.2     Value Functions
Being unemployed with current skill s has value


            U (s) =z +                   0 W x, u, s , s - U s         dF (x) + U s           dGu s |s                (4)
                           S        M1


where the expectations about s reflect the worker's current employment state. At the end
of the period, the worker's human capital shock is realized after which she has the chance to
find a job. If she finds one with positive surplus she accepts it and her future value reflects
her new employer, her outside option of unemployment, and her current human capital s .
    Wages depend on the benchmark ,       ^s^ and the current employer .11 An employed
worker has value

     ^ s, s
 W , ,           ^s
          ^ =w , , ^ +                   (1 -  ) 1           W (x, , s , s ) dF (x) +        W (, x, s , s ) dF (x)
                                    S                   M1                              M2


                 + 1 - 1            dF (x)           ^ s ,s
                                              I1 W , ,    ^ + I2 W (, u, s , s ) + I3 U (s )                          (5)
                               M3


                 +  U (s ) dGe (s |s) .


At the end of the period, the exogenous match destruction shocks and the shocks to human
capital are realized. Subsequently, the workers that stayed on their jobs may receive outside
job offers. In such a case, she may move to a new firm or she may use the offer to renegotiate.
In either of these cases, her negotiation benchmark gets updated. If a worker does not use an
outside offer, she continues on her current job as long as the human capital shock does not
render the match inviable, indicated by I3 . In such a case, it might still be that the human
  10
    I henceforth suppress the arguments determining the sets M1 through M3 just introduced.
  11
    The current skill s does not affect the wage until it is being used in a wage bargain in which case the
benchmark skill gets updated.


                                                        8
capital shock allows either party to force a renegotiation with respect to unemployment,
indicated by I2 . Finally, the value of firm  having employed a worker s with benchmark
 ,^s
   ^ is


          ^ s, s
      J , ,                       ^s
               ^ =p (y , s) - w , , ^ +                       (1 -  ) 1                J , x, s , s dF (x)               (6)
                                                          S                       M2


                      + 1 - 1               dF (x)          ^ s ,s
                                                     I1 J , ,    ^ + I2 J , u, s , s                     dGe s |s .
                                      M3


   This reflects that the job has no continuation value once the worker leaves. If the worker
samples an outside offer from the set M2 she renegotiates. The rest mimics the logic of
the previous equation. Using the definition of the joint surplus along with the bargaining
protocol, Appendix D.1 shows how to combine all three equations to arrive at the joint
surplus,

S (, s) = max 0, p (y , s) - z +            (1 -  ) S (, s ) + 1                  (S (x, s ) - S (, s )) dF (x) dGe (s |s)
                                        S                                    M1


         - 0              S (x, s ) dF (x) dGu (s |s) +           U (s ) dGe (s |s) -        U (s ) dGu (s |s)   .       (7)
                 S   M1                                       S                          S


    The joint surplus first reflects the flow surplus p (y , s) - z . As a consequence of transfer-
able utility, the distribution of rents within the match does not affect the joint surplus which
implies that neither    ^ nor s
                              ^ enter. Likewise, the wage does not enter the expression and
neither does any future renegotiation that purely changes the allocation within the match.
The continuation value consists of the joint surplus under the updated human capital of the
worker along with a term that reflects that, if a worker moves to a new job, she captures the
full surplus of the current match plus a share  of the net gains from the move. The first
term on the second line reflects the foregone option value of search in unemployment, while
the remaining terms account for the fact that a worker's human capital dynamics depend on
her employment status.
    This functional equation can be solved jointly with the value function for unemployment
(4) using the bargaining protocol (1) which implies that W (x, u, s , s ) - U (s ) = S (x, s ).
The joint surplus orders jobs according to their desirability to a worker across the two
dimensions of . S (, s) then determines all labor market flows and knowledge of the surplus
function is sufficient to simulate the flow of workers across employers and employment states.
That is, for given model parameters and given the bargaining protocol, knowledge of the
surplus function is enough to simulate worker histories across all relevant states. I describe
below how we can separately solve for the associated wages.



                                                              9
2.3     Correlated Unemployment Spells
I next make an assumption about the job offer distribution which implies that, in expectation,
more productive firms also provide more job security and vice versa.

Assumption 1. E ( |y ) is strictly decreasing in y and E (y | ) is strictly decreasing in
 everywhere in the support of .

    Denote by  a worker's employment tenure, defined as the time of continuous employment
or, put differently, as the time since the last unemployment spell. Assumption 1 is sufficient
to establish the following proposition.12

Proposition 1. In expectation, job security 1 -  is strictly increasing in employment tenure
.

Proof. See Appendix A.1.

    The proof first establishes that workers value more productive and more stable jobs more
highly. It follows from this, jointly with assumption 1, that the job ladder points towards
both more productive and more secure jobs. There are then two forces that drive Proposition
1. First, secure jobs last longer by definition, a pure composition effect. Second, secure jobs
are more desirable and workers select into those as they climb the job ladder.
    With regards to the consequences of job loss, this has the key implication that the risk of
experiencing an unemployment spell declines with time since unemployment. That is, there
is negative duration dependence in the rate of job loss. Since an unemployment spell sets
back  to zero, it follows that unemployment spells beget unemployment spells. This feature
is key for the model to capture the persistent consequences of job displacement along with
their decomposition into employment and wage losses.


2.4     Wages
This section briefly shows how to solve for wages. It then discusses their comparative statics.
   To pin down wages, I proceed in three steps. First, note that one can solve for the joint
surplus of all (, s) along with the value of unemployment from (7) and (4). Second, given
the surplus, the surplus splitting rules (1)-(3) pin down the net value of a job to the worker,
W , , ^ s, s - U (s), for all , , ^ s . Third, by combining equations (4) and (5), one can

  12
    Assumption 1 is more restrictive than what is needed but it simplifies the proof. I estimate the joint
distribution of  and y in the empirical part via Indirect Inference. Assumption 1 holds in the offer
distribution I estimate. What the assumption helps to rule out are, for instance, situations where workers
systematically climb the job ladder towards highly productive "revolving door" jobs.


                                                   10
obtain a general expression for W , ,  ^ s, s
                                            ^ - U (s) which depends on the wage, joint surplus,
and the value of unemployment. I derive and present that equation in Appendix A.2. This
equation can then be used to construct the wages that deliver the values computed in the
second step for all combinations , ,  ^ s . I already described how knowledge of the surplus
function is sufficient to simulate individual labor market histories in the model. The wage
equation can then be used to construct the associated evolution of wages.
    The effect of productivity y on wages can be positive or negative, depending on . To
see why, first consider the case where  = 0. In this case, a worker switching jobs will
receive a net value equal to the full surplus of her old match, independent of the new job.
Therefore, a new employer with higher productivity will initially pay less because it comes
with more room for future wage growth. On the other hand, if  = 1, wages exactly equal
flow output, so more productive firms pay more. The same effect is observed in Cahuc et al.
(2006). A similar non-monotonicity occurs in s. To see this, again consider the case where
 = 0 where a worker moving from unemployment will always receive a value of z         r
                                                                                        on her
initial job. Clearly then, workers with higher human capital get lower wages initially.
    Similarly, the relationship between wages and job security need not be monotone. For
the reasons already mentioned, it is clear that workers pay a compensating differential for
job stability when  = 0. But for interior values of , more job security must deliver a
higher net value for both the worker and the firm. Numerically, I find that wages are often
non-monotone in job security.


2.5    Efficiency
I briefly discuss the efficiency properties of this setting. In the standard partial equilibrium
job ladder model, there is only one decision margin that could possibly be inefficient, namely
the reservation margin. Besides that, a utilitarian planner and a worker climbing the job
ladder agree that more productive jobs are preferable. Here, however, a worker climbing the
job ladder frequently has to trade off job security against job productivity. The question is
then whether the assignment of jobs with two attributes to the rungs of the job ladder is
efficient in the decentralized setting.
    To answer this question, I study a utilitarian planner who maximizes welfare subject to
search frictions. Because preferences are linear, this corresponds to maximizing the present
value of output. The planner's only choice variable is the hierarchy of firms along the job
ladder, that is the set of acceptable outside offers for workers in a job , as well as the set of
admissible matches for workers exiting unemployment.
    Appendix A.3 shows how to solve this planning problem. It establishes that the social


                                               11
value functions are equivalent to the private value functions if  = 1. It follows that the
equilibrium reservation strategy and the ranking of jobs align with their Pareto optimal
counterpart in that case. The reason is that the matching technology is linear, with the
total number of matches between workers and firms given by 0 u + 1 (1 - u).13 Thus, there
are no congestion externalities. Additionally, the number of matches is independent of the
incentives for firms to create job since I do not endogenize job creation. As a consequence,
for the worker to make socially efficient choices, it suffices to give her all the bargaining
power. In this case, she fully internalizes the value of her outside options which otherwise
partially accrues to outside parties whose interests are only internalized by a planner.
    If  < 1, the setup therefore features a standard decision margin which might be inefficient
and is common to all search models, namely the reservation strategy. Unemployed workers
need to decide on whether a job is acceptable or not. The novel, more complex margin here
is whether one job is preferable over another. When a job is both, more stable and more
productive, a worker always moves there and optimally so. However, workers frequently need
to decide between two jobs, one of which is preferable in one dimension while inferior in the
other. And so the question is whether they optimally trade off the two job characteristics.
    Figure 1 shows these decision margins for the estimated model.14 The dashed lines in the
figure show, for both planner and equilibrium, the reservation productivity associated with
different values of job security  .15 Furthermore, I select two jobs in ( , y )-space and plot
the indifference curves that govern the mapping of jobs to rungs on the job ladder, both in
equilibrium and under Pareto optimality.
    Workers climb the job ladder towards more stable and more productive jobs. However,
the job ladder is not efficient. The indifference curves through the two job types depicted
imply that a worker high up on the job ladder demands an inefficiently large compensating
productivity differential for unemployment risk since the worker's indifference curve is steeper
than the socially efficient one. These workers sort into "too secure" jobs, overvaluing job
security relative to job productivity. At the same time, the indifference curves through
the less attractive job show that workers lower down on the job ladder demand too little
of a compensating productivity differential for unemployment risk and therefore sort into
"too risky" jobs, undervaluing job security. Finally, the difference between the dashed lines
  13
      This equation, but not the argument, imposes that all unemployed workers accept all offers. This is the
case in my estimated model.
   14
      I use the exact parameters of the estimated model, except I reduce  to .5 to amplify the differences
between planner and equilibrium which are otherwise hard to visually depict.
   15
      One might expect the reservation productivities to be flat since an unemployed worker that is indifferent
about a job offer should not care about the job's security. They are, however, non-constant because of a
timing assumption that can be seen in equation (7). Workers only get the chance to search for a better job
if their current job does not dissolve at the end of the current period.



                                                      12
                                   3
                                                                Worker ICs
                                                                Planner ICs
                                   2                            Worker Reservation
                                                                Planner Reservation

                                   1



                                   0



                                   -1



                                   -2



                                   -3
                                    0.12   0.1   0.08    0.06   0.04     0.02         0




Notes:  is expressed at monthly frequency (axis inverted). Planner corresponds to model solution with
 = 1. To construct the reservation levels, I solve for 0 such that S 0 = 0 in equation (7). For the
indifference curves, I choose two of the jobs available in the job offer distribution in the estimated model
and then perturb  . I then search for the compensating adjustment in y such that surplus is the same.
Worker's skill level identical across all three experiments.

                      Figure 1: Efficiency of the 2-Dimensional Job Ladder

indicates that unemployed workers reject too many jobs from a social perspective.
    These properties are a novel manifestation of a standard search externality (Mortensen
(1982), Diamond (1982), Pissarides (1990), Hosios (1990)). The worker fails to internalize
the gains to outside employers that are associated with the worker being available to form
other relationships. As a consequence, a planner generally attributes a larger option value
to search which here happens both in employment and unemployment. The direction of the
inefficiency then depends on whether search is more efficient off- or on-the-job. High up on
the job ladder, there is little to be gained from on-the-job search and all that matters is the
foregone value of search during unemployment. Since the planner recognizes the full value
in that, she is less concerned with unemployment risk compared with the worker privately,
and so she puts less weight on job security. As a consequence, workers are sorting into "too
secure" jobs from a social viewpoint. Low down on the job ladder, however, on-the-job search
is important and, if very efficient (1 > 0 ), might dominate the foregone option value of
search in unemployment. This is the case in my estimation. Then, the planner associates
more value with job stability, exactly as depicted in the figure. The exact same force leads
to inefficiently high reservation productivities. The worker does not fully internalize the
additional gains from search that come with accepting a job and hence is too "picky".
    There are also human capital externalities. Since a worker shares the returns to her
future human capital with outside employers, she generally associates too little value with
skill growth and too much damage with skill decay. If, as is the case in the quantitative
model, skills grow during employment and decay during non-employment, then the human


                                                        13
capital externality has workers in the decentralized setting undervalue job security. These
forces, however, are not strong enough in my quantified model to overcome the fact that
unemployed workers and those low down on the job ladder are too picky in accepting jobs
and then sort into too risky positions, as indicated in the figure.
    As mentioned above, the model abstracts from curvature in the matching technology
and from entry into vacancies. This allows me to cleanly describe how the standard search
externality operates along a novel margin in this setup, namely along the tradeoff between
job security and job productivity on the job ladder. Because my objective is to speak to
the consequences of job loss from a worker perspective, this partial equilibrium approach
works for what follows. A full-blown policy evaluation, of course, should take into account
the other forces as well.


3      Estimation
3.1     Data
I use German administrative data provided by the German Federal Employment Agency's
research institute IAB. The Sample of Integrated Labour Market Biographies (SIAB) is a 2%
random sample of all individuals in Germany which have been employed subject to social
security at any point between 1975 and 2010. On the individual level, the data cover stan-
dard observables (age, gender, education) along with information on employment (employer,
remuneration, full-time/part-time, occupation, industry, location), benefit receipt, and job
search. Further, the data contain information on wage and employment structure at the
establishment level.16 The dataset thus allows me to track a large number of workers' em-
ployment and wage histories over a long time horizon. I use the data both to estimate and
validate the model and to study the consequences of job loss in detail in section 4. Appendix
B.1 outlines how I construct the main dataset used in the estimation.


3.2     Estimation Strategy
I estimate the model's parameters at monthly frequency using Simulated Method of Mo-
ments. That is, I use a set of moments that are informative for the model's parameters and
minimize the distance between empirical and model-generated moments.17 Throughout, I
focus on the model in steady state, where the inflows and outflows of workers across the
  16
    Empirically, the employer will be an establishment throughout.
  17
    My moments are partly coefficients from auxiliary regression models, so the approach could alternatively
be presented as Indirect Inference.


                                                    14
various states are in balance. I relegate most other details with regard to the estimation to
appendix B.3.
    I make several parametric assumptions. First, I set the two marginal distributions govern-
ing firm-level heterogeneity to beta, y  Beta (y , µy ),   ^  Beta ( , µ ) where    ^  10 .
Since a beta distribution has support on the unit interval this implies that the monthly
separation rate is restricted to be below 10%. In order to allow for correlation in those
characteristics, I construct the bivariate distribution F () using Frank's Copula C where
the single parameter  governs the covariance between the two job attributes in the offer
distribution. I approximate F () on 10-by-10 gridpoints such that there are 100 distinct
employer types.
    Worker skills are approximated on 20 gridpoints, s  {s, s    ¯}, uniformly distributed on
the unit interval. I adopt a simple transition matrix for human capital. While a worker is
employed, her skill increases from s to min {s + 1, s
                                                    ¯} with probability e . While unemployed,
her skill decreases from s to max {s, s - 1} with probability u .18 Finally, the net output of
a match is additively separable, p(y , s) - z = p + s + y where p is a location parameter
common to all matches. Since preferences are linear, z can then be normalized to zero
without loss of generality.


3.3     Empirical Strategy
Table 1 lists the complete set of parameters I estimate. I next make several heuristic
arguments--linking features of the data to model parameters--that motivate the choice
of estimation targets. Appendix B.1 offers additional detail on the construction of these
moments.
    First, the job finding rate directly informs 0 . Likewise, the incidence of job-to-job tran-
sitions is monotonically related to 1 .
    I inform the marginal distribution of job security governed by ( , µ ) by the average
separation rate and, more importantly, by duration dependence in the rate of job loss. Intu-
itively, the evolution of job security with tenure informs the distribution of unemployment
risk across jobs: If the risk of job loss hardly moves with tenure it suggests little variation
in  . If it declines steeply and displays strong duration dependence, it suggests substantial
dispersion in  .19 To measure duration dependence in the rate of job loss, I use the following
linear probability model,
  18
     With this process for skills, there is no permanent component to a worker's ability, it just moves up
and down on the skill grid. To be consistent, the empirical work strips out worker fixed effects wherever
applicable.
  19
     This argument presupposes that workers, on average, move towards more secure jobs, which I confirm
below.


                                                   15
                   Parameters                         Description

                        0         Offer Arrival Rate during Unemployment
                        1             Offer Arrival Rate during Employment
                                            Worker Bargaining Power
                        e             Skill Appreciation during Employment
                        u          Skill Depreciation during Unemployment
                       y , µy             Job Productivity Distribution
                        , µ                 Job Security Distribution
                                                Copula Parameter
                         p                  Common Output Shifter

                                        Table 1: Parameters


                                               max
                                IEU
                                 it   = 0 +            
                                                      Dit + Xit + it .                          (8)
                                               =1

IEU
 it  indicates whether individual i experienced a separation to unemployment in month t.
   
Dit indicates whether the individual has been continuously employed for  quarters. Xit is
a rich set of controls to account for dynamic selection on observables similar to the one used
in Kroft et al. (2016) when measuring duration dependence in the job finding rate, see figure
2 for details. I compute the average    ^ for  = 5 - 8, 17 - 20, and 37 - 40 and take the
difference with the first four quarters. That is, I compute the decline in the separation rate
in the second, fifth and tenth year of continuous employment relative to the first year.
    Next, I use duration dependence in wages to inform human capital dynamics. First, I
                                                                        0
regress the first log wage observation after an unemployment spell, it    , on the duration (in
                                                   u
months) of the preceding unemployment spell, it , controlling for an individual's average log
earnings  ¯i,
                                    0           u
                                  it  = 0 + 1 it  + 1 ¯ i + it .                            (9)

The coefficient 1 naturally informs the speed of skill decay during unemployment, u . To
inform the rate at which skills grow during employment, e , I measure the length of the
                                            j
job-spell prior to a job-to-job transition, it . I then regress the log starting wage of the new
     jj                                             j
job it on the duration of the prior job spell, it     , controlling for the log starting wage at the
                jj -1
previous job, it ,
                                  jj             j         jj -1
                                it   = 0 + 2 it    + 2 it        + it .                         (10)


                                                     16
The coefficient 2 naturally informs the speed of skill accumulation during employment, e :
                                                                       j     jj -1
If e is higher we would expect a larger elasticity of the jump it        - it      with respect to the
duration of the preceding spell.
    In addition, I target several wage moments. Annual wage growth for continuously em-
ployed workers, w (potentially spanning multiple jobs); the difference in average residual-
ized log wages among the newly employed and the average worker,           ¯0 -   ¯ ; and the difference
between residualized log wages at the 90th and 50th percentile,            ¯ 90 -   ¯ 50 , and 50th and
10th percentile,   ¯ 50 - ¯ 10 . I show below that the latter targets are sufficient for the model
to capture the overall extent of frictional wage dispersion in the data, see figure 3. These
moments jointly provide information on the heterogeneity in firm productivity governed by
(y , µy ), the location parameter p, and the bargaining parameter .
    Finally, the parameter  governs the comovement of firm productivity and security in
the job offer distribution. I use an auxiliary linear model, regressing the average rate of
separation into unemployment at a firm,         ¯, on a worker's log wages. I again control for
average log earnings and also include a control u       ¯ that measures a worker's average rate
of separation into unemployment to strip out as much as possible from the worker side.
Specifically, I run
                                  ¯it = 0 + 3 it + 3 
                                                      ¯ i + 4 u
                                                              ¯i + it ,                             (11)

where  ¯it denotes the average separation rate at worker i's period t employer. Holding
everything else equal, as long as more productive firms pay higher wages, an increase of the
correlation between y and  in the distribution workers sample from must then decrease
3 . That is, I use the wage as a proxy for y , which assumes that workers at more productive
firms receive higher wages. However, I have argued above that this need not be the case in
my model. I verify numerically that, in the cross-section, more productive firms pay higher
wages conditional on  in the vicinity of the parameter estimates. I exactly mimic all these
computations in the model.


3.4     Results
Table 2 reports the targeted values of those moments in the data and the corresponding
values in the estimated model. The last column lists the parameter estimates. While I
arranged moments and parameters along the arguments made in the previous subsection, all
parameters are estimated jointly. Overall, the model closely matches the data. The standard
errors are tight because of the very large number of observations. I next discuss the value of
the empirical moments and parameters jointly with the model fit.



                                                  17
                          Moments                        Target   Model    Estimates
                      Job Finding Rate                    5.8%    5.8%     0 = .058
                                                                              (.00026)
                           EE Rate                        .81%    .80%      1 = .079
                                                                              (.00029)
                   Mean Rate of Job Loss                  .76%    .74%      = 1.081
                                                                              (.0006)
              Duration Dependence         1   8     ^
                                                         -1.48% -1.03%
                                          4    =5
                        1  20   ^                        -2.27% -1.92% µ = 2.215
                        4   =17 
                                                                              (.00325)
                          1    40     ^
                                                         -2.52% -2.21%
                          4     =37
                           ¯ 90 - 
                                  ¯ 50                    .185   .168       y = .087
                                                                              (.00195)
                           ¯ 50 - 
                                  ¯ 10                    .159     .177     µy = .400
                                                                              (.0062)
                      Wage Growth w                      1.68%    1.57%     p = .612
                                                                              (.01069)
                              0
                              ¯ -
                                 ¯                        .741     .762      = .962
                                                                              (.00051)
                           ^1 in (9)
                                                         -.0058   -.0054    u = .236
                                                                              (.00158)
                           ^2 in (10)
                                                         .0026    .0029     e = .052
                                                                              (.00045)
                           ^3 in (11)
                                                         -.0043   -.0046    = -.104
                                                                              (.00686)
Notes: Separation rates are expressed at monthly frequency. Wage growth w annualized. For description
of moments see section 3.3, additional details in appendix B.1.  and µ govern the beta distribution of
^  10 such that  has support [0, .1]. GMM standard errors in brackets are multiplied by a factor of

100. For details of the estimation, see appendix B.3.

                                  Table 2: Moments and Estimates




                                                    18
                                    Avg Monthly Sep Rate rel. to 1st Year
                                                                                0

                                                                                                                         Model
                                                                            -0.005                                       Data

                                                                             -0.01



                                                                            -0.015



                                                                             -0.02



                                                                            -0.025



                                                                             -0.03
                                                                                     1   2     3   4    5   6    7   8      9    10
                                                                                             Year of Continuos Employment


Notes: I run regression (8) at a monthly frequency in both model and data, compute yearly averages of
the ^ and express them relative to the first year of continuous employment. The controls include gender
dummies, month and year fixed effects, age group dummies (16-24, 25­34, 35-44, 45-54, and 55-64), 15
education category dummies, and gender interacted with education. I only use employment spells up to 10
years.

                      Figure 2: Negative Duration Dependence in Job Loss

Flows The first set of targets captures labor market flows which are, unsurprisingly, low
compared with the US labor market. More specific to this paper, the hazard rate into
unemployment sharply declines with employment tenure. Workers in their second year of
employment have a monthly rate of job loss almost 1.5 percentage points lower compared
with those in their first year of employment. This fall continues and the monthly rate of
job loss drops by another .75 percentage point by year 5 of continuous employment where
it largely levels off. Over the next 5 years of continuous employment it drops by another
quarter percentage point. The model does not fully match the rapid decline of the rate of
job loss over the first year of employment but accounts closely for its evolution thereafter.
Figure 2 plots the full range of ^ from equation (8), both in model and data.
    I note that the estimate for 1 exceeds the estimate for 0 , so search on-the-job is ac-
tually more efficient than during unemployment.20 I highlight this because it leads to the
high value of  I estimate. Because 0 < 1 , workers exiting unemployment would receive
very low wages for intermediate or low levels of . The reason is that they would effectively
compensate the employer for the additional option value from search in employment. Em-
pirically, however, wage dispersion is compressed and wage growth is meager as discussed
next. To jointly account for this, the model requires a high value for the bargaining power
parameter.
  20
    Hornstein et al. (2011) argue that, for the US, 0 usually exceeds 1 . However, in recent survey evidence
Faberman et al. (2020) find that the employed are four times more efficient at job search than the unemployed
in the US. Krolikowski (2017) likewise calibrates a value for 1 almost twice that of 0 .




                                                                                                       19
                                                   Residual Wage Dispersion
                                            1

                                           0.9

                                           0.8

                                           0.7

                                           0.6




                                    F(x)
                                           0.5

                                           0.4

                                           0.3

                                           0.2
                                                                              Model
                                           0.1
                                                                              Data
                                            0
                                            -0.5              0                       0.5




Notes: I regress log wages on an individual fixed effect and year fixed effects and residualize. The figure
plots the cumulative distribution of the residual in the pooled sample.

                           Figure 3: Residual Dispersion of Log Wages

Wages and Human Capital Wage dispersion as measured by the 90/50 and 50/10 log
wage difference is compressed but note that these are residualized measures. Relatedly, wage
growth is fairly low. All three moments are closely captured by the model. As a consequence,
the model captures the overall amount of wage dispersion closely as I show in figure 3.
    The point estimate for 1 implies that an additional month in unemployment lowers the
starting wage on the next job by .58 percentage points. This is somewhat smaller than
what the literature has found for the US, with values in the range of 1 - 1.5% (Addison and
Portugal (1989), Neal (1995)). It is very close, however, to recent evidence from Germany
on the same parameter: Schmieder et al. (2016) obtain a point estimate of -.0067 for an
OLS specification regressing log reemployment wages on nonemployment duration and an
only slightly larger value of -.0080 from an IV specification.
    With regard to skill accumulation, the point estimate for 2 implies that, for a job mover,
an additional month of job tenure on the previous job raises the next wage by .26 percentage
points.
    The estimate of 3 implies that a 10% increase in wages lowers the employer level risk
of monthly job loss by .043 percentage points. This is quantitatively sizable, given that the
mean rate of job loss in the pooled sample is .76%. That is, for the average worker, a firm
that pays her a 10% higher wage comes with a reduction of her monthly separation risk by
more than 5%.
    The estimated human capital process governs the distribution of human capital in the
cross-section. I next show the distribution of worker types in the estimated model and how it
differs across employment states in figure 4. The population distribution of skills is relatively
even except there is mass at the top. These are primarily the workers that have been working
at jobs with very low separation risks for decades. The picture is very different among the
unemployed. I separately plot the distribution of skills for the short term, average, and long

                                                           20
                                                              Empirical CDF
                                            1

                                           0.9       LTU
                                                     Unemployed
                                           0.8
                                                     STU
                                           0.7       Population
                                           0.6




                                    F(x)
                                           0.5

                                           0.4

                                           0.3

                                           0.2

                                           0.1

                                            0
                                                 0      5          10         15   20
                                                              Skill Type


Notes: Based on model simulations. 20 skill types. Short term unemployed (STU) are those with duration
less or equal than 6 months. Long term unemployed (LTU) are those with duration more than 18 months.

                         Figure 4: Stationary Distribution of Skill Types

term unemployed. Since the job losers are selected from the lower, more slippery rungs of the
job ladder, even the short-term unemployed have substantially lower skill than the average
worker. Since human capital deteriorates with time out of work this is even more the case
among the average unemployed and the long-term unemployed.

Sorting A burgeoning literature on the empirical extent of sorting appears to agree that
there is positive sorting between worker and firm types in the data (Card et al. (2013),
Bonhomme et al. (2019)). In my setup, I work with an additively separable production
function. This implies that there are no complementarities in the production function that
push towards sorting of high worker (productivity) types towards high firm (productivity)
types. However, there exists a different driver of sorting in my model. The longer a worker has
been climbing the job ladder towards more productive firms the longer has her human capital
been accumulating. As a consequence, there will be sorting between high-productivity firms
and workers in the cross-section, despite the absence of complementarities in the production
function.21
    To illustrate this, I first report the unconditional rank correlation between worker and
firm types in the model which is .238. Second, figure 5 illustrates the extent of sorting in
the model as follows: I select the most and least productive employer. I then compute, for
each worker type, total employment across these two firm types and then distribute it in
figure 5. This has the advantage that the figure is vertically normalized. The figure shows
a very strong sorting pattern: Of the most productive worker type, over 75% work for the
most productive firm and few work for the least productive firm. In turn, less productive
  21
    The sorting literature attempts to identify the sorting of permanent worker types while my model does
not have a permanent component. However, the sorting literature has thus far mostly considered fairly short
panels. Given that human capital grows slowly on the job in my estimated model I argue that sorting of the
current worker type is a relevant if not immediate counterpart to the empirical sorting literature.


                                                                  21
                                                                                    Sorting
                                                                  0.8
                                                                                              Least Productive Firm
                                                                                              Most Productive Firm
                                                                  0.7




                                    Frac. of Employment at Firm
                                                                  0.6



                                                                  0.5



                                                                  0.4



                                                                  0.3



                                                                  0.2
                                                                        0   5          10             15              20
                                                                                Worker Skill Type


Notes: For each worker type, I compute total employment at the most and least productive firm type. The
figure then shows the distribution across these two firm types such that the vertical sum of the points is
normalized to 1.

             Figure 5: Positive Sorting between Workers and Firms in the Model

workers more frequently work for the least productive firm: The fraction of employment at
the most productive firm is monotonically increasing in skill and the fraction at the least
productive firm is monotonically decreasing in worker skill. This suggest a fair amount of
sorting through the job ladder alone, despite the absence of production complementarities.

Offer Distribution and the Job Ladder The estimated copula parameter  governing
the correlation between  and y guarantees that assumption 1 holds, implying that more
productive jobs provide, in expectation, more job security and vice versa. I show the distri-
butions (densities and CDFs) of the two job attributes in figure 6. I plot the distributions
that workers sample from, which corresponds to the distributions of job attributes among
those who have just left unemployment. I contrasts this with the distribution of job at-
tributes among all employed workers, who have been climbing the job ladder towards more
productive and also more stable jobs and are hence more protected from unemployment risk,
the basic mechanism this paper builds on.
    With regard to productivity, the marginal distribution of job productivity has (roughly
equal) mass at the bottom and the top of the distribution, with about a third of jobs
distributed fairly uniformly in between. As a check on the empirical plausibility of the
implied dispersion in firm productivity, consider a worker with average human capital among
the employed and consider her working at a representative sample of firms. The standard
deviation of average log output she has with each employer is .236. The standard deviation
of the establishment fixed effect from an AKM decomposition Card et al. (2013) undertake
in the same data rises from .159 (in 1985-91) to .230 (in 2002-09). While the two calculations
do not exactly compare this is still reassuring.



                                                                                   22
                                 80                          1

                                 60

                                 40                      0.5

                                 20

                                  0                          0
                                      0   0.05    0.1            0    0.05            0.1



                                 30                          1
                                                                     Newly Employed
                                                                     All Employed
                                 20
                                                         0.5
                                 10


                                  0                          0
                                      0   0.5      1             0     0.5            1




Notes: Based on model simulations.  is expressed at monthly frequency. Left panels are densities, right
panels are CDFs. I fit beta distributions to simulated data. Newly employed are those who found a job
within the current period.

                    Figure 6: Job Security and Productivity -- Distributions

3.5     Evidence on Heterogeneous Job Security
I conclude this section by providing direct evidence on heterogeneity in job security as
modeled here. Before doing so I contrast my approach with one that builds on Jovanovic
(1979) and Jovanovic (1984) in allowing for gradual learning about match quality (e.g., Pries
(2004) and Krolikowski (2017)). Gradual learning gives rise to negative duration dependence
in unemployment risk, albeit through a different form of dynamic selection. Over time, match
quality gets revealed, low quality matches separate and so long-lasting matches are stable.
Thus, the separation rate falls within a match over time in learning models. Here, the
separation rate within a match is constant over time and duration dependence is solely a
consequence of composition. Likewise, in learning models, the probability of job loss tends
to increase after a job-to-job transition since job tenure gets reset. In turn, because of
the direction of the career ladder in my model, on average a job-to-job transition decreases
unemployment risk. While I do not empirically discriminate between the two alternatives,
this subsection provides direct evidence for the mechanism I build on.22
    I now offer direct evidence on persistent employer-level heterogeneity in terms of un-
employment risk. I offer several different measures of unemployment risk at the employer
level and contrast the empirical dispersion in the respective measure with its model counter-
  22
    A learning model with firm heterogeneity might look observationally similar to my setup when extended
to allow for differential firm productivity and on-the-job search (Borovickova (2016)). In this case, low
productivity employers are closer to an endogenous separation threshold and hence such employers come
with higher unemployment risk. However, the fundamental mechanism in that model in capturing the
response of job loss will be the same, unemployment risk differing across employers. My setup just directly
assumes this which is more convenient and direct for my purposes and puts less restrictive structure on the
joint distribution of productivity and job security.



                                                        23
part.23 Throughout, the empirical measures of heterogeneity in worker churn are even more
dispersed than their counterpart in the estimated model. I note that none of the targets
above directly relates to this evidence. That is, my estimation strategy merely targets how
the separation rate falls with employment tenure and fully loads this on heterogeneity in
unemployment risk.

Lon-run firm level churn To begin with, I compute for each employer the average rate at
which workers separate into unemployment. Specifically, I regress individual-level indicators
that record a separation into unemployment on firm fixed effects. This rate can be thought
of as a good counterpart to the  used in the model since it is computed from a firm panel
and thus does not reflect merely short term fluctuations in employment growth.
    The left panel of figure 7 plots the employment weighted distribution of job security
measured this way in model and data. The empirical measure implies substantial permanent
heterogeneity in unemployment risk across employers, exceeding its model counterpart.
    There is nothing mechanical that forces these two measures together. As argued before,
I estimate the distribution of unemployment risk by targeting the extent of duration de-
pendence in the rate of job loss. The fact that dispersion in unemployment risk, measured
directly, if anything exceeds its model counterpart is reassuring for the model mechanism to
play an important role in generating the downward sloping EU hazard. That is, the true
extent of dispersion in the risk of job loss across employers is even larger than what the
model requires to fit the the observed duration dependence in the rate of job loss.24

Addressing worker heterogeneity A natural question is whether these patterns detect
worker, rather than firm-level heterogeneity in terms of the propensity to flow into unemploy-
ment. That is, if there are fickle worker types who sort into certain firms, a similar pattern
might arise and not properly reflect the extent of dispersion in unemployment risk workers
face in the labor market. To address this, I next run a linear probability model where I
regress, at the individual level, indicators of separation into unemployment on person, occu-
pation, and year fixed effects. I then construct the residual, average it across employers in a
pooled fashion, and then plot the employment-weighted distribution in the right panel of fig-
ure 7. Again, the direct measure reveals that there is even more dispersion in unemployment
risk across employers in the data than in the estimated model.
  23
      To do so, I exploit that my data contains an employer-ID. Since I only observe a relatively small subset
of the universe of the German workforce the sample is biased towards large firms.
   24
      The direct empirical measures of dispersion exceed their model counterpart throughout this subsection.
I suspect that this reflects a degree of segmentation in the labor market where not all workers search across
the exact same set of employers.



                                                     24
                      25                                      90

                                                  Data        80
                                                                                   Data
                                                  Model                            Model
                      20
                                                              70

                                                              60
                      15
                                                              50

                                                              40
                      10
                                                              30

                                                              20
                       5

                                                              10

                       0                                        0
                           0        0.05    0.1           0.15 -0.05    0                  0.05




Notes: Unemployment risk is expressed at monthly frequency. Left panel: Employment weighted distribution
of firm fixed effects from an individual level regression of indicators for separation into unemployment on firm
fixed effects. I fit beta densities in the model and in the data. The right panel plots the employment weighted
distribution of the average (pooled) firm level residual from a regression of the same job loss indicators on
worker, occupation, and year fixed effects. I fit normal densities in the model and in the data.

                               Figure 7: Direct Evidence on Heterogeneity in 

    I also ask whether, in the data, workers indeed climb the job ladder towards firms with
less unemployment risk. To that end, I use the same metric of permanent firm-level un-
employment risk. On average, this metric falls by .018 upon a job-to-job transition. That
is, workers indeed climb towards "drier" rungs on job ladder. Benchmarked by a monthly
unemployment risk of .76% (see table 2) this calculation implies that unemployment risk
falls by, on average, more than 2% upon a job-to-job transition.

A permanent-transitory model Finally, I estimate a permanent-transitory model that
is commonly used to model individual income dynamics. Here, I apply the model to churn
into unemployment instead of wages/earnings and at the firm level instead of the individual
level. This offers yet another perspective on dispersion, across employers, in terms of job
security since it allows me to isolate the permanent, arguably forecastable component of
unemployment risk that will ultimately guide workers' mobility decisions. Specifically, I
follow Doris et al. (2011) and Doris et al. (2013) who show how to estimate the following
model via GMM,
                                      yit = pt i + t it .                              (12)

yit , in my case, is the average fraction of firm i's full time workforce that leave into unemploy-
ment as defined above during any given month in year t. is a mean zero random variable
with variance  2 and we allow for time-varying loadings pt so the first part of the equation
captures the permanent component of churn. The second part is the transitory component
of churn which likewise allows for time-varying loadings t and where it follows an AR(1)
process, it = i,t-1 + it . I estimate this in an employment-weighted way and otherwise ex-


                                                           25
                                     Specification        Data Model
                                         (12)             .0114 .0067
                                       (13), v1           .0194 .0066
                                       (13), v2           .0116 .0066
Notes: This reports the time series average of the standard deviation of the permanent component of
unemployment risk across employers. Specifically, row 1 reports the time series average of p2 2
                                                                                            t  as estimated

for model (12) while rows 2 and 3 report the time series average of p2       2
                                                                         t  +  a    ¯t +  a¯2
                                                                                            t , estimated for
model (13). a¯t denotes employment-weighted average firm age in year t. v1 assigns a uniform random year
of entry on [1900, 1975] for firms with censored year of entry, v2 instead drops such observations.

             Table 3: Dispersion in Unemployment Risk ­ Permanent Component

actly follow the approach and estimation method developed in Doris et al. (2011) and Doris
et al. (2013) to estimate a process for individual earnings dynamics. Measuring the amount
of job-risk through this lens, I obtain a year-specific variance of the permanent component
of unemployment risk across employers, p2  t .
                                              2

    Finally, I estimate a firm-age dependent process in the data. Just like in the literature
on earnings, it might be that age predicts churn. Since firm age is observable it thus seems
natural to include it here into the component of unemployment risk that can be observed by
the worker. The extended process then takes the following form,

                                      yit = pt (   i   + i ait ) + t it ,                               (13)

where ait denotes firm i's age in year t and both and  denote mean zero random variables
with variance  2 and     2
                           and covariance   . This again follows Doris et al. (2011) and Doris
et al. (2013). In my dataset, firm "birth" is censored at 1975. To deal with this, I proceed in
two different ad-hoc ways. First, I assign a uniform random firm birth year in [1900, 1975]
for censored observations. Second, I alternatively drop all censored observations, biasing the
sample towards young firms.25 Finally, I estimate this in an employment-weighted fashion.
    The results are in table 3. In particular, I present a statistic that amounts to the time-
series average of the cross-sectional standard deviation of the permanent component of churn.
Several things are worth noting. First, and most importantly, recall that the average monthly
separation rate into job loss is just .76% in the data. This implies that a standard deviation
increase in the permanent component of churn is very large. Second, the data again display
even more heterogeneity than the model backs out. Third, in the model, where firm-age
plays no role, the results are stable across specifications.
  25
    In the model, I simply assign a random firm age, uniform on [0, 100] years which is without significance
since firm age plays no role in the model.



                                                        26
    To sum up, this section demonstrates, in various different ways, that the risk of losing a
job and moving into unemployment differs substantially across employers; and it does so in
a way that cannot be explained with sorting of unemployment-prone workers or short-term
firm-level fluctuations alone. Furthermore, workers move towards employers that shield them
from unemployment risk along the job ladder. Jointly, this provides direct evidence for the
basic mechanism this paper develops.


4     The Consequences of Job Loss
This section provides reduced-form evidence on the consequences of job loss in the German
labor market in the tradition of the original work by Jacobson et al. (1993). I then show
that the model quantitatively captures the empirical earnings response to a separation, as
well as its empirical decomposition into the response of future wages, employment, and job
loss, along with the dispersion of the earnings losses. Finally, I use the model to quanti-
tatively decompose the earnings losses into the mechanisms at work and demonstrate that
heterogeneous job security is key to capturing the empirical patterns.


4.1     Empirical Framework
Before discussing variable and sample construction, I introduce the empirical model which is
very similar to those estimated in Davis and von Wachter (2011), Krolikowski (2017), Huck-
feldt (2016), Flaaen et al. (2019), Schmieder et al. (2020), and Lachowska et al. (2020). The
worker displacement literature typically estimates a distributed-lag model of the following
form,
                                                           20
                                  ey    y   y
                                   it = 0 +  Xit +
                                                                 y k
                                                                 k Dit + uit .                           (14)
                                                          k=-5

Each y fixes a separation year. The dependent variable is earnings, wages, or another variable
of interest of individual i in t{y - 5, y + 20}. X contains a vector of controls. The dummies
  k
Dit  take zero for all k and t if individual i did not get displaced in year y . In turn, if i gets
                   k                                                   5
displaced in y , Dit = 1 if t - y = k . As an example, if y = 1985, Di  90 = 1 if i gets displaced
in 1985.26
    One strategy is to separately run this regression for each year y and then average the
                         y
coefficient estimates k    across y (Davis and von Wachter (2011)). Then, the sequence of
  26
     The literature traditionally focuses on workers losing their job in the course of mass layoffs to isolate
layoffs from quits and selective firings. I do not restrict attention to mass-layoffs but otherwise apply the
same sample selection criteria as the displacement literature. I hence stuck with the term displacement. The
next subsection provides a clear definition of displacement.


                                                     27
average coefficients captures the change in earnings/wages k years after displacement at-
tributable to the event. Instead, I follow Flaaen et al. (2019) and estimate equation (14) in
a stacked fashion. To do so, I treat the datasets corresponding to each displacement year y
as separate datasets and stack them to estimate

                                                            20
                                   ey         y
                                    it = 0 + Xit +
                                                                    k,y
                                                                 k Dit  + uy
                                                                           it .                            (15)
                                                        k=-5


This notation highlights that I estimate constant, not displacement year-specific parameters.
And it highlights that multiple displacement years y enter the estimation separately.
     As an example, suppose individual i satisfies the sample selection criteria discussed below
for y  {1980, .., 1989} but not otherwise and suppose i experiences displacement in 1985
but not otherwise. In this case, individual i enters 10 of the stacked datasets with all her
information. In 9 of these datasets, namely those with y = 1985, individual i is part of
                        k,y                                                               -6,85
the control group, Dit      = 0k . In the dataset where i experiences displacement, Di    79    =
   0,85           20,85
Di85 = ... = Di05 = 1.
     The primary advantage of this approach is that it allows for a straightforward construction
of standard errors for the estimated k . Here, too, I follow Flaaen et al. (2019) and construct
two-way clustered standard errors (Cameron et al. (2011)), clustered at the individual and
year level.
             y
     I let Xit  include age fixed effects and year fixed effects where any given year has a
separate fixed effect for each y . I deviate slightly from the displacement literature by not
including an individual fixed effect in my main specification. Instead, I include dummies
for an individual's earnings decile in all years prior to y .27 The reason is the following:
A displacement event is "scarring" and thus gets partially absorbed by an individual fixed
effect. My alternative measure instead is purely "backward-looking". It controls for income
up to the displacement event rather than throughout. When I instead use a standard fixed
effect the results are, however, very similar as I discuss below.
     Finally, I separately construct and include the same variable but only looking back three
years. This control is standard in the displacement literature and accounts for differential
pre-displacement earnings immediately preceding the event.
  27
    Specifically, I compute, for each individual, their mean earnings in all the years prior to y . I then record
a worker's decile when I pool this variable across the sample. I do the same for mean wages and the mean
rate of separation when changing the dependent variable.




                                                       28
4.1.1    Sample and Variable Construction

Appendix B.2 describes how I turn the monthly panel used in the estimation into the annual
panel used here. Then, for each displacement-year sample, I apply additional sample selection
criteria that are in the tradition of the displacement literature. I restrict the sample to
workers of age 18-65 who are of prime age (26-54) in year y . Furthermore, I restrict the
sample to workers with high job-tenure (at least 3 years at the same establishment by year
y ) and to workers with average daily earnings exceeding 24 Euros in all years {y - 3, .., y }. I
restrict to y  {1980, ..., 2010} such that I can observe at least 5 years prior for any separation
year y .
     The pre-separation tenure restriction is standard in the displacement literature and (par-
tially) addresses concerns about selection into the treatment group: employers may well lay
off certain workers after having learned their type and those types may subsequently have
low earnings. The idea here is that this type of revelation happens within the first few
years of tenure. Second, the control for pre-displacement year earnings decile--which serves
the purpose of a backward-looking fixed effect--also addresses permanent income differences
between treatment and control group. A third selection concern is that workers who may
have just received a negative productivity shock select into the treatment group: then, lower
earnings after separation may be driven by that shock rather than the separation per se.
This is why the displacement literature traditionally studies mass-layoff separators. I show
my results for mass-layoff separators in Section 4.1.3.28
     More generally, an important questions is what constitutes the empirical counterpart to
job loss in the model. A natural candidate is simply the separation of full time employed
workers into non-employment. However, my data also allows me to observe whether a
worker moves into the unemployment insurance system and hence is unemployed rather than
merely non-employed. I therefore condition, in addition, on a worker receiving unemployment
insurance following displacement.29 In summary, a displaced worker is a prime-age worker
with a high job-tenure that becomes non-employed and starts receiving UI benefits.
     My main dependent variables are log annual earnings and log wages. This allows for a
direct interpretation of the coefficient as the percentage earnings losses and, accordingly, for
a straightforward construction of standard errors and is in the tradition of a large empirical
  28
      In my model, there are no mass-layoff separators and I have, in taking the model to the data, connected
job security with the frequency of regular separations into unemployment. I therefore do not restrict to
mass layoffs in this section either so as to be consistent. Beyond this, mass layoffs are concentrated in
recessions, happen at large firms, and come with other issues as discussed further in the robustness section.
It is reassuring that I find similar results across the two approaches.
   29
      This is the same definition I use when computing the rate of job loss used in the model estimation, for
more details see Appendix B.1.



                                                     29
                                                        0


                                                      -0.1




                                    Earnings - Data
                                                      -0.2


                                                      -0.3


                                                      -0.4


                                                      -0.5


                                                      -0.6

                                                             -5   0      5       10         15   20
                                                                  Years Around Separation


Notes: This plots the coefficients k from estimating specification (15) for log earnings. Two-way clustered
standard errors used to construct 95% confidence intervals.

                Figure 8: Empirical Earnings Losses from Job Loss in Germany

literature on wages and earnings. It comes, however, with two disadvantages: First, given
the magnitude of the losses, log differences substantially deviate from percent changes which
makes the coefficients harder to interpret. Second, and more importantly, it does not allow
to take into account years with zero earnings. I therefore supplement the analysis with a
regression in levels discussed in more detail below.
    Each of the stacked samples then consists of two groups, a treatment group that experi-
ences displacement in year y , and a control group which does not.30 Overall, this reduced-
form approach is the workhorse of the large body of empirical work on the consequences of
job loss. A detailed discussion of the virtues of the approach and its underlying identifying
assumptions is beyond the scope of this paper.
    This leaves me with a total of 31,924 displacements. The displacement events are fairly
evenly spread across years. The average displaced worker is 39.2 years old (40.3 across all
worker-year observations in pooled sample), 59.8% are men (61.7%). In the year prior to
displacement they have an average real daily wage of 68.95 Euros (base year 2000), compared
with 87.41 Euros for all workers in the pooled sample.

4.1.2    Results

Figure 8 plots the results for log earnings. The time path of the coefficients suggests a 43
log points drop in earnings, relative to counterfactual, in the displacement year. Earnings
then drop even further in the year after, reflecting that workers spend parts of the actual
displacement year employed prior to separation. Earnings subsequently recover at declining
pace, but even after 20 years, a significant earnings gap remains.
  30
    I do not restrict the control group with regard to future job loss. This is in contrast to much of the
displacement literature which chooses a control group of never (or, not for a while) displaced workers.
Krolikowski (2018) argues that doing so inflates the estimated earnings losses and I follow him in not
conditioning on future displacement status in the control group.


                                                                         30
                          0.05                                                                        0.05

                                                                                                         0

                             0                                                                        -0.05




                                                                                  Employment - Data
                                                                                                       -0.1




            Wage - Data
                                                                                                      -0.15
                          -0.05
                                                                                                       -0.2

                                                                                                      -0.25
                           -0.1
                                                                                                       -0.3

                                                                                                      -0.35
                          -0.15                                                                        -0.4

                                                                                                      -0.45

                           -0.2                                                                        -0.5
                                  -5      0      5       10        15   20                                 -5      0         5       10          15   20
                                         Years Around Separation                                                       Years Around Separation

                                       (a) Wage Response                                                      (b) Employment Response

Notes: Panel (a) plots the coefficients k from estimating specification (15) for log wages. Two-way clus-
tered standard errors are used to construct 95% confidence intervals. Panel (b) plots the reduction in the
employment rate as approximately implied by the log wage and log earnings response. For each k , I compute
    e
 1+k              e
1+k w - 1 where     and  w correspond to the estimated coefficients from the specifications for log earnings
and wages. This uses that earnings are the product of wages and employment. To construct an upper bound
for the 95% confidence intervals I use that the variance of the ratio of two random variables X and Y with
                                              2
                                                 V (y )  V (x)
mean x       ¯ can be bound as V X
       ¯ and y                      Y    x  ¯
                                            y
                                            ¯     ¯2 + x
                                                  y       ¯2   , see e.g. Lee and Forthofer (2006), section 4.

        Figure 9: Decomposing the Earnings Response into Wages and Employment.

    Importantly, the recovery in earnings has two components. The recovery in the wage
rate, and the recovery in the employment rate. To decompose the earnings response to
displacement, I separately run specification (15) for log wages (rather than earnings). I then
use the differences in the time path of the estimated coefficients to construct the implied
reduction in the employment rate as described in the figure notes.
    Figure 9(a) plots the response of wages while figure 9(b) plots the implied response of the
employment rate. Wages in the displacement year drop only slightly, simply because most
employment in that year is prior to the separation. In turn, wages in year y + 1 are around
15 log points below counterfactual. After year y + 2 an extremely slow recovery sets in, and
even after two decades a sizable gap remains. I note that I find more long-run recovery in
wages when studying mass-layoff separators below.
    Employment, in turn, falls by almost 40 log points relative to counterfactual and even
more so in year y +1. It subsequently recovers at declining speed. Importantly, displacement
depresses future employment in a highly persistent fashion.31
    Where does the long run scar in the employment rate come from? To answer this, I
use a linear probability model replacing earnings by job loss indicators indicators as the
dependent variable in specification (15). These indicators record future separations into
  31
    The employment response is more pronounced and persistent compared with what the literature has
found for the US, see e.g. Lachowska et al. (2020) and Huckfeldt (2016).




                                                                             31
                                                                0.15




                                    Risk of Separation - Data
                                                                 0.1




                                                                0.05




                                                                  0
                                                                       2   4    6   8    10   12   14   16   18   20
                                                                               Years Around Separation


Notes: This plots the coefficients k from estimating specification (15) with job loss indicators on the left
hand side. Two-way clustered standard errors used to construct 95% confidence intervals.

                                Figure 10: Job Loss Begets Job Loss

unemployment.32
    The results are plotted in figure 10. The probability of observing job loss in the future
rises sharply due to displacement. In year y + 1, the displaced worker is over 10 percentage
points more likely to suffer another job loss. Given a monthly rate of job loss of less than
.76% in the pooled sample of workers, this amounts to a drastic loss of future job security due
to job loss. Furthermore, job security measured this way remains depressed and displaced
workers never quite catch up to the counterfactual path of job security, just like the future
employment rate never fully recovers.33
    This suggests that serially correlated unemployment spells are a key driver of the ev-
idence in figure 9(b). Displaced workers experience many years of unstable employment
relationships which depresses their future employment rate. A simple, back-of-the-envelope
way to compute the present value earnings losses is to compute 20               k e        e
                                                                      k=0 = .95 k where k are
the estimated coefficient from specification (15) with log earnings as dependent variable and
we apply a discount factor of 5%. Computed this way, I find that the earnings losses amount
to 21.3% of present value earnings over the next 20 years. This is large compared with what
Davis and von Wachter (2011) find for the US (11.6%).
    To assess the relative importance of employment and wages, I also compute the present
                                                                            w
value wage losses in the same fashion (using the estimated coefficients k     from the log wage
specification). This amounts to 11.7% which suggests that a sizable fraction of the present
value earnings losses can be attributed to the cumulative future employment losses due to
the serially correlated spells which are at the center of this analysis. I emphasize that these
losses are associated with losing high-value jobs since the sample is restricted to workers
  32
     In order to focus on the future evolution of job security in general I do not impose a pre-separation
tenure restriction on these events.
  33
     Stevens (1997) was the first to document that displacement comes with a higher risk of subsequent
unemployment spells.


                                                                                        32
with high tenure. I revisit the question to which extent these losses exceed the cost of an
average job lost in section 4.4 using the model.
    The most closely related empirical evidence is in recent work by Schmieder et al. (2020)
who measure displacement losses in Germany in IAB social security data.34 While our
methodologies differ, the quantitative results are similar. They report a loss of some 30 days
of work (per year) 10 years after displacement which is even larger than the 5.8% reduction
in the employment rate I find at the same horizon. They further find that log wages initially
drop by 10 log points (less then the 15.7 log point drop I measure) but then display a
similarly sluggish recovery. The earnings response they measure is similar in terms of size
and persistence. Interestingly, they also report an elevated likelihood of benefit receipt over a
15 year horizon following displacement which points towards an important role for repeated
job loss. I note that they restrict to workers that get displaced during mass-layoff events
which, like the results in the next subsection, suggests that not imposing that restriction
does not dramatically alter the results.
  34
    Theirs extends earlier work by Schmieder et al. (2009) that restricts attention to displacement in the
1982 recession.




                                                   33
4.1.3    Robustness


            Log Wage and Earnings - Data




                                                                                                            Log Wage and Earnings - Data
                                             0                                                                                                     0


                                           -0.1                                                                                                  -0.1


                                           -0.2                                                                                                  -0.2


                                           -0.3                                                                                                  -0.3


                                           -0.4                                                                                                  -0.4


                                           -0.5                                                                                                  -0.5
                                                                                       Wages                                                                                                     Wages
                                                                                       Earnings                                                                                                  Earnings
                                           -0.6                                                                                                  -0.6
                                               -5   0         5       10          15              20                                                 -5       0         5       10          15              20
                                                        Years Around Separation                                                                                   Years Around Separation

                                                         (a) Baseline                                                                                     (b) Mass Layoff Separators




                                                                                                             % Change Wage and Earnings - Data
            Log Wage and Earnings - Data




                                             0                                                                                                     0


                                           -0.1                                                                                                  -0.1


                                           -0.2                                                                                                  -0.2


                                           -0.3                                                                                                  -0.3


                                           -0.4                                                                                                  -0.4


                                           -0.5                                                                                                  -0.5
                                                                                       Wages                                                                                                     Wages
                                                                                       Earnings                                                                                                  Earnings
                                           -0.6                                                                                                  -0.6
                                               -5   0         5       10          15              20                                                 -5       0          5       10         15              20
                                                        Years Around Separation                                                                                   Years Around Separation

                                             (c) Industry-Occupation Stayers                                                                               (d) Regressions in Levels

Notes: a) baseline, b) mass layoff in year y : full time employment fell > 30% between y - 2 and y , employment
in y -2 must be no more than 130% of employment in y -3 and employment in y +1 must be no more than 90%
of employment in y - 2. Employment must also be larger than 50 in y - 2. This follows Davis and von Wachter
(2011). c) The occupational classification uses the 1988 classification of occupations (KldB 88), the industry
definition uses the 3-digit classification (w93_3) of industries each published by the IAB. Treatment group
are workers that return to a job in the same industry-occupation window after the initial unemployment
spell following displacement. d) I run specification (15) with earnings in levels as the dependent variable.
I first construct counterfactual earnings for each individual in the treatment group by adding k to their
earnings for all k . I then compute the ratio of the dummy coefficients k to counterfactual earnings and
report the average of that ratio in the pooled sample for each k . I proceed identically for wages. Two-way
clustered standard errors used to construct 95% confidence intervals.

                                                    Figure 11: Earnings and Wage Response ­ Robustness

I now provide several robustness checks of the empirical earnings and wage response to
displacement as measured in the previous subsection. First, I contrast my approach with
the standard approach in the literature to include only workers displaced in the course of a
mass-layoff event to identify involuntary separations into non-employment. As can be seen in
figure 11(b), the short run losses are even larger, yet the losses are less persistent. One may
expect that displacement in the course of a mass layoff event should come with even larger

                                                                                                       34
losses. I can imagine two opposing forces which might lead to a stronger recovery for mass-
layoff separators. First, there might be less selection and it might accordingly also be less
"stigmatizing" for a worker to be laid off during a mass layoff event since adverse selection
into the treatment group plays less of a role. This is in line with theoretical predictions
and empirical results in Gibbons and Katz (1991). Second, mass layoffs might trigger policy
interventions that help the affected workers recover.
    I next consider industry-occupation stayers to address concerns that the losses largely
reflect occupation- or industry specific human capital. Figure 11(c) suggests that industry-
occupation stayers suffer somewhat smaller, yet still substantive reductions in the wage rate
which suggests a limited role for specific human capital in the German labor market. It then
follows from the comparison of the earnings losses--which are indeed smaller in the short
run--that stayers appear to return to employment somewhat quicker.35
    Finally, I also compute the earnings losses from a regression with earnings in levels. Note
that that I have used log earnings in the above specifications which means that any years
where a worker did make zero earnings did not enter the calculations. To offer an alternative,
I run specification (15) with earnings in levels on the left hand side.36 I construct the losses
as described in the figure notes. The most striking observation is that, preceding in this
fashion, there is a more sustained recovery in the long run.
    Finally, I offer additional robustness in Appendix C. There, I include worker fixed effects,
restrict the sample to men only, and treat part time employment and the definition of the
treatment group in an alternative ways. Relative to baseline, the main difference is that
most alternative specifications lead to a somewhat more pronounced long-run recovery in
earnings and wages.

4.1.4    Heterogeneity in Earnings Losses

Finally, to gauge the extent of heterogeneity in the earnings losses from displacement I run
quantile regressions for log earnings. Specifically, I estimate conditional quantile models of
the form
                                                          20
                                                 y                     k,y
                                Qey
                                  it
                                     ( ) =  ( ) Xit +           k ( ) Dit  .                          (16)
                                                         k=-5

  35
     Neal (1995) argues for an important role of industry-specific human capital in the wage losses from
displacement. In turn, Kambourov and Manovskii (2009) argue for an important role for occupation-specific
human capital. Huckfeldt (2016) finds that displaced occupation stayers in the US experience substantially
smaller earnings losses compared with movers.
  36
     Whenever a worker in the sample has at least three consecutive years with zero earnings I ignore the
corresponding observations. I assume that most of these workers are not actively participating in the labor
market.




                                                    35
                                                 0


                                               -0.2




                                Log Earnings
                                               -0.4


                                               -0.6


                                               -0.8


                                                -1                             10th          75th
                                                                               25th          90th
                                               -1.2                            Median

                                                  -5   0         5        10            15          20
                                                           Years Around Separation


Notes: Estimates of k ( ) for the conditional quantile model (16), for   {10, 25, 50, 75, 90}. Sample
construction and variable definitions otherwise unchanged.

                  Figure 12: Quantiles of the Earnings Losses from Job Loss

This is exactly the same model as the one behind regression equation (15), except there we
modeled the conditional expectation while here we model the conditional quantile function.
I do so for the quantiles   {10, 25, 50, 75, 90}. I plot the resulting sequences k ( ) in Figure
12.
    The results imply that almost all workers experience some losses at least in the short term.
However, within a few years a sizable fraction of workers recovers. In fact, 15 years after
the event, the median displaced worker has fully recovered. In turn, there is a particularly
large tail of workers with vast earnings losses due to displacement. These results are, to the
best of my knowledge, new to the literature on worker displacement and suggest that there
is considerable heterogeneity in the evolution of earnings post displacement.


4.2    Model vs Data
I now show that the model provides a decent fit to the patterns documented in the previous
subsection, in particular with regard to the long run and the extreme persistence in the data.
Specifically, I construct the consequences of job loss in a model generated dataset employing
the same empirical models used in section 4.1. Sample selection, variable construction, and
reduced form specifications applied to model generated data are exactly identical to the one
laid out above. I highlight that I have not directly targeted this feature in the estimation.
    Figure 13 compares the consequences of job loss in the quantitative model with the data.
The top left figure shows that the model tracks the large and persistent earnings reductions
following a separation. The model predicts slightly too large losses in the short run, but
closely captures the large persistence of the empirical earnings response.
    However, the model gets the decomposition of these losses slightly wrong over the first 6
years past separation. In particular, as can be seen in the same figure, wages in the model

                                                                     36
                                      0
                                                                                                  0




                     Log Earnings




                                                                               Log Wage
                                    -0.2
                                                                                                -0.1
                                    -0.4
                                                              Data
                                                              Model                             -0.2
                                    -0.6
                                       -5     0     5    10    15     20                           -5     0     5        10    15   20
                                            Years Around Separation                                     Years Around Separation

                                                                                                0.15
                                      0




                                                                           Risk of Separation
                     Employment




                                    -0.2                                                         0.1


                                    -0.4                                                        0.05


                                    -0.6
                                                                                                  0
                                       -5     0     5    10    15     20                                   5        10        15    20
                                            Years Around Separation                                     Years Around Separation

Notes: Constructed like figures 8-10 for both data and model.

                   Figure 13: The Response to Job Loss -- Model versus Data

actually keep deviating from counterfactual for 5 years after displacement while they start
recovering earlier in the data. Likewise, the model-based employment response is too large
in the short run. Over longer horizons, however, the model closely tracks the decomposition
of the earnings response into employment and wages. Like in the data, the bulk of the long
term earnings losses are due to a reduced wage.
    The bottom right figure implies that the model also quantitatively captures the source of
the employment reduction. Just like in the data, workers experience a sharp increase in their
separation risk that can be attributed to the original separation. The model slightly under-
states the prominence of the mechanism, consistent with the observation that it generates
somewhat too much of a recovery in employment.37 Taken together, the model provides a
decent account of the empirical response of labor market trajectories to job loss, in particular
in the long run.38
    Finally, I show that the model accounts for the heterogeneity in the earnings losses as
picked up by the quantile regressions presented in the previous subsection. I run the same
regressions in simulated data and contrast model and data in figure 14.
  37
     This also aligns with the observation that the direct measures of dispersion in unemployment risk in the
data exceed their model counterpart, section 3.5.
  38
     The model slightly overstates the reduction in hours yet understates the loss in job security. An important
observation is that the model has a constant job finding rate which is not hampered by job loss. Adding such
an element would then lead to an even larger overstatement in terms of the employment reduction. Jointly,
this suggests that the job finding rate itself cannot be too adversely affected by the displacement event.



                                                                       37
                                                             Data
                                        0




                       Log Earnings
                                      -0.5


                                       -1


                                         -5   0         5           10            15          20


                                                            Model
                                        0
                       Log Earnings




                                      -0.5
                                                                         10th          75th
                                                                         25th          90th
                                       -1
                                                                         Median
                                         -5   0         5           10            15          20
                                                  Years Around Separation
Notes: Constructed like figure 12 for both data and model.

               Figure 14: Heterogeneity in the Earnings Losses -- Model versus Data

4.3        The Response to Displacement ­ Sorting out the Drivers
This section argues, based on model simulations and counterfactuals, that the response of
human capital to the long lasting employment losses that come with displacement is key in
understanding the empirical displacement losses.
    The decomposition of the earnings response into employment and wages was given in the
previous subsection. Further, it is clear that the driver of the reduction in the employment
rate is the reduction in job security that comes with a separation. The wage response
however, is driven by three main forces. The loss of the employer itself, the loss of human
capital due to the cumulative additional time out of employment, and the loss of negotiation
rents that had been accumulated through outside offers prior to the separation. In order to
sort out the quantitative contributions of these mechanisms, I use the estimated model to
construct counterfactual employment biographies for a cohort of workers who get displaced.39
    In a first step, I compute counterfactual wages for a cohort of job losers in a baseline
period that satisfy the same sample selection restrictions applied previously. To do so, I
simply keep them in their job at baseline. Simulating forward from there and dividing
counterfactual by realized wages picks up the true wage losses from displacement in the
model. These are plotted as the thick black line in figure 15.40
  39
       I use the same sample selection criteria as in the previous subsection.
  40
       I note that the wage losses in the model differ somewhat from what the regression specification picks up in


                                                            38
                                                                          Decomposing Wage Losses
                                                                 1




                                 Wage rel. to Counterfactual
                                                               0.98

                                                               0.96

                                                               0.94

                                                               0.92

                                                                0.9

                                                               0.88

                                                               0.86

                                                               0.84
                                                                                          Negotiation Rents
                                                                                          Firms
                                                               0.82
                                                                                          Human Capital
                                                                0.8
                                                                      0      50     100    150    200      250
                                                                      Months Before and after Separation

Notes: Counterfactuals obtained from model based simulations in steady state. Lower black envelope gives
wages path relative to counterfactual for displaced workers.

                                Figure 15: Decomposing Wage Losses

    I then proceed stepwise, "turning on" each mechanism sequentially, filling in the total loss
with its components. The first component of the wage losses I "turn on" are the negotiation
rents: To that end, I keep the workers in their jobs but I remove the negotiation component
of the wage by setting the benchmark firm to unemployment in the baseline period, adjusting
the wage. I then simulate forward. In a next step, I remove the cohort from their job in
the baseline period and simulate forward, but I assign the counterfactual path for human
capital, obtained from the original counterfactual where I turn off displacement altogether.
That is, I do not let the displacement event affect the path of human capital. The resulting
path isolates the losses that stem from the loss of the employer from the losses that arise
from human capital dynamics. The remaining gap can be attributed to the human capital
response to the original separation. The three regions in figure 15 correspond to these three
sources of wage loss.41
    I find that negotiation rents play only a small role, reflecting the high value for  I
estimate. The loss of the employer itself has long-lasting consequences. Why? Because
workers have to re-climb a job ladder with slippery bottom rungs. A worker now has lost
her job security and thus experiences multiple unemployment spells that set her back at the
bottom of the ladder multiple times.
simulated data. In particular, the regression understates both the short run losses and the long run recovery.
The difference in the short run partially reflects that the simulations are monthly while the regressions
are carried out on an annual dataset. The other reason is that the log approximation to percentage losses
becomes imprecise for large losses.
  41
     There is an alternative sequence for the counterfactuals: One can first fix the human capital to the coun-
terfactual path but keep the worker on the job and compute counterfactual wages, then remove the workers
negotiation rents, and finally "turn on" the separation. The results are quantitatively and qualitatively
similar though not identical since the mechanisms interact.



                                                                                  39
    Finally, the loss of human capital amplifies the long-run wage response and accounts for
an increasing fraction of the losses as time goes by.42 The key reason is the interaction of
the process for human capital with the loss in job security. Following an initial separation,
workers experience a long period of turbulence with repeated unemployment spells and
depressed employment. This causes a worker's cumulative experience, and thus human
capital, to diverge from its counterfactual path until the effect on the employment rate has
vanished--which takes over two decades to happen. This is why the human capital response
to the long-lasting loss in job security is key in explaining the extremely persistent wage
losses observed empirically. Fundamentally, however, the underlying source is the loss of job
security.43
    I complement this with an additional exercise that documents that heterogeneity in
 is key for the model to capture the consequences of job loss, illustrated in Figure 16.
Figure 16(a) contrasts the benchmark model with an alternative setting where I set all
 to the average separation rate under the stationary distribution and keep everything
else the same. It shows that, in that setting, the employment rate converges rapidly back
to counterfactual. Importantly, this also means that the wage converges back fast. The
reasons for the quick wage convergence are straightforward. First, a displaced worker no
longer repeatedly loses her employer. Second, and more importantly, the (cumulative) future
experience lost upon separation is substantially smaller. Thus, while the other mechanisms
in the model quantitatively matter, the key underlying driver of the overall response to a
job separation is the loss of job security.
    16(b) documents that human capital dynamics are important to explain the high per-
sistence of the wage and earnings losses. To illustrate this, I eliminate all human capital
dynamics, setting skill to its average level for all workers. Naturally, the employment re-
sponse is unchanged and highly persistent. However, wages, and hence earnings, display a
much less persistent response because human capital accumulation is not affected by the
reduction in the employment rate. Wages, in fact drop further initially in the alternative
model but then rapidly recover. In turn, wages in the benchmark display a highly persistent
response, like wages in the data which display very little recovery. Thus, it is the interaction
of the loss in job security with the accumulation of human capital that drives the wage losses
in the long run.
  42
     I note that, in the short run, the response of human capital actually increases wages according to this
exercise. The reason is that wages are not monotone in s everywhere. As discussed in section 2.4, this might
result in workers re-entering from unemployment with lower human capital temporarily receiving higher
wages which is the effect observed in the figure.
  43
     Ljungqvist and Sargent (1998) build on a large, sudden drop in human capital at the moment of job loss
to capture the earnings losses from job loss. Their framework has identical separation rates across jobs and
can thus not explain the joint response of wages, employment, and separation risk described in section 4.1.


                                                    40
                         0                              0                                 0                                    0                              0                                 0



                       -0.1                           -0.1                              -0.1                                 -0.1                           -0.1                              -0.1



                       -0.2                           -0.2                              -0.2                                 -0.2                           -0.2                              -0.2




                                                                           Employment




                                                                                                                                                                                 Employment
            Earnings




                                                                                                                  Earnings
                       -0.3                           -0.3                              -0.3                                 -0.3                           -0.3                              -0.3




                                              Wages




                                                                                                                                                    Wages
                       -0.4                           -0.4                              -0.4                                 -0.4                           -0.4                              -0.4



                       -0.5                           -0.5                              -0.5                                 -0.5                           -0.5                              -0.5



                       -0.6                           -0.6                              -0.6                                 -0.6                           -0.6                              -0.6



                       -0.7                           -0.7                              -0.7                                 -0.7                           -0.7                              -0.7
                              0   10     20                  0   10   20                       0   10   20                          0   10     20                  0   10   20                       0   10   20


                                       (a) Homogeneous                                                                                       (b) Homogeneous s

Notes: Figure (a) plots the response of earnings, wages, and employment restricting job security to  =    ¯ 
(dashed line) against their benchmark response in the full model (solid line). Figure (b) does the same for a
framework with human capital fixed at s = s   ¯. Both ¯ and s ¯ are set according to the average values in the
benchmark model. All other parameters are taken from the benchmark. All figures show regression-based
results like figures 8-10 for benchmark and alternative models.

           Figure 16: Job Security and its Interplay with Human Capital Dynamics



4.4     How Costly is the Average Job Lost?
The displacement literature has traditionally focused on high tenured job losers for the
reasons discussed in the empirical section. This raises the question to which extent the
measured "cost of job loss" is special to these workers losing presumably highly valuable
jobs and hence overstates the losses associated with a common unemployment spell. This is
particularly important because the majority of job losers is selected from workers with low
tenure. To assess the question, I use the model where I can compute the true earnings losses
from job loss for various subgroups through counterfactual simulations.
    I do so for the treatment group satisfying the displacement sample restriction and then do
the same for a group of workers that simply consists of all job losers in a period. I separately
restrict attention to workers who are in short term employment having left unemployment
no more than three years ago.
    I plot the results in figure 17. As we have already seen, the long term employed who
get displaced suffer large and long lasting losses. Interestingly, however, the losses of the
average worker are not a whole lot smaller and even those with short employment tenure still
suffer large and persistent earnings losses from job loss. In present value terms, the losses for
the three groups are, 22.2%, 17.7%, and 13.1%, respectively. This suggests that the scarring
that has been documented in the empirical literature is not special to the group that satisfies
the restrictive sample selection criteria. Indeed, all groups of workers, even those who were
unemployed recently, have much to lose from job loss.

                                                                                                             41
                                                          1


                                                         0.9




                               Earnings Losses - Model
                                                         0.8


                                                         0.7


                                                         0.6


                                                         0.5


                                                         0.4
                                                                                 Long Term Employed
                                                         0.3
                                                                                 All Job Losers
                                                                                 Short Term Employed
                                                         0.2
                                                               2   4   6   8    10   12   14   16   18   20
                                                                       Years After Job Loss

Notes: Counterfactuals obtained from model based simulations in steady state, monthly frequency, then
aggregated to annual. I express average realized annual earnings in the group of job losers relative to
average counterfactual earnings. Long term employed job losers have been continuously employed at the
same firm for at least 3 years. Short Term Employed have previously exited unemployment within the last
36 months.

                 Figure 17: Earnings Losses for Various Groups of Job Losers

5     Conclusions
This paper introduces the search for job security as an integral part of the search for better
employment in a job ladder model of individual earnings and wage dynamics. As workers
move towards more secure employment through job-to-job transitions, those exiting unem-
ployment are initially more susceptible to job loss than workers higher up on the job ladder.
Hence, unemployment spells beget unemployment spells. The framework captures the conse-
quences of job loss I document for the German labor market. In particular, it quantitatively
accounts for the joint response of wages, employment, and unemployment risk to job loss.
The loss in job security reduces workers' future employment rates and keeps their wages
depressed. I argue that key driver of the long term losses is the original loss of job security
and its interaction with the evolution of human capital.
    One key feature of the empirical evidence in Schmieder et al. (2020) is that job loss comes
with much larger earnings losses when it occurs during an aggregate downturn. I believe my
framework has the potential to capture and explain this feature of the German labor market.
First, and unsurprisingly, unemployment spells are much longer during recessions. Thus, if
skill falls during an unemployment spell, this can help explaining larger and more persistent
earnings losses from job loss during a recession. Furthermore, the framework generates wage
stickiness in existing matches and many workers who remain employed will not suffer wage
cuts in a recession. In turn, however, a worker laid off in a recession receives, once rehired,
a wage that fully reflects the aggregate state of the economy. Extending the setup to allow


                                                                               42
for aggregate dynamics is, however, challenging and so is left for future research.


References
Addison, John and Pedro Portugal, "Job Displacement, Relative Wage Changes, and Duration
  of Unemployment," Journal of Labor Economics, 1989, 7 (3), 281­302.
Altonji, Joseph G. and Lewis M. Segal, "Small-Sample Bias in GMM Estimation of Covariance
  Structures," Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 1996, 14 (3), 353­366.
Bagger, Jesper, Francois Fontaine, Fabien Postel-Vinay, and Jean-Marc Robin, "Tenure,
  Experience, Human Capital, and Wages: A Tractable Equilibrium Search Model of Wage Dy-
  namics," American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (6), 1551­96.
Bonhomme, Stephane and Gregory Jolivet, "The Pervasive Absence of Compensating Dif-
  ferentials," Journal of Applied Econometrics, 2009, 24 (5), 763­795.
  , Thibaut Lamadon, and Elena Manresa, "A Distributional Framework for Matched Em-
  ployer Employee Data," Econometrica, 2019, 87 (3), 699­739.
Borovickova, Katarina, "Job Flows, Worker Flows and Labor Market Policies," Technical Report
  2016.
Burdett, Kenneth, Carlos Carrillo-Tudela, and Melvyn Coles, "The cost of job loss," The
  Review of Economic Studies, 2020, 87 (4), 1757­1798.
Burgess, Simon, Julia Lane, and David Stevens, "Job Flows, Worker Flows, and Churning,"
  Journal of Labor Economics, 2000, 18 (3), 473­502.
Cahuc, Pierre, Fabien Postel-Vinay, and Jean-Marc Robin, "Wage Bargaining with On-
  the-Job Search: Theory and Evidence," Econometrica, 2006, 74 (2), pp. 323­364.
Cameron, A. Colin, Jonah B. Gelbach, and Douglas L. Miller, "Robust Inference With
  Multiway Clustering," Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 2011, 29 (2), 238­249.
Card, David, Jörg Heining, and Patrick Kline, "Workplace Heterogeneity and the Rise of
  West German Wage Inequality," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 05 2013, 128 (3), 967­
  1015.
Couch, Kenneth A. and Dana W. Placzek, "Earnings Losses of Displaced Workers Revisited,"
  American Economic Review, 2010, 100 (1), 572­89.
Davis, Steven J. and Till von Wachter, "Recessions and the Costs of Job Loss," Brookings
  Papers on Economic Activity, 2011, 43 (2), 1­72.
  , R. Jason Faberman, and John C. Haltiwanger, "The Establishment-Level Behavior of
  Vacancies and Hiring," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2013.
Diamond, Peter A, "Wage Determination and Efficiency in Search Equilibrium," Review of
  Economic Studies, April 1982, 49 (2), 217­27.
Doris, Aedin, Donal O'Neill, and Olive Sweetman, "GMM Estimation of the Covariance
  Structure of Longitudinal Data on Earnings," The Stata Journal, 2011, 11 (3), 439­459.


                                               43
  ,   , and   , "Identification of the Covariance Structure of Earnings Using the GMM Estimator,"
  The Journal of Economic Inequality, 2013, 11 (3), 343­372.
Eberle, Johanna, Alexandra Schmucker, and Stefan Seth, "Example Programs for Data
  Preparation of the Sample of Integrated Labour Market Biographies for Stata - Creating cross-
  sectional data and biographical variables," Technical Report 2013.
Faberman, Jason R., Andreas I. Mueller, Aysegul Sahin, and Giorgio Topa, "Job Search
  Behavior among the Employed and Non-Employed," June 2020.
Flaaen, Aaron, Matthew D. Shapiro, and Isaac Sorkin, "Reconsidering the Consequences of
  Worker Displacements: Firm versus Worker Perspective," American Economic Journal: Macroe-
  conomics, April 2019, 11 (2), 193­227.
Gelman, Andrew, John B. Carlin, Hal S. Stern, and Donald B. Rubin, Bayesian Data
  Analysis, 2 ed., Chapman and Hall/CRC, July 2003.
Gibbons, Robert and Lawrence F Katz, "Layoffs and Lemons," Journal of Labor Economics,
  October 1991, 9 (4), 351­80.
Hall, Robert E., "Lost Jobs," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1995, 26 (1, 25th A),
  221­274.
Honore, Bo, Thomas Jorgensen, and Aureo de Paula, "The informativeness of estimation
  moments," Journal of Applied Econometrics, 2020, 35 (7), 797­813.
Hornstein, Andreas, Per Krusell, and Giovanni L. Violante, "Frictional Wage Dispersion
  in Search Models: A Quantitative Assessment," American Economic Review, December 2011,
  101 (7), 2873­98.
Hosios, Arthur J., "On the Efficiency of Matching and Related Models of Search and Unemploy-
  ment," The Review of Economic Studies, 1990, 57 (2), pp. 279­298.
Huckfeldt, Christopher, "The Scarring Effect of Recessions: A Quantitative Analysis," March
  2016.
Jacobson, Louis S, Robert J LaLonde, and Daniel G Sullivan, "Earnings Losses of Displaced
  Workers," American Economic Review, September 1993, 83 (4), 685­709.
Jovanovic, Boyan, "Job Matching and the Theory of Turnover," Journal of Political Economy,
  1979, 87 (5), pp. 972­990.
  , "Matching, Turnover, and Unemployment," Journal of Political Economy, 1984, 92 (1), 108­
  122.
Jung, Philip and Moritz Kuhn, "Earnings losses and labor mobility over the life cycle," Journal
  of the European Economic Association, 2019, 17 (3), 678­724.
Kambourov, Gueorgui and Iourii Manovskii, "Occupational Specificity of Human Capital,"
  International Economic Review, 2009, 50 (1), 63­115.
Kroft, Kory, Fabian Lange, Matthew J. Notowidigdo, and Lawrence F. Katz, "Long-
  Term Unemployment and the Great Recession: The Role of Composition, Duration Dependence
  and Non-Participation," Journal of Labor Economics, 2016, 34 (S1), S7­S54.



                                               44
Krolikowski, Pawel, "Job Ladders and Earnings of Displaced Workers," American Economic
  Journal: Macroeconomics, April 2017, 9 (2), 1­31.
  , "Choosing a Control Group for Displaced Workers," ILR Review, 2018, 71 (5), 1232­1254.
Lachowska, Marta, Alexandre Mas, and Stephen A. Woodbury, "Sources of Displaced
  Workers' Long-Term Earnings Losses," American Economic Review, October 2020, 110 (10),
  3231­66.
Lee, Eun Sul and Ronald N Forthofer, Analyzing Complex Survey Data, Sage, 2006.
Lise, Jeremy, "On-the-Job Search and Precautionary Savings," The Review of Economic Studies,
  2013, 80 (3), 1086­1113.
  , Costas Meghir, and Jean-Marc Robin, "Matching, Sorting and Wages," Review of Eco-
  nomic Dynamics, 2016, 19, 63 ­ 87.
Ljungqvist, Lars and Thomas J. Sargent, "The European Unemployment Dilemma," Journal
  of Political Economy, 1998, 106 (3), pp. 514­550.
Mincer, Jacob and Haim Ofek, "Interrupted Work Careers: Depreciation and Restoration of
  Human Capital," Journal of Human Resources, 1982, 17 (1), 3­24.
Mortensen, Dale T, "Property Rights and Efficiency in Mating, Racing, and Related Games,"
  The American Economic Review, 1982, 72 (5), 968­979.
Neal, Derek, "Industry-Specific Human Capital: Evidence from Displaced Workers," Journal of
  Labor Economics, 1995, 13 (4), pp. 653­677.
Pinheiro, Roberto and Ludo Visschers, "Unemployment Risk and Wage Differentials," Journal
  of Economic Theory, 2015, 157, 397 ­ 424.
Pissarides, Christopher A, Equilibrium Unemployment Theory, MIT press, 1990.
Postel-Vinay, Fabien and Jean-Marc Robin, "The Distribution of Earnings in an Equilibrium
  Search Model with State-Dependent Offers and Counteroffers," International Economic Review,
  2002, 43 (4), pp. 989­1016.
      and   , "Equilibrium Wage Dispersion with Worker and Employer Heterogeneity," Economet-
  rica, 2002, 70 (6), pp. 2295­2350.
Pries, Michael J., "Persistence of Employment Fluctuations: A Model of Recurring Job Loss,"
  The Review of Economic Studies, 2004, 71 (1), pp. 193­215.
Rubinstein, Ariel, "Perfect Equilibrium in a Bargaining Model," Econometrica, 1982, 50 (1), pp.
  97­109.
Ruhm, Christopher J, "The economic consequences of labor mobility," ILR Review, 1987, 41
  (1), 30­42.
Schmieder, Johannes F., Till von Wachter, and Joerg Heining, "The Costs of Job Dis-
  placement over the Business Cycle and Its Sources: Evidence from Germany," 2020.
  ,     , and Stefan Bender, "The Long-Term Impact of Job Displacement in Germany During
  the 1982 Recession on Earnings, Income, and Employment," 2009.




                                                45
  ,     , and          , "The Effect of Unemployment Benefits and Nonemployment Durations on Wages,"
  American Economic Review, March 2016, 106 (3), 739­77.
Stevens, Ann Huff, "Persistent Effects of Job Displacement: The Importance of Multiple Job
  Losses," Journal of Labor Economics, 1997, 15 (1), pp. 165­188.
Topel, Robert, "Specific capital and unemployment: Measuring the costs and consequences of job
  loss," in "Carnegie-Rochester conference series on public policy," Vol. 33 Elsevier 1990, pp. 181­
  214.




APPENDIX
A        Proofs
A.1        Proof of Proposition 1
The first part of this proof establishes that the surplus function is strictly increasing in productivity
and job security. It follows that workers move towards more productive and secure jobs along the
job ladder. The second part then establishes that it follows that the expected probability of job
loss is a strictly decreasing function of the time since the last unemployment spell (employment
tenure).

Part 1: Slope of the Surplus Function
We want to prove that S (, s) is strictly increasing in productivity y when S (, s) is strictly
                                                                        ^ (, s) where
positive. To that end, whenever S (, s) is strictly positive, S (, s) = S

^ (, s) =p (y , s) - z +  (1 -  )
S                                                       ^ , s
                                                 max 0, S           +                 ^ , s
                                                                                   1  S                   ^ , s
                                                                                                 - max 0, S        dF (x) dGe s |s
                                         S                              ^
                                                                        M 1(,s )



           -                         ^ x, s
                                   0 S            dF (x) dGu s |s
                   S   ^
                       M 1(u,s )


           +       U s    dGe s |s -             U s   dGu s |s     .
               S                             S


This auxiliary function is identical to the surplus function when strictly positive but does not
restrict it to be non-negative. The set M ^ 1 (, s) here collects all jobs x such that S
                                                                                       ^ (x, s) > S
                                                                                                  ^ (, s)
and S^ (x, s) > 0 and is hence identical to M1 (, s).
      To show that the surplus is strictly increasing in y , it then suffices to show that


 ^ (, s) = p (y , z ) +  (1 -  )
TS                                                   ^ , s
                                                 max S        , 0 + 1                   ^ x, s
                                                                                        S                 ^ , s
                                                                                                 - max 0, S       dF (x) dGe s |s
                                        S                                    M1 (,s )
                                                                                                                               (17)


                                                                        46
is a contraction and that it maps weakly increasing into strictly increasing functions. Note that
I have omitted the constants that are independent of  which is without loss. The operator is a
contraction because it satisfies Blackwell's sufficient conditions.
   Next, denote the integrand in (17) by S     ~ (, s)  max S    ^ (, s) , 0 + 1                                        ^ (x, s) -
                                                                                                                        S
                                                                                                            M1 (,s)
       ^ (, s))
max 0, S                                            ^ (, s) is non-decreasing in y then S
                     dF (x). We will show that when S                                   ~ (, s) is
non-decreasing in y . To do so, take two jobs 1 , 2 with 1,2 < y,2 and ,1 = ,2 =  . Assuming
^ (, s) is non-decreasing in y , we have that
S


     ~(2 , s) - S
     S          ~(1 , s)

      = (max {S (2 , s), 0} - max {S (1 , s), 0}) 1 - 1                           dF (x)
                                                                      M1 (2 ,s)


         - 1                           S (x, s)dF (x) - S (1 , s)                          dF (x)
                   M (1 ,s)\M (2 ,s)                                  M (1 ,s)\M (2 ,s)


       (max {S (2 , s), 0} - max {S (1 , s), 0}) 1 - 1                             dF (x) +                        dF (x)
                                                                        M (2 ,s)               M (1 ,s)\M (2 ,s)


      = (max {S (2 , s), 0} - max {S (1 , s), 0}) 1 - 1                          dF (x)
                                                                      M (1 ,s)

       0.                                                                                                                     (18)

                      ^ (, s) is weakly increasing in y , then T S
Next, we show that if S                                          ^ (, s) is strictly increasing in y .
Again consider 1 , 2 with 1,2 < y,2 and ,1 = ,2 =  . We have that



               ^ (1 , s) = p (y,1 , z ) +  (1 -  )
              TS                                                     ~ (1 , s ) dGe (s |s)
                                                                     S
                                                               S

                            p (y,1 , z ) +  (1 -  )                  ~ (2 , s ) dGe (s |s)
                                                                     S
                                                               S

                           < p (y,2 , z ) +  (1 -  )                 ~ (2 , s ) dGe (s |s) = T S
                                                                     S                         ^ (2 , s)
                                                                 S


which implies the result. The weak inequality follows from (18). The strict inequality follows from
the assumptions on the production function. The proof for 1 -  is almost analogous and therefore
                         ^ (, s) and hence S (, s) is strictly increasing in y and strictly decreasing
omitted. It follows that S
in  whenever S (, s) > 0.


Part 2: Duration Dependence in the Rate of Job Loss
Consider newly employed workers with employment tenure  = 1 which just exited unemployment.
Expected job security 1-E [ | = 1] depends on the expected  in the offer distribution conditional
on S () > 0. We show that E [ | = 2] < E [ | = 1]. Consider the workers who move from  to
^ after the first period. If 
                             ^y < y , it must be that ^ <  for S ^ > S (). If ^y > y , we have



                                                            47
that E ^ |^y <  by assumption 1. Thus, conditional on a job-to-job transition,E [ | = 2] <
E [ | = 1]. Because of search frictions, the share of workers transitioning to a new job ^ is strictly
positive for all  . Since non-movers have unaltered , we have that E [ | = 2] < E [ | = 1]
unconditionally.44 For  > 2, proceed by induction.


A.2      Wages
The moment the wage gets set, the current skill and (new) benchmark skill are identical and
the worker receives an expected value which depends on the current firm and skill as well as the
benchmark firm, W , ,  ^ s, s . Evaluate (5) at these arguments and rewrite as



    ^ s, s =w , ,
W , ,           ^ s +                         (1 -  )
                                          S


                 1                (W (x, , s , s ) - U (s )) dF (x) +         (W (, x, s , s ) - U (s )) dF (x)
                             M1                                          M2


                + 1 - 1                 dF (x)               ^ s , s - U (s ) + I2 (W (, u, s , s ) - U (s ))
                                                      I1 W , ,                                                       dGe (s |s)
                                   M3


                +        U (s ) dGe (s |s)
                     S


and apply the bargaining rules


     ^ s, s =w , ,
 W , ,           ^ s +                            (1 -  )
                                              S


                    1              ((1 - ) S (, s ) + S (x, s )) dF (x) +            ((1 - ) S (x, s ) + S (, s )) dF (x)
                              M1                                                M2


                 + 1 - 1                  dF (x)              ^ s , s - U (s ) + I2 S (, s )
                                                       I1 W , ,                                        dGe (s |s)
                                     M3


                 +           U (s ) dGe (s |s) .
                         S

  44
     This argument contrasts E [ | = 2] with E [ | = 1] conditional on not losing a job at the end of
the period. The unconditional comparison includes an additional composition effect. Workers with high 
are more likely to lose their job. That is, the distribution of  among job losers first order stochastically
dominates the one among stayers. This effect just reinforces the argument which is why the proof is restricted
to job-stayers.




                                                                48
Hence,

        ^ s, s - U (s) =w , ,
    W , ,                   ^ s -z+                (1 -  )
                                               S


                        1           (1 - ) S (, s ) + S (x, s ) dF (x) +          (1 - ) S (x, s ) + S (, s ) dF (x)
                              M1                                             M2


                       +    1 - 1         dF (x)             ^ s ,s - U s
                                                      I1 W , ,                    + I2 S , s         dGe s |s
                                    M3


                       - 0               S (x) dF (x) dGu s |s +       U s   dGe s |s -        U s   dGu s |s   .
                               S    M1                             S                       S


This equation can then be used to compute wages in the last step of the three-step algorithm
described in the main text since everything except wages in this expression is known after completing
the first two steps.
                                                                 ^ s, s - U (s) to a worker, the
   Note that, to deliver, all else equal, a higher net value W , ,
wage must increase. As a consequence, whenever the negotiation benchmark changes from       ^ to
^ with S 
         ^ , s > S ,
                   ^ s the wage must increase. The main text argues why the wage is not
generally monotone in the other state variables y ,  , s.


A.3      Planning Problem
Because of the partial equilibrium nature of the model, the utilitarian planner's problem is simple.
The planner decides which jobs are acceptable for the unemployed and which jobs are preferable
for the employed. Her objective is to maximize the expected present value of flow output (which
includes z when unemployed) produced by a worker.
   Denote by Y P (, s) the expected present value of output produced by a type s worker currently
                                                                                    P (, s)
matched with firm . The worker moves to another job  only if it falls into the set M1
chosen by the planner. Denote by U P (, s) the expected present value of output produced by an
                                                                          P (u, s) chosen by the
unemployed worker who accepts a job offer  only if it falls into the set M1
planner. As in the equilibrium cases, I will suppress the dependence of these sets on employment
status and skill. Define S P (, s)  max 0, Y P (, s) - U P (s) , the social net value of an employed




                                                             49
worker and her job. Proceeding like in the decentralized case gives


    Y P (, s) = p (y , s) +                    (1 -  ) 1              Y P x, s dF (x)
                                          S                       P
                                                                 M1


                    + 1 - 1                   dF (x) max Y P (, s ), U P s              +  U P s   dGe s |s
                                          P
                                         M1


       U P (s) = z +                 0            Y P x, s - U P s          dF (x) + U P s    dGu s |s        (19)
                                S          P
                                          M1


     S P (, s) = max 0, p (y , s) - z +                          (1 -  ) S P (, s )
                                                             S


                    +1               S P x, s - S P (, s ) dF (x) dGe s |s
                             P
                            M1

                    -0                   S P x, s dF (x) dGu s |s                                             (20)
                            S        P
                                    M1


                    +       U P s dGe s |s -                 U P s dGu s |s
                        S                                S


The solution to S P (, s) implies the sets M1
                                            P for all firms  and u, that is it implies the solution

to the planner problem. Therefore, comparing equations (20) and (19) with the expressions for
bilateral surplus in (7) and unemployment in (4), we have that

                                              S P (, s) = S (, s)      if  = 1.                               (21)

It follows immediately that the socially efficient ranking of jobs and reservation strategies can be
derived from solving the equilibrium value functions under  = 1. I notice that these expressions can
also be derived from a constrained maximization problem where the planner maximizes aggregate
output subject to frictions.



B      Data and Estimation
The SIAB comes in spell format. I convert the main dataset into a monthly panel which I use to
compute the moments used in the estimation. Section B.1 describes the construction of the main
monthly panel dataset and how I construct the moments that are used in the estimation. I collapse
the monthly panel into an annual panel which is used in the regressions in section 4.1.




                                                             50
B.1      Monthly Panel and Construction of Variables and Moments
I use the publicly available code by Eberle et al. (2013) to convert the spells into monthly cross
sections which we then merge into a monthly panel covering 1993-2010.45 This assigns the spell
information pertaining to a particular reference date during a month as the monthly observation. I
record a worker as employed for a given month if the worker is full-time employed subject to social
security (at the reference date) and otherwise as nonemployed.46
    During nonemployment, I assign a value of 0 for earnings. During employment, I assign the
average daily wage during the spell as reported by the employer as the wage observation. To deflate,
I use the OECD's CPI for Germany.47 During months of employment, I assign the average daily
wage as the average daily earnings. This is consistent with restricting employment to full-time
employment. I note that the data are censored at the social security contribution ceiling which I do
not make any adjustments for. Finally, I censor the bottom percent and top per-mille of all wage
observations in any given year.
    I restrict the sample to workers of age 18-65. I next describe how I construct the empirical
moments discussed in section 3.3. For transitions into unemployment I compute the rate at which
currently employed workers exit employment. Specifically, I record an EU transition whenever a
worker is full time employed subject to social security in one month but not in the month thereafter
and, in addition, shows up as receiving unemployment insurance (UI) the month thereafter (or is
still non-employed in the month 2 or 3 after separation and then starts receiving UI).48
    For transitions into employment, I compute the rate at which currently non-employed workers
who have been receiving UI within the last three months transition into employment. In order to
compute the rate of EE transitions, I compute the rate at which currently employed workers are
employed at another establishment the following month.
    The set of controls in the duration dependence regressions are listed in figure 2. In the duration
regressions (9) and (10), I restrict to unemployment spells up to 2 years and job spells up to 8
years. In order to compute the ratio of the wages of the newly employed to the wages of the
average worker, I project wages on fixed effects for age, gender, education and calendar year and
residualize. I then take the ratio of average residualized wages of those with employment tenure
less than 12 months and the average of all residualized wages. To construct the 50-10 and 90-50
wage ratios, I project log wages on an individual fixed effect and year fixed effects. I residualize
   45
      I also use this code to assign a main employer. Download link accessed under http://doku.iab.de/
fdz/reporte/2013/MR_04-13_EN.pdf.
   46
      The main reason for only including full-time employment is that the data do not contain detailed
information on hours but rather just a part-time indicator. Thus, constructing wages, which are key for the
estimation, is problematic for part-time workers. I thus follow Card et al. (2013) in restricting attention to
the full-time employed. However, in Appendix C I check whether the displacement regressions are sensitive
to the classification of part-time workers.
   47
      https://data.oecd.org/price/inflation-cpi.htm, downloaded on 9/11/2018.
   48
      Thus, some very brief (within-month) E-U-E transitions go undetected. Germany has two different
tiers of unemployment insurance. I lump both unemployment benefits (ALG) and unemployment assistance
(ALHI) as UI.


                                                     51
and take the difference. Finally, to compute average wage growth, I compute individual 12 month
ahead wage growth and normalize by the aggregate wage growth (in the same calendar year) to
normalize for aggregate growth which the model does not have. I eliminate the top and bottom
percentile of wage growth observations and take the pooled mean. For remaining details, see the
main text.


B.2      Annual Panel for Section 4
I construct annual earnings in year y as the mean earnings across all months within the year. I
construct annual wages as mean wages during months of employment. When collapsing the monthly
panel into the annual panel, I record job loss in year y if I record at least one job loss in the monthly
panel during that year. Further, I merge information on the number of full-time employees at an
establishment to register a mass-layoff as described in the robustness section 4.1.3. I record as
employer the establishment the worker works at in January.


B.3      Details of the Estimation
I estimate the parameter vector  via Simulated Method of Moments,

                                  ^ = arg min L ()  g () W g ()
                                  
                                            


where W is a weighting matrix and g () is a K × 1 vector of differences between several statistics
in the data and their model counterparts in simulated data. K is the number of targets, 13 in
total, listed in sections 3.3 and table 2. I target the log difference between all the moments listed
in these sections.
   W is a diagonal matrix. Because 0 exactly equals the job-finding-rate I fix it at that value
and set its weight to zero. The rest of  is an identity matrix, except I triple the weight on three
targets: The rate of job loss, the job-to-job rate, and the ratio of the wage of newly hired workers
to the average wage.
    To find ^, I proceed as follows: I first conduct a broad grid search on a set of quasirandom points
from the Sobol sequence. I solve the model 2 million times and pick the global minimum 0 from
the Sobol set. From that set of parameters, I follow Lise (2013) and Lise et al. (2016) in using a
Metropolis-Hastings algorithm to further reduce L (): I create chains 0 , ..., N starting at 0 . To
update the parameter vector from j to j +1 , I draw a new vector of parameters j from N j , 
where the diagonal matrix  is scaled proportionally to 0 . I then compute L j               - L j . If
positive, j +1 = j . If negative, j +1 = j with probability exp A L j - L j                       where
A is a tuning parameter that is chosen--jointly with the scaling factor of --so as to obtain an
average rejection rate of .7, as suggested by Gelman et al. (2003). I choose the length of the chains
N to be 400 and simulate 4000 chains. I pick the global minimum from all 1.6 million model


                                                   52
simulations as ^.
    To construct standard errors for these parameter estimates, we can cast this indirect inference
approach in terms of GMM under standard regularity conditions (see, for instance, Honore et al.
(2020)). Then we have that
                                                  d
                                             n^  N (,  )

where
                                             -1                    -1
                               = G WG             G W SW G G W G        .

    Here, S is the variance-covariance matrix of the empirically measured moments. As is common
practice, I set the off-diagonal elements of S to zero (Altonji and Segal (1996)). I measure the
variance of the statistics I target in levels. To convert that to the variance of the log of the
respective statistic (which is the target entering g ()) I use a first-order Taylor approximation.
The number of observations which enter the computation of the statistics differ. To obtain a
bound, I therefore set n equal to the smallest number of observations used in the computation of
any moment. The standard errors are nonetheless extremely tight since my dataset has millions
of observations. Finally, G is a M × K matrix that contains the gradient of each model generated
statistic with respect to the model parameters evaluated at ^ which I compute based on numerical
simulations.



C       Additional Robustness for Reduced Form Results
This subsection computes the empirical wage and earnings response to displacement as measured
by specification (15) in a few additional ways. I contrast the results with the baseline specification
in figure 18.
    First, a common practice is to define the treatment group somewhat differently. For instance,
Davis and von Wachter (2011) include into the treatment group in year y all separators in years
y, y + 1, y + 2. This mechanically smoothes earnings and wages losses around the layoff year as can
be seen in figure 18(b).
    Second, I restrict the sample to men only. Earnings and wages recover more strongly over time
compared with baseline. Third, I include results for log earnings and log wages where, instead
of including the average pre-separation earnings/wage decile, I include a worker fixed effect. The
results are similar but there is even less recovery in wages and earnings in the long run.
    Finally, I treat part time wages and earnings differently. Recall that I do not observe hours, so
for the main analysis I treat workers as employed only when full time employed. That is, whenever
a worker is not full time employed I assign earnings of zero and a missing wage. Here, I also treat
workers that are part-time employed ("geringfuegig beschaeftigt") as employed and assign their
daily wage as the relevant value for both wages and earnings (I merely see that status but still no
hours). I report the corresponding results in figure 18(e). The long-run recovery in earnings and


                                                      53
wages is more pronounced but the overall picture remains the same.



            Log Wage and Earnings - Data




                                                                                                                                          Log Wage and Earnings - Data
                                             0                                                                                                                                  0


                                           -0.1                                                                                                                               -0.1


                                           -0.2                                                                                                                               -0.2


                                           -0.3                                                                                                                               -0.3


                                           -0.4                                                                                                                               -0.4


                                           -0.5                                                                                                                               -0.5
                                                                                                                    Wages                                                                                                         Wages
                                                                                                                    Earnings                                                                                                      Earnings
                                           -0.6                                                                                                                               -0.6
                                               -5   0         5       10                                       15              20                                                 -5           0            5    10          15              20
                                                        Years Around Separation                                                                                                                    Years Around Separation

                                                         (a) Baseline                                                                                                           (b) Expanded Treatment Group




                                                                                                                                          % Change Wage and Earnings - Data
            Log Wage and Earnings - Data




                                             0                                                                                                                                  0


                                           -0.1                                                                                                                               -0.1


                                           -0.2                                                                                                                               -0.2


                                           -0.3                                                                                                                               -0.3


                                           -0.4                                                                                                                               -0.4


                                           -0.5                                                                                                                               -0.5
                                                                                                                    Wages                                                                                                         Wages
                                                                                                                    Earnings                                                                                                      Earnings
                                           -0.6                                                                                                                               -0.6
                                               -5   0         5       10                                       15              20                                                 -5           0            5    10          15              20
                                                        Years Around Separation                                                                                                                    Years Around Separation

                                                        (c) Men Only                                                                                                                   (d) Worker Fixed Effects
                                                                       Log Wage and Earnings - Data




                                                                                                        0


                                                                                                      -0.1


                                                                                                      -0.2


                                                                                                      -0.3


                                                                                                      -0.4


                                                                                                      -0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                            Wages
                                                                                                                                                                                            Earnings
                                                                                                      -0.6
                                                                                                          -5           0            5    10                                            15              20
                                                                                                                           Years Around Separation

                                                                       (e) Different Treatment of Part-Time
                                                                       Earnings

Notes: a) baseline, b) the treatment group in year y includes all separators in years y, y + 1, y + 2 c) only
men in the sample d) and e) see description in text. Two-way clustered standard errors used to construct
95% confidence intervals.

                                             Figure 18: Earnings and Wage Response ­ Additional Robustness




                                                                                                                                    54
D          Additional Material
D.1            Derivation of Surplus
The exposition used that the joint surplus does not depend on the internal division of rents, some-
thing we have yet to show. Therefore, write the joint surplus in general form, S , ,      ^ s, s
                                                                                               ^ 
        ^ s, s
max W , ,                    ^ s, s
             ^ - U (s) + J , ,    ^ , 0 and plug in equations (5) and (6). This gives


    ^ s, s
S , ,    ^ = max             0, p (y , s) +                    (1 -  )     1                W x, , s , s            dF (x) +             W , x, s , s           + J , x, s , s     dF (x)
                                                       S                              M1                                           M2


                   +    1 - 1               dF (x)                    ^ s ,s
                                                               I1 W , ,            ^ s ,s
                                                                           ^ + J , ,    ^                           + I2 W , u, s , s                + J , u, s , s
                                       M3


                   I3 U (s )         +  U s                dGe s |s - U (s)             .



Plug in (4) for U (s), add and subtract                                           S   U (s ) dGe (s |s) to get

S     ^ s, s
    , ,    ^   = max     0, p  y , s     -z+                   (1 -  )
                                                           S


               1               W     x, , s , s       -U       s       dF (x) +             W      , x, s , s    +J    , x, s , s       -U      s      dF (x)
                        M1                                                        M2


               +    1 - 1            dF (x)       I1       W      ^ s ,s
                                                                , ,    ^ +J             ^ s ,s
                                                                                      , ,    ^ -U           s       + I2    W   , u, s , s      +J      , u, s , s   -U    s       dGe   s |s
                               M3


               -             0     W    x, u, s , s        -U      s     dF (x) dGu         s |s    +       U   s    dGe    s |s    -       U    s     dGu   s |s      .
                   S   M1                                                                               S                               S



Using the bargaining rules and the definition of surplus

              ^ s, s
          S , ,    ^ = max               0, p (y , s) - z +                     (1 -  )
                                                                            S


                               1                  ^ s ,s
                                              S , ,    ^ +  S x, , s , s                                 ^ s ,s
                                                                                                   - S , ,                  dF (x) +                S , x, s , s     dF (x)
                                       M1                                                                                                   M2


                          +        1 - 1            dF (x)                    ^ s ,s
                                                                       I1 S , ,    ^ + I2 S , u, s , s                          dGe s |s
                                               M3


                          -                 0 S x, u, s , s              dF (x) dGu s |s +                      U s        dGe s |s -               U s      dGu s |s          .
                                 S     M1                                                                   S                                   S




                                                                                             55
                                                                                      ^ s, s
Conjecture that the surplus function does not depend on the negotiation benchmark S , ,    ^ =
S (, s). Hence,

          ^ s = max
        S ,                0, p (y , s) - z +           (1 -  )   1               S , s   +  S x, s       - S , s    dF (x)
                                                    S                        M1


                  +     1 - 1         dF (x)     (I1 + I2 + I3 ) S , s        dGe s |s
                                 M1


                  -             0 S x, s       dF (x) dGu s |s +             U s    dGe s |s -          U s   dGu s |s    .
                       S   M1                                            S                          S



where I use that I1 + I2 + I3 = 1 and S (, s ) = 0 if I3 = 1. Cancelling terms, we arrive at

  ^ s = max 0, p (y , s) - z + 
S ,                                                (1 -  ) S (, s) +                   1  (S (x, s ) - S (, s )) dF (x) dGe (s |s)
                                               S                                  M1


          -            0 S (x, s ) dF (x) dGu (s |s) +                U (s ) dGe (s |s) -           U (s ) dGu (s |s)     .
              S   M1                                              S                             S


This is the expression offered in the main text which also verifies that the joint surplus does not
depend on the negotiation benchmark.




                                                                  56
