                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      CROSS-SECTORAL EXTERNALITIES RELATED TO NATURAL RESOURCES
                       AND ECOSYSTEM SERVICES

                                       Manuel Bellanger
                                         Robert Fonner
                                       Daniel S. Holland
                                        Gary D. Libecap
                                       Douglas W. Lipton
                                        Pierre Scemama
                                        Cameron Speir
                                        Olivier Thébaud

                                       Working Paper 28480
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28480


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2021




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Manuel Bellanger, Robert Fonner, Daniel S. Holland, Gary D. Libecap, Douglas W.
Lipton, Pierre Scemama, Cameron Speir, and Olivier Thébaud. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Cross-sectoral Externalities Related to Natural Resources and Ecosystem Services
Manuel Bellanger, Robert Fonner, Daniel S. Holland, Gary D. Libecap, Douglas W. Lipton,
Pierre Scemama, Cameron Speir, and Olivier Thébaud
NBER Working Paper No. 28480
February 2021
JEL No. D23,H23,H73,P48,Q20,Q22

                                          ABSTRACT

Standard approaches to environmental and natural resource use externalities generally focus on
single-sector resources and user groups. Remedies include Pigouvian-style government
constraints, small group controls following Elinor Ostrom, or less frequently, bargaining across
users as outlined by Ronald Coase. However, many difficult natural resource management
problems involve competing uses of the same resource or multiple interdependent resources,
across multiple, heterogeneous sectors. Cross-sectoral externalities are generated and impede
attainment of conservation objectives. The multiplicity of resources and stakeholders, who may
have different property rights, hold different use or non-use values, have different traditions, or
fall under different regulatory regimes, increases the likelihood of multi-jurisdictional conflicts.
We provide an institutional analysis following Oliver Williamson's four-levels of institutions
(social embeddedness, institutional environment, governance, resource allocation) to illustrate the
sources of potential conflict, the costs of addressing them, and the potentials for exchange. In
comparing the costs of alternative approaches, we include transaction costs associated with
property rights; the costs of lobbying, implementing, and enforcing government regulation; and
the costs of scaling up from small-group controls when resource problems involve multiple
sectors and heterogeneous populations. In our illustrative case examples, instruments that
are not formal property rights are exchanged at lower transaction costs. We close by
discussing how Coasean, Pareto-improving voluntary exchange agreements may be lower cost,
more effective, and more durable solutions than alternative management regimes to mitigate
cross-sectoral externalities.

Manuel Bellanger                                Daniel S. Holland
Unité d'Economie Maritime UMR                   Northwest Fisheries Science Center
6308 AMURE                                      NOAA Fisheries
Ifremer, Univ Brest, CNRS, IUEM                 Seattle, WA 98112
Plouzane                                        dan.holland@noaa.gov
France
manuel.bellanger@ifremer.fr                     Gary D. Libecap
                                                Distinguished Professor,
Robert Fonner                                   Bren School of Environmental Science
Northwest Fisheries Science Center              and Management
NOAA Fisheries                                  Distinguished Professor of Economics
Seattle, WA 98112                               University of California, Santa Barbara
robby.fonner@noaa.gov                           (Emeritus)
                                                400 Daly Avenue
                                                Missoula, Montana 59801
                                                and NBER
                                                glibecap@bren.ucsb.edu
Douglas W. Lipton
NOAA Fisheries
Silver Spring, MD 20910
dlipton@umd.edu

Pierre Scemama
Unité d'Economie Maritime
UMR 6308 AMURE
Ifremer, Univ Brest, CNRS, IUEM
Plouzane
France
pierre.scemama@ifremer.fr

Cameron Speir
Southwest Fisheries Science Center
NOAA Fisheries
Fisheries Ecology Division
Santa Cruz, CA 95060
cameron.speir@noaa.gov

Olivier Thébaud
Unité d'Economie Maritime
UMR 6308 AMURE
Ifremer, Univ Brest, CNRS, IUEM
Plouzane
France
olivier.thebaud@ifremer.fr




                                     1
    1. Introduction
Common-pool resources, including open-access fisheries, aquifers, irrigation systems,
pastures, forests, earth's oceans and atmosphere, tend to be rapidly and wastefully
exploited by individual users whose incentives to maximize short-term profits oppose
collective interests (Gordon, 1954; Hardin, 1968). The economic analysis of institutions
has made important contributions to the study of common-pool externalities (Scott, 1955;
Demsetz, 1967; Dahlman, 1979; Libecap, 1989, 1994; Bromley, 1992; Ostrom, 1990,
2009; Williamson, 1996, 2000). The field of institutional economics has examined the
particular role of property rights regimes and their implication for economic behavior in
relation to societal institutions. It has also been at the forefront of the search for
understanding the functioning of governance systems and the emergence of new modes of
organizations. In the case of the exploitation of a local common-pool resource, theory and
empirical evidence have often focused on solutions to address externalities and resulting
overexploitation of resources within sectors. However, with the increasing pressure of
human activities on biodiversity and ecosystems, more complex situations -- such as
multiple sectors exploiting distinct but interconnected resources whose ecological
production and human exploitation span large geographical scales and multiple
jurisdictions -- have emerged (Crowder et al., 2006; Sanchirico et al., 2010; Grip, 2017).
For instance, marine and coastal activities are often closely interrelated, and resources
spanning marine and coastal environments are also likely to span multiple jurisdictional
boundaries and ecological structures where stakeholders have different values and
objectives for resource management (Bellanger et al., 2020). These settings make it critical
to take into account cross-sector interactions and heterogeneities to foster coordination in
addressing resource-use externalities (Rice, 2011).

We focus on complex natural resource management problems where competing uses of the
same resource, or multiple interdependent resources, by numerous sectors generate cross-
sectoral externalities that impede attainment of conservation objectives. These "wicked"
problems are difficult to define and cannot be solved by using typical scientific models
(Batie, 2008; Groeneveld, 2020). Cross-sectoral conflicts exacerbate the difficulties that
are traditionally found in reducing common-pool externalities, including divergent
preferences across stakeholder groups, distributional issues, information problems, and
compliance (Crowder et al., 2006; McCann, 2013). Further difficulties also arise from
having pre-established institutional systems that have developed independently from one
another, resulting in governance institutions with overlapping and conflicting mandates
within and across resources, economic sectors, biomes, and jurisdictional boundaries. The
different groups often hold conflicting opinions on the type of action that needs to be
implemented and the timing of intervention. These concerns increase the transaction costs
of reaching agreement on appropriate remedies (Libecap, 2014). Cross-sectoral conflicts
can also involve values that cannot easily be traded-off, such as non-use values for
endangered species in the face of potentially irreversible losses (Bishop, 1978).

In its most basic definition, "cross-sectoral" is used when something relates to more than
one group of stakeholders. Bryson et al. (2006) describe cross-sectoral collaboration as
partnerships involving government, business, nonprofits and philanthropies, communities,
and/or the general public. The distinction between public/government, commercial and
nonprofit sectors is relevant but insufficient to characterize cross-sectoral issues as some
can involve multiple commercial sectors for example. For our purpose, more useful
definitions of the differences between sectors can be based on differences in how the
resource is valued by a group (e.g., for use or non-use), means of production, benefits from
ecosystem services, distinct jurisdictions, etc. A common theme across definitions is that



                                                                                          2
"cross-sectoral" entails a notion of heterogeneity of uses and users, and the several
possible definitions can be viewed as a gradient in how heterogeneous user groups need to
be in order to be considered as different sectors (Neely et al., 2017). Beyond stakeholder
heterogeneity, the characteristics of the biophysical environment and the multi-jurisdiction
nature of externality problems generate specific challenges (Folke et al., 2007; Ostrom,
2009).

1.1 Case examples of cross-sectoral conflicts
Examples of governance conflicts at the interface of multiple sectors and jurisdictions
include management regimes for diadromous species of conservation concern (e.g.,
salmon, eel, river herring, etc.), where fish that migrate between river and sea are subject
to intense human harvest, disruption of watersheds by dams and land uses, reduced stream
flow caused by agricultural water diversions, predation, and other threats. Each of these
water uses involves different parties, whose practices are governed by different regulatory
agencies and regimes. These regulatory efforts are aimed primarily at reducing
externalities within a sector and are not designed specifically to address broader problems
across the resource. The result in some sectors is important loss in use and non-use values.

For instance, Lackey (2017) describes a durable `salmon crisis' on the US West coast
where the different ecosystem services that are involved in the conflicts are linked. This
case reveals the heterogeneity attributes that are characteristic of cross-sectoral
externalities: multiple sectors competing for uses of interdependent resources spanning
multiple biomes and distinct jurisdictions, conflicts between use and non-use values, and
uncertainty regarding the extent of external effects across sectors and resources. River
flows are used as a direct input to hydropower, agriculture, and salmon habitat. Salmon is
also an input to commercial, recreational, and indigenous fishing and serve as key prey
species for marine mammals including endangered Southern Resident Killer Whales,
which, like salmon, hold significant cultural value and also support a whale-watching
industry. While the use of water as input to hydropower and agriculture is fairly
predictable and visible, its effect on salmon production is more variable, less certain, and
less visible to most user groups. Hydropower flow rules and management of water
diversions for agriculture may ignore their indirect impacts on marine mammals due to
reduced prey abundances. Likewise, marine mammals' managers may not be able to
address issues related to hydropower and agriculture. At the cross-road of these conflicts
and others involving logging, hatchery policies, development and water pollution, salmon
recovery institutions are struggling to reverse the long-term decline of wild Pacific salmon
in the USA (Northwest Fisheries Science Center, 2015).

The collapse of Pacific leatherback sea turtle populations is another illustration of cross-
biome conflicts that undermine biodiversity conservation (Spotila et al., 2000). Factors
contributing to ocean mortality of leatherback turtles include incidental fisheries bycatch
and direct harvest. On nesting beaches, egg and hatchling mortality is due to coastal
development, predation, egg harvest, and other beach-related sources of mortality (Tapilatu
et al., 2013). Illegal egg poaching on nesting beaches undermines conservation efforts and
exposes very contrasting preferences between conservationists and some local
communities where turtle egg consumption is associated with traditions and beliefs
(Tomillo et al., 2008). As all stages of the life cycle are essential for population
persistence, understanding the tradeoffs involved in protecting nesting beaches and
breeding habitats, and regulating bycatch and subsistence takes at-sea, is imperative for
conservation and population recovery (Gjertsen et al., 2014).




                                                                                          3
Wolf management is a third telling example of cross-sectoral conflicts. Human perceptions
of wolves vary from iconic biodiversity symbol to a source of human fears of the wild,
while reaction to the losses from attacks on livestock can lead to illegal killing of protected
wolves (Salvatori and Linnell, 2005). Wolf habitats typically range over hundreds of
kilometers and span across jurisdictional boundaries (Gehring and Potter, 2005). Thiel et
al. (2012) describe a case where wolf protection reduces the value of the property rights of
livestock owners and wild game provisioning services, while providing positive cultural
services and non-use values. Therefore, the distribution of costs and benefits of wolf
protection varies considerably across stakeholder groups. Moreover, wolves are highly
mobile and the time and location of livestock attacks by wolves, which depend on wild
game availability, are very difficult to predict. These characteristics increase the
transaction costs of addressing stakeholder conflicts. Thiel et al. (2012) report that the state
may play a key role in organizing the social-ecological transaction between sectors,
depending on the incentives of politicians and agency officials.

1.2 Characterizing cross-sectoral conflicts and perspectives for their
resolution: an institutional economics analysis
Clarifying management tradeoffs across heterogeneous sectors and jurisdictions --
embracing the complexity of positive and negative effects associated with alternative
management options, as required to address cross-sectoral externalities -- is a challenge
under traditional single-sector regulatory approaches. Addressing broad externalities
requires consensus, aligned incentives, and a proportionate distribution of benefits and
costs across diverse sectors (Ostrom, 1990; Cox et al., 2010). More narrow government
interventions (Pigou, 1932) or small-group collective action (Ostrom 1990) typically are
not designed for cross-sectoral coordination and joint action among heterogeneous parties
for several reasons.

First, the multiplicity of interacting resources being valued by different stakeholders
increases the likelihood of jurisdictional conflicts across regulatory authorities and the
difficulty of managing the system. No single agency generally has authority to address
these conflicts in a manner that generates support among varying users. Second,
differences in use and non-use values between sectors may have important implications for
addressing externalities. For example, organized citizen groups and non-profit
organizations that emphasize significant non-use values may pressure policy-makers to
implement measures to protect and recover at-risk biodiversity. On the other hand, use
sectors frequently invoke traditions or socio-economic considerations to lobby against
policy measures that restrain their activities. Fulfilling the demand for biodiversity
conservation typically modifies historical practices or the formal or informal property
rights of user groups, without compensation. The predictable result is opposition, delay, or
evasion, undermining resource objectives. Standard regulatory governance structures are
not designed to promote exchange among these differential parties. Indeed, some parties
may not want to compromise if they believe their political influence may advance certain
of their strongly-held values. The costs of competitive lobbying and enforcement also rise
as other parties find their positions or livelihoods compromised.

System complexity, which is characterized in terms of heterogeneity in stakeholders,
biophysical systems, and institutions, raises the cost of cross-sector coordination. The
literature on determinants of transaction costs associated with environmental policy-
making has analyzed heterogeneity-related attributes such as multiplicity of stakeholders
groups (Libecap, 2005; McCann, 2013), power imbalance (Krutilla and Krause, 2011),
mobility of the resource (Libecap, 2014), and institutional misalignments (Krutilla and



                                                                                              4
Krause, 2011; Marshall, 2013; McCann, 2013; Libecap, 2014). Heterogeneity increases the
cost of organizing relations between groups because of practical reasons such as their
number and location (Coggan et al., 2010), or because of the lack of trust (Mettepenningen
and van Huylenbroeck, 2009) and social connectedness (Morrison et al., 2008). Notably,
two of the most influential strands of literature on the economic analysis of environmental
governance, Elinor Ostrom's social-ecological systems framework and Oliver
Williamson's transaction cost approach, both predict that these cross-sectoral conflicts will
not have straightforward bargaining-based solutions in the absence of government
intervention. Even government intervention, however, requires lobbying of politicians and
agency officials, and when the parties hold different resource objectives, lobby efforts
compete, molding and potentially delaying any response. Accordingly, heterogeneity and
different cultural norms between user groups, geographic dispersion, uncertainties
regarding system dynamics, asymmetry of information, are factors that are known to
impede self-organized governance systems (Ostrom, 1990, 2009) and increase the
transaction costs of reaching agreement on solutions to address externalities (Libecap,
1994; Williamson, 1996), allowing conflicts to expand and persist.

Where such heterogeneities exist, they are outside of the small, homogenous groups and
corresponding shared values and trust among parties found by Ostrom (1990) to promote
collective action. Accordingly, it may not be feasible to scale up or coordinate across
different groups and jurisdictions at low cost to achieve joint resource objectives.
Moreover, with competing interests in such settings, lobbying for Pigouvian-style taxes
(Pigou, 1932) or restrictions on access and use, or for eliciting government support of
cross-jurisdictional collective action, typically encounters conflicting stakeholder
objectives. Competing interests and the uncertain political and bureaucratic response to
them raise the costs of securing jointly-agreed government support. When these costs are
weighed with the transaction costs identified by Coase (1960) and Williamson (1996,
2000), Coasean alternatives based on voluntary bargaining among stakeholder groups may
be more cost-effective and durable than government constraints or deliberative approaches
(Ovando et al., 2021).

Consider the following two examples. Since at least 2001, there have been concerns about
overfishing of Bigeye tuna in the Western Central Pacific Ocean (Ovando et al, 2021).
Overfishing occurs from the bycatch of juvenile Bigeye that school with Skipjack tuna
under fish aggregating devices (FADs). 19 countries have long line or purse seine vessels
harvesting Bigeye and 17 countries have purse seine vessels in the much larger Skipjack
fishery. Further, international environmental NGOs value ecosystem services provided by
Bigeye stocks. These multiple interests have been in conflict, blocking agreement on
conservation measures. The primary remedy is reduction in FAD use by Skipjack interests,
but doing so imposes productivity losses on those vessels without compensation. To break
the impasse, Ovando et al. (2021) propose a Coasean bargain whereby the parties seeking
FAD removals would purchase Vessel Day Scheme (VDS) licenses held by Skipjack
vessel owners and reduce FAD use. VDS licenses to fish are sold to fishing vessel owners
by Parties to the Nauru Agreement, countries whose members control access valuable
fishing waters. Under the proposal, parties desiring reduced FADs and Bigeye
conservation would purchase VDS licenses from Skipjack vessel owners and restrict FAD
use in fishing. The aggregate bargain across participating agents not only determines
overall voluntary Bigeye conservation, but compensates the vessel owners who give up
FADs to achieve it. Doing so elicits their support of conservation. This Coasean bargain
occurs at lower transaction costs because formal property rights to fish Bigeye are not
defined, and rather the exchange uses existing VDS licenses that serve as a mechanism for
exchange.



                                                                                           5
Similarly, consider the role of Fiordland Marine Guardians ­ a statutory advisory body
appointed by the Minister for the Environment ­ in coordinating non-traditional instrument
exchanges for conservation among the various parties that depend upon the waters off the
southwest portion of the South Island of New Zealand (Guardians of Fiordland's Fisheries
and Marine Environment Inc., 2003, 2020). The stakeholders and values are heterogeneous
and competitive, ranging from commercial and recreational fishers to indigenous Maori
customary fishing and non-use values, to tourism, to NGO members who value
biodiversity and other forms of non-use. Multiple government, cross-sectoral regulatory
agencies are involved with overlapping, but not aligned mandates. To reduce fishing
pressure on vulnerable species and prized ecosystems, to limit tourism and associated
pollution, and to constrain the introduction of invasive species, the Fiordland Marine
Guardians play a key role in a Coasean exchange. The Guardians have an officially-
recognized role as a neutral party for negotiating conservation strategies, developing codes
of practice, and monitoring compliance among the actors in each sector. They oversee the
exchange of "gifts and gains" among the parties to achieve conservation goals (Guardians
of Fiordland's Fisheries and Marine Environment Inc., 2003, p.14-16, 79-81). These
include temporary closures, reductions in harvests, and limited access to sensitive areas.
These arrangements are voluntarily agreed to by the negotiating parties. The background
institutions and incentives for exchange include formal fishing rights, individual
transferable quotas (ITQs) held by commercial fishers, who seek to avoid local depletion
and external imposition of fishing controls, the desire of tourism groups to avoid additional
limits on access to high-profile areas, NGOs that seek to protect special ecological areas,
Maori groups that want recognition of their historical areas and customary practices, and
recreation fishers that desire access. In negotiations, each group trades portions of its
preferred independent, unconstrained objective to obtain broader collaboration by the
overall group and the government agencies under which they operate (Guardians of
Fiordland's Fisheries and Marine Environment Inc., 2003, p.14, 17-18, 79-81).

The article is structured as follows. The next section provides background on the standard
theoretical framework for the institutional analysis of traditional common-pool allocation
problems. We then extend this framework to characterize cross-sectoral and cross-
jurisdictional externalities. To this end, impediments to more integrated institutional
systems are examined in light of Williamson's (2000) four-levels of institutions. The
article then discusses reliance upon voluntary Coasean bargaining as an alternative to
traditional regulation and the case examples above are used to illustrate how the
consideration of institutional factors relating to Williamson's framework can help identify
opportunities for feasible arrangements to mitigate cross-sectoral conflicts.


    2. Institutional analysis of common-pool allocation problems
2.1 Common-pool externalities
Common-pool externality problems have led to the depletion of many valuable common-
pool resources worldwide (MEA, 2005). This wasteful process results from the disconnect
between the private costs incurred by individual users acting independently and the full
social costs of their activities (Dahlman, 1979). When resource users do not bear the full
social cost of their activities, they exploit the resource too intensively with short-term
incentives predominating over long-term consequences.

To reduce the losses of the commons, constraints on individual behavior can be imposed so
as to better take into consideration the social benefits and costs of common-pool resource


                                                                                           6
exploitation. For instance, these limits can be designed to promote higher-valued uses of
the resource or to spread the resource across generations of users. In general, when a
common-pool resource is accessed locally by few and homogenous groups of users,
cultural norms and collective-choice arrangements can reduce common-pool losses
(Ostrom, 1990). By contrast, when the set of competitors is larger and more heterogeneous
or when the resource is highly mobile across a vast geographic scale, such collective-
choice arrangements may not be effective in reducing open-access losses and more formal
state intervention may be required to address common-pool externalities (Cox et al.,
2010). These can range from the taxes described by Pigou (1932); regulatory constraints
on access and use to better equate social benefits and costs; or the assignment of a property
right of some type that more fully aligns private and social costs and benefits and that can
be traded (Coase, 1960).

2.2 Property rights regimes
Property rights are a form of regulation of access to, and use of, a resource. The emergence
of property rights has been shown to derive from the existence of negative externalities
(Demsetz, 1967; Scott, 1955). The philosophy behind rights-based approaches to
mitigating common pool losses is to internalize the costs that a resource user's actions
impose on others and to capture the gains from increases in resource values. The
characteristics of property rights are traditionally described with four main attributes that
allow evaluation of their `completeness': the right to use the resource, the right to derive
profit from the resource, the right to transfer ownership, and the right to enforce property
rights (Eggertsson, 1990). The costs of defining, transferring, monitoring, and enforcing
property rights are referred to as transaction costs (Eggertsson, 1990; McCann et al., 2005;
Krutilla and Krause, 2011; Marshall, 2013; Libecap, 2014).

Property rights determine the nature of the possible uses of a resource and its associated
flow of benefits accruing to the owner; they also determine the costs that the owner may
impose on others through his use of the resource. By determining who is entitled to the
costs and benefits of decisions to use a resource, property rights ultimately structure the
incentives that guide agents in their individual decisions (Libecap, 1989). A property rights
regime still requires that a higher authority with coercive power and legitimacy, usually the
State, is able to impose obligations on third parties who may covet or act on that resource
(Bromley, 1992). According to Arrow (1974), a higher authority may be necessary to
address equity issues, as well as to overcome market failures. Furthermore, property rights
are complemented by institutional arrangements providing for coordination and
enforcement mechanisms (Williamson, 1996).

2.3 Institutional change to internalize common-pool externalities
Institutional change results from efforts undertaken by individuals and stakeholder groups
to modify collective rules governing their activity in order to avoid the losses due to
common-pool externalities (Libecap, 1989). Williamson (2000) developed a framework for
analyzing institutions and institutional change that distinguishes four levels corresponding
to different types of institutions: social embeddedness, institutional environment,
governance, and resource allocation (see Figure 1, which is derived from Williamson's
Figure 1 (2000, p. 597)). This framework defines the options and structures for cross-
sector coordination to address environmental and natural resource externalities. It links the
different levels of institutions with different frequencies of change and different purposes
of institutional design at the different levels. Each level of institutions may play a critical
role in devising incentive-compatible responses.




                                                                                             7
In Figure 1, institutions in the lower levels are nested within and directly affected by
higher levels of institutions, while feedback processes link lower levels to higher levels.
According to this framework, the property rights regime and institutional environment
which are embedded within informal institutions, such as social norms and traditions, do
not change immediately in reaction to changes in governance system or resource
allocation. The timescale of institutional change may also be substantially different from
the timescales of natural processes and perceptions of change in ecosystems. Informal
institutions and the legal system play an important role in influencing the modes of
coordination, structuring interactions among stakeholders, and shaping individual
incentives and behavior. Therefore, the question of institutional design needs to account
for this interconnectedness between all levels of institutions ­ both formal and informal.

The transaction costs associated with defining, monitoring, and enforcing formal property
rights are generally not low enough to ensure the complete definition of a property right as
well as smooth redistribution through trade (Coase, 1960). For these reasons, in the cases
examined above, alternative mechanisms  VDS licenses in the Bigeye tuna case as well
as "gifts and gains" in the New Zealand Fiords  were the basis of exchange. These
arrangements follow from Williamson's schematic that extends the institutional
environment to include the governance level. He described governance as "an effort to
craft order, thereby to mitigate conflict and realize mutual gains" (Williamson, 2000).
Determining which governance structures will minimize transaction costs is therefore an
underappreciated dimension in addressing complex common-pool problems. To this end, it
is useful to examine the determinants of transaction costs and their effects on the
likelihood of collective action to address externalities (Krutilla and Krause, 2011; Libecap,
2014; Marshall, 2013; McCann, 2013).



  Figure 1: Williamson's framework for analyzing institutions and institutional change.
     Adaptation of Figure 1. Economics of Institutions in Williamson (2000, p. 597)




2.4 Externality problems in multiple sector settings

The initial development of institutions around common-pool externality problems tends to



                                                                                           8
be based on single-sector approaches, even when multiple sectors exploit the same
resource or several interdependent resources (Crowder et al., 2006; Grip, 2017). This is
particularly likely when sectors are under different government agency jurisdictions.
Institutions typically develop in response to the uses and externalities that are immediately
apparent, ignoring those that are less apparent. The question of coordinating management
operations across sectors only arises when cross-sectoral externalities become sufficiently
large relative to the costs of addressing them (Demsetz, 1967). The reasons for cross-
sectoral externalities to become apparent include: continued depletion of a resource;
technical change within one sector that increases exploitation; new ecological thresholds
and regime shifts; institutional change, perhaps from external sources; new scientific
understanding of the resource and problem; and emergence of broader socio-economic
contexts or social norms regarding the resource (Folke et al., 2004; Young, 2010;
Hiedanpää and Bromley, 2016).

Before this critical point, multiple sector-based institutional regimes might have emerged
and co-existed without much interaction or cross-sectoral coordination (Crowder et al.,
2006). Taking into consideration these additional cross-sectoral externalities challenges
established sector-based institutional systems, including the definition of individual rights,
traditions, and formal governance systems. Even if the potential aggregate gains of cross-
sectoral coordination are large, the emergence of institutions with a cross-sectoral focus
can be hampered by excessive transaction costs associated with additional institutional
change to meet the new conditions (Coase, 1960).


    3. Impediments to integrating institutional systems across sectors
The factors raising the transaction costs of addressing cross-sectoral externalities include:
scientific uncertainty regarding mitigation benefits and costs; varying preferences and
perceptions across heterogeneous populations; asymmetric information; and anticipation of
non-compliance with agreement rules (Libecap, 2014). Further difficulties also arise from
having pre-established institutional systems that have developed independently from one
another with different supportive constituents. The different groups may hold conflicting
opinions on the nature of the resource problem and the type of action that needs to be
implemented and the timing of intervention. These concerns increase the transaction costs
of reaching agreement on appropriate remedies.

In the following subsections, we review impediments to integrated, cross-sectoral
institutional systems in light of the four levels identified in Williamson's analytical
framework. These factors play critical roles in devising solutions to cross-sectoral
externality problems.

3.1 Level 1 ­ Social embeddedness
Social embeddedness encompasses informal institutions such as traditions, experience,
ethics, and social norms, which are assumed to change only slowly. Each user group has its
own value system that affects the way alternative policies are perceived and weighed.
Certain types of intervention that are considered unethical among a set of stakeholders may
not be included in the set of strategies contemplated by the stakeholders and policy makers.
For instance, the current policy debate on the protection of some marine mammals that
prey on endangered species is disconnected from ecological scientific knowledge: culling
predators to rebuild stocks of endangered prey species is considered immoral by some
(Lute and Attari, 2017). Social norms also influence the perceived legitimacy of
interventions and therefore compliance (Hatcher et al., 2000). These value systems can be



                                                                                            9
viewed as informal constraints, social transmission of collective frameworks that provide a
common basis to individuals for interpreting signals from their environment. Social and
scientific representations have a core role in the development of these collective views that
support conservation policy intervention. The more heterogeneous the set of stakeholders,
the more their value systems are likely to differ in ways that raise the costs of consensus on
cross-sectoral collaboration.

One of the recent evolutions influencing the world views of scientists and managers is the
paradigm shift in the ecology community regarding the use of historical baselines for
managing human-altered ecosystems. It is increasingly acknowledged that humans have
always transformed ecosystems they interact with and that it might be impossible to return
ecosystems to a pristine state and thus it may be irrelevant to manage human-altered
ecosystems using historical baselines (Hobbs et al., 2013). In this view, humans have to be
proactive and think about their values and the compromises they are willing to make or
costs they are willing to bear, e.g. to recover endangered species. This is particularly
relevant if there is a new epoch, the Anthropocene, characterized by the significant impacts
of humans on Earth's geology and ecosystems (Dirzo et al., 2014; IPBES, 2019). To the
extent that this ecology community reflects the broader public or influences their
perception of environmental issues, then we could expect related norms and values to
change more quickly in Anthropocene than assumed in the Williamson framework. If so,
the time scale on the higher levels of the framework may be speeded up, inducing changes
in the lower levels and creating opportunities for institutional change.

3.2 Level 2 ­ Institutional environment
Laws reflect different ways in which various political constituencies value ecosystems. For
instance, fisheries laws (e.g., Magnuson-Stevens Act in the US, Common Fisheries Policy
in the EU) set objectives of reaching optimal yields: they are use-oriented. In contrast,
biodiversity conservation laws (e.g., Endangered Species Act and Marine Mammal
Protection Act in the US, Habitat Directive and Bird Directive in the EU) that aim to
prevent species extinctions reflect non-use values (e.g., existence value). The development
of sector-based institutional systems in parallel can lead to overlapping and conflicting
legal mandates (e.g., species conservation vs. harvest promotion) without overarching
regulations to address cross-jurisdictional conflicts.

Moreover, property rights require exclusion, and property rights that do not prevent
negative impacts due to the exploitation of the same or interconnected resource by another
sector are incomplete. Because of transaction costs in defining property rights, they are
always likely to be incomplete and the question arises as to the magnitude of spillover
costs. Policy interventions, such as modification of existing property rights regimes, may
be opposed if they raise equity concerns or if existing owners are not compensated for their
losses. The likelihood that policymakers take broad and resolute action is higher when the
public as a whole is concerned by an issue, rather than just the community of
environmental experts (Burns, 2008). The inherent complexity of cross-sectoral issues,
however, makes it more difficult for citizens to be well informed about the consequences
of the externality problem. Voting decisions by elected representatives on environmental
policies are largely influenced by the ideology and the economic interests of
representatives' constituencies (Yandle, 1989). Beyond ideology divergences, regional
considerations and population demographics may also provide insights on voting decisions
regarding environmental issues (Burns, 2008). Therefore, the opportunities provided by
decentralized governments may be critical for durable political support to more grassroots,
bottom-up approaches (Grant and Tilley, 2019).




                                                                                           10
Political incentives may hinder legislative change aimed at incorporating cross-sectoral
management considerations into the institutional environment. The incentive of politicians
to respond to particularistic concerns as compared to providing broad, general values
depends on interest group lobbying and time frames (Peltzman, 1976; Volden and
Wiseman, 2007). Interest group lobbying does not just influence the final vote on
environmental policies. Consultations during the development of a bill and early rounds of
voting on amendments may be important for the choice of policy instruments but are
generally less visible to the public. The early stages of policy development are likely to be
influenced by concentrated interests with important lobbying capacity, rather than broad
societal interests. Theories of the political economy of environmental regulation hold that
political solutions emerge from the confrontation among key interest groups competing for
influence and that these solutions are generally sub-optimal (Hahn, 1990; Aidt, 1998).
Industry-related interest groups historically have been thought to have the advantage that
they face lower organizational and lobbying costs than groups which benefit from
environmental policy. If so, they may be able to exert a disproportionate influence on
policy-making (Schneider and Volkert, 1999). Environmental groups, however, may be
increasingly effective as counter lobbyists. As Peltzman (1976) has argued, successful
politicians never fully respond to a particular interest group, so that regulatory policies
reflect a range of competing interests and will be incomplete for each. The costs of
achieving a desired goal for any group rises with competing lobby efforts, and the
regulatory response may not overlap well with the initial group objective. For these
reasons, there can be opportunities for further voluntary negotiations to achieve goals not
fully addressed by formal laws, even in light of recognized transaction costs.

Further, the implementation of environmental legislation by regulatory agencies may be
affected by bureaucrats' self-interest considerations (Kirchgässner and Schneider, 2003).
Environmental agencies can weaken the policies or increase their scope and effectiveness,
for instance through the selective choice of monitoring and enforcement levels for specific
environmental measures (Oates and Portney, 2003). Regulatory agencies typically have the
initial jurisdiction before any legal action may be brought in court. However, in the event
of conflicts between several jurisdictional authorities, the courts can play the role of
referee to arbitrate cross-sectoral conflicts and oversee that the judgement is executed.
Litigation can increase the transaction costs of conflict resolution by polarizing the
different parties, inflating the need for information, and generating further delays (Hanna,
2001).

3.3 Level 3 ­ governance
In Williamson's transaction cost approach, governance structures are set up to organize
transactions, i.e. transfers of rights between economic agents. Williamson (1996, 1998)
recognizes four different types of governance form: the market (based on autonomous
decision and price signal coordination), the hierarchy (based on subordination links
between agents), a variety of hybrid forms (that borrow from market and hierarchies), and
public bureaus (to address regulation and redistribution issues). Governments and public
bureaus are typically charged with regulation of extractive-use sectors and organize
transactions to limit extraction and to deal with allocation issues. However, these
governance structures are designed to regulate a single set of users and have a limited
ability to organize transactions across sectors or address cross-jurisdictional externalities.
In some cases, cross-sectoral entities can be established but might only have an
advisory/consultative role without enough leverage to tackle problems. Regarding
ecosystem management, hybrid forms of governance may be well suited to cope with
complexity while being flexible enough for trust to develop (Muradian and Rival, 2012;
Sanchirico et al., 2010; Scemama and Levrel, 2019).



                                                                                           11
Designing effective institutions with a cross-sectoral focus requires characterizing and
minimizing the transaction costs associated with addressing inter-group conflicts,
particularly those that may arise from the imposition of disproportionate costs. Traditional
top-down regulations (e.g., `polluters pay' approaches) typically are not well suited to
address dynamic factors such as climate change and shifting political agendas, and are
associated with high transaction costs in adjustment (Libecap, 2016). Collaborative
governance frameworks, inspired by Ostrom's design principles for collective action
(Ostrom 1990), generally prescribe getting all stakeholders together and having them agree
on collective rules. However, Ostrom's original arguments for successful collective action
emphasized relatively small groups and similar objectives (Cox et al. 2010), conditions
that do not correspond to the cross-sector problems examined here. Expanding the groups
involved in policy negotiations potentially broadens support for intervention, but
introduces additional coordination costs that may reduce the chance of an agreement that
fully addresses the externality problem. The group becomes larger with demands that are
more heterogeneous. Accordingly, there are tradeoffs with no clear resolution to the
dilemma (Lubell et al., 2019).

Distributional issues are one of the key challenges that cross-sectoral governance faces.
Stakeholders are likely to oppose to the allocation of the costs and benefits associated with
addressing the conflicts if the selected policy measures can leave them worse off. Whether
governance is structured to provide means of compensation across sectors appears
particularly important. Conflicts over the distribution of benefits and costs can impede
institutional change even when expected aggregate gains are large (Cox et al., 2010).
Governance structures that provide means of bargaining or arbitration may thus be more
likely to generate solutions that address tradeoffs across sectors. Assignment of property
rights of some type across sectors or as indicated in the examples above, use of alternative,
tradable mechanisms can allow for bargaining that mitigates open-access losses (Coase,
1960).

3.4 Level 4 ­ Resource allocation
The final institutional level in Williamson's framework deals with resource allocation and
describes the individual incentives that determine the opportunity cost of resource use and
conservation. Perhaps the most important challenge to taking into account cross-sectoral
externalities in resource allocation is the difficulty in measuring the magnitude and
distribution of externality costs across the different parties, especially when the resource is
broadly spread so that different groups/sectors may observe different resource conditions.
System complexity in terms of linkages between the different ecosystem services that are
involved in the conflicts can make it difficult to clarify what trade-offs are being made
when the resources in dispute are allocated. For instance, the transmission of externality
through indirect impacts on ecosystem processes that produce ecosystem goods (e.g.,
trawling impacting nursery habitats) or via interactions among multiple interconnected
resources (e.g., reduced stream flow caused by agricultural water diversions affecting wild
salmon production) can make externalities more variable and less visible, especially for
large-scale resources where the distribution of externality costs can vary (Ayres et al.,
2018). Further, there are inherent difficulties in measuring non-use values via revealed-
preference (Boyle, 2017) or stated-preference techniques (Johnston et al., 2017) and thus to
develop policy proposals that account for those. Compliance is also important to the
effectiveness of management measures and it is undermined if the costs and benefits of
addressing externalities are not distributed proportionally. Establishing trust across sectors
may be more difficult than within sectors, making it particularly challenging to enforce a
cross-sectoral agreement.




                                                                                            12
The possibility of using side payments to mitigate opposition from parties who expect to
be left worse off by new institutional arrangements also appears as one of the major
elements that can influence the political feasibility of resolving cross-sectoral conflicts
(Ovando et.al, 2021). Boyce (1998) finds that forcing winners to compensate losers
(`beneficiary pays' schemes) reduces rent-seeking activities by those who are benefiting
from solutions that otherwise would impose more direct costs and fewer benefits on other
constituencies and sectors. Side payments such as subsidies or property rights reallocation
can provide means of bargaining across sectors.


    4. Coasean bargaining to mitigate cross-sectoral conflicts
Coase (1960) envisioned a bargaining setting emphasizing the importance of the allocation
of property rights and the central role of voluntary bargaining among stakeholder groups,
including exchange of property rights and side payments. Coase illustrated his arguments
with simple examples but acknowledged that transaction costs could limit what was
possible. Libecap (2016) found that the transaction costs of defining property rights and
engaging in Coasean bargaining are not necessarily higher than the transaction costs
involved in political intervention via traditional regulation and taxes (i.e., the transaction
costs associated with the formation of interest groups, lobbying, political competition, and
oversight of bureaucracies).

As we have argued, cross-sectoral externalities can be more problematic to address. As
negative effects rise, however, a Coasean approach can offer a way forward. Standard
regulation typically is single sector/user group focused and small group collective action
generally will not fit the case at hand. Coasean bargaining, however, can go across sectors
and user groups if there can be a suitable mechanism, even if it is not a formal property
right. Coasean bargaining may offer a solution for setting conservation objectives
collaboratively and for negotiating over costs and benefits once that objective has been
established (Ovando et al., 2021). Existing ranking of resource users or claimants based on
historical use can provide a basis for granting of some form of initial property rights.
Allowing previous users to exchange in some manner with other sectors (e.g., through
easements), perhaps even mandate that they exchange with other sectors, would provide a
way of including new claimants without undermining previous users.

Barriers to Coasean solutions in cases of multi-sector conflicts may exist. First, the
allocation of rights can have distributional effects and some parties may oppose to the
assignment of formal property rights. Such opposition is likely when some groups are left
out of the initial allocation or when the assignment of rights among groups is perceived as
unfair by some parties. However, assigning rights does allow parties to bargain and adjust
compared to traditional regulations that may not (Libecap, 2016). Moreover, as illustrated
by the Bigeye tuna and the Fiordland Marine Guardians case examples, the basis of
exchange can be instruments that are not formal property rights, allowing for Coasean
bargaining at lower transaction costs than would be required for the allocation and trade of
formal property rights. Second, there may be differential internal coordination costs within
groups  for instance if some groups are more heterogeneous and less cohesive than
others  that could affect the outcomes of a Coasean bargain. However, such
heterogeneous groups would also face higher costs of forming a cohesive position in
lobbying for government intervention or in negotiating with other parties to seek consensus
in a deliberative approach. In the end, the constraints of group heterogeneity on Coasean
bargaining are not necessarily more severe than forming a uniform effort for government
policies or for consensus-based collective action.



                                                                                           13
Coasean bargaining arrangements that have been successful at mitigating conflicts between
use and biodiversity conservation include conservation easements and land trusts (Parker,
2004), wetland mitigation banking (Levrel et al., 2017), habitat credits (Wallace et al.,
2015), water markets (Grafton et al., 2010), and others (Anderson and Libecap, 2014).
While these often are partial solutions, or second best, they can be an improvement over
the alternative of no or very limited collaboration, opposition, and evasion. In these
arrangements, conservation advocates pay to improve biodiversity conservation or
resource users pay to obtain additional use rights.

Institutions facilitating Coasean bargaining typically fall within the governance level of
Williamson's framework (Level 3 in Table 1 and Figure 1), and are nested into the broader
institutional environment including laws and property rights (Level 2). In addition,
Coasean bargaining provides individual incentives for stakeholder to negotiate and adjust,
which is relevant to the resource allocation level of Williamson's framework (Level 4).
Coasean bargaining arrangements can also relate to the social embeddedness level (Level
1) via the increasingly acknowledged idea that resource users must have a "social license
to operate", i.e. that they need to be accountable for their broader impact on ecosystems
(Gunningham et al., 2004). To illustrate further, we provide examples of Coasean
bargaining solutions within the cross-sector externalities described earlier.

In the Western US, voluntary market-based water transactions have been widely used as a
way of balancing streamflow needs for imperiled salmon species with historical water uses
(Richter et al., 2019). NGOs and state water trusts purchased and leased water rights from
private irrigators, restoring flows through thousands of stream kilometers in dewatered
salmonid habitats (McCoy et al., 2018). Dam owners and operators are generally required
to mitigate their impacts to fish and wildlife and fund various salmon recovery actions
such as habitat restoration, wild stock supplementation via conservation hatcheries, and
spills and flow operation for fish (NPCC, 2019). In one remarkable instance of dam
relicensing, Indian tribes who owned the rights to fish salmon on the Deschutes River were
able to enter a settlement agreement with the dam license holder and became majority
owners of the largest hydroelectric project within the State of Oregon (Jud, 2006). This
diversification of shareholder interests has led to measures that better balance electricity
generation and salmon conservation, contributing to significant increases in salmon returns
in recent years (Simpson, 2019).

In the realm of sea turtle conservation, performance payment approaches (i.e., direct
payments that vary as a function of conservation success) taking place around the world
have achieved substantial behavioral changes relating to egg harvest and at-sea takes
(Ferraro and Gjertsen, 2009). These initiatives include nesting beach protection programs
implemented by NGOs where local individuals receive payments for nest identification
and protection that vary according to hatching success. They also include bycatch-release
incentive programs whereby a fisher that accidentally catches a turtle in its net can receive
a payment that depends on estimated damage to the net in exchange of releasing the turtle
alive.

Regarding wolf management, Thiel et al. (2012) describe a compensation scheme
established in Saxony (Germany) that has substantially improved the welfare of livestock
owner while avoiding illegal killing of wolves. Regional authorities worked with
environmental NGOs to implement ex-post financial compensation for damaged livestock
to increase acceptance of wolf protection. Compensation was contingent upon undertaking
protecting measures (herd protection dogs and appropriate fences) to overcome moral
hazard issues.




                                                                                          14
Each of these cross-sectoral arrangements is described within Williamson's framework in
Table 1. This categorization identifies the institutional factors that must be considered in
achieving collaboration as well as the opportunities for securing it when each level is
considered.



 Table 1: Examples of institutional considerations in case examples in relation to the four
                             levels of Williamson's framework
Level of institutions     Salmon conservation on the      Pacific Leatherback Sea          Wolf management in
                          US West Coast                   turtle conservation              Europe
Level 1 ­ Social          Important cultural value of     Importance of traditions and     Increasing consideration of
Embeddedness              salmon, relevance of animal     beliefs associated with turtle   the existence value of
                          cruelty concerns in predator    egg consumption                  wolves
                          control issues
Level 2 ­ Institutional   Protection under the ESA,       Treaty obligations of states     Protection under the Bern
Environment               balance of energy needs with    under the UNCLOS & the           convention and the Habitats
                          conservation under the          CBD, Protection under            Directive
                          Northwest Power Act, Indian     CITES
                          treaties, water rights
Level 3 ­ Governance      Development of water markets    Development of                   Implementation of ex-post
                                                          performance payment              financial compensation
                                                          approaches                       scheme
Level 4 ­ Resource        NGOs and State trusts leasing   Involvement of local             Adjustment of farmers to
allocation                water rights                    communities in                   the new incentive
                                                          conservation programs            framework




     5. Conclusion
We undertook an institutional analysis of how the existence of governance conflicts at the
interface of multiple sectors and jurisdictions undermines attainment of conservation
objectives. The multiplicity of ecosystem services involved in the conflicts increases
system complexity and thereby the likelihood multi-jurisdictional conflicts. In addition,
contrasted values for use and non-use sectors make it difficult to assign property rights and
constrain the scope of tradeoff possibilities. Examining sources of transaction costs
facilitates consideration of practical issues that are often ignored in institutional design
(McCann, 2013). For example, transaction costs can be lowered by supporting research
programs to reduce uncertainties about the distribution of externality costs, arranging long-
term means of side payments across sectors to reconcile diverging preferences, organizing
transparent methods for collecting information and interpreting data to reduce information
asymmetry, or establishing credible and effective enforcement regimes (Libecap, 2014).

An examination of impediments to more integrated institutional regimes highlighted the
relevance and interconnectedness of the different levels of institutions used by Williamson
(2000) to analyze institutional change. Notably, opportunities for institutional change may
arise from a rapid shift in norms and values related to the realization that human activities
are driving climate change in Anthropocene, speeding up the timescale of institutional
change in the higher levels (social embeddedness, institutional environment, and
governance) of the Williamson framework. For example, the Marine Mammal Protection
Act was recently amended to allow for the lethal removal of pinnipeds in the Columbia
River and its tributaries to protect endangered and threatened populations of salmon
(United States. Cong., 2018). Similar motivations may also create impetus to amend the
Endangered Species Act to allow consideration of trade-offs between objectives or cost
concerns to promote cross-sectoral solutions. Moreover, new social media available to
people to share information can make change happen more quickly. Campaigns on social



                                                                                                                     15
media can increase political pressure on decision makers and precipitate governance shift
or overturn policy intervention within a few days.

An improved understanding of the sources and magnitude of transaction costs can help to
identify opportunities for feasible arrangements that promote cooperation between sectors
or integration of management across sectors. Ultimately, reaching agreement on a policy
choice to mitigate cross-sectoral externalities requires attention to the specificities of the
stakeholders, resources, and institutions involved in the conflicts as identified in
Williamson's framework. When considering practical approaches to addressing cross-
sectoral conflicts, it is useful to recognize that marine ecosystems cannot be returned to
historical pristine conditions. All solutions will be second-best because of the trade-offs
imposed by competing parties. Cross-sectoral coordination for conservation requires long-
term stakeholder and political commitments. Accordingly, Pareto-improving arrangements
are likely to be more durable. Voluntary agreements within a framework envisioned by
Coase (1960) may be the most fruitful way to proceed. They can build upon incentive-
based fishery sector systems (Grafton et al., 2006) and would require extension of property
rights to include impacts on ecosystem resources as illustrated by Wallace et al. (2015) and
Holland (2018). Coasean solutions allow sectors to bargain and adjust to address the
externality problem and can offer opportunities to move on from stalemate.


References

Aidt, T.S. (1998). Political internalization of economic externalities and environmental
   policy. Journal of Public Economics, 69(1), 1-16.
Anderson, T.L., Libecap, G.D. (2014). Environmental Markets: A Property Rights
   Approach. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Arrow, K.J. (1974). The limits of organization. WW Norton & Company.
Ayres, A.B, Edwards, E.C., Libecap, G.D. (2018). How transaction costs obstruct
   collective action: The case of California's groundwater. Journal of Environmental
   Economics and Management. 91 46-65.
Batie, S.S. (2008). Wicked problems and applied economics. American Journal of
   Agricultural Economics 90 (5), 1176­1191.
Bellanger, M., Speir, C., Blanchard, F., Brooks, K., Butler, J. R., Crosson, S., ... & Young,
   J. C. (2020). Addressing marine and coastal governance conflicts at the interface of
   multiple sectors and jurisdictions. Frontiers in Marine Science, 7:544440.
Bishop, R.C. (1978). Endangered species and uncertainty: the economics of a safe
   minimum standard. American journal of agricultural economics 60.1:10-18.
Boyce, J.R. (1998). Rent-seeking in natural resource quota allocations. Public Choice,
   96(3-4), 271-294.
Boyle, K.J. (2017). Introduction to revealed preference methods. In A primer on
   nonmarket valuation (Second edition). Springer, Dordrecht.
Bromley, D.W. (1992). The commons, common property, and environmental policy.
   Environmental and resource economics 2.1: 1-17.
Bryson, J.M., Crosby, B.C., Stone, M.M. (2006). The design and implementation of Cross
   Sector collaborations: Propositions from the literature. Public administration review,
   66, 44-55.
Burns, S. (2008). Environmental policy and politics: trends in public debate. Natural
   Resources & Environment, 23(2), 8-12.



                                                                                           16
Coase, R.H. (1960). The Problem of Social Cost. The journal of law and economics 3: 1­
   44.
Coggan, A., Whitten, S.M., Bennett, J. (2010). Influences of transaction costs in
   environmental policy. Ecological economics, 69(9), 1777-1784.g
Cox, M., Arnold, G., Villamayor Tomás, S. (2010). A review of design principles for
   community-based natural resource management. Ecology and Society 15(4): 38.
Crowder, L.B., Osherenko, G., Young, O.R., Airamé, S., Norse, E.A., Baron, N., ...,
   Wilson, J.A. (2006). Resolving Mismatches in U.S. Ocean Governance. Science
   313:617­618.
Dahlman, C.J. (1979). The problem of externality. The journal of law and economics
   22(1):141-162.
Demsetz, H. (1967). Toward a theory of property rights. American Economic Review
   57(2):347-59.
Dirzo, R., Young, H.S., Galetti, M., Ceballos, G., Isaac, N.J., Collen, B. (2014).
   Defaunation in the Anthropocene. Science, 345(6195), 401-406.
Eggertsson, T. (1990). Economic Behavior and Institutions. Cambridge: Cambridge
   University Press.
Ferraro, P.J., Gjertsen, H. (2009). A global review of incentive payments for sea turtle
   conservation. Chelonian Conservation and Biology, 8(1), 48-56.
Folke, C., Carpenter, S., Walker, B., Scheffer, M., Elmqvist, T., Gunderson, L., Holling,
   C.S. (2004). Regime shifts, resilience, and biodiversity in ecosystem management.
   Annu. Rev. Ecol. Evol. Syst., 35, 557-581.
Folke, C., Pritchard Jr, L., Berkes, F., Colding, J., Svedin, U. (2007). The problem of fit
   between ecosystems and institutions: ten years later. Ecology and society, 12(1).
Fung, A., Wright, E.O. (2001). Deepening democracy: Innovations in empowered
   participatory governance. Politics & Society, 29(1), 5-41.
Gehring, T.M., Potter, B.A. (2005). Wolf habitat analysis in Michigan: an example of the
   need for proactive land management for carnivore species. Wildlife Society Bulletin,
   33(4), 1237-1244.
Gjertsen, H., Squires, D., Dutton, P.H., Eguchi, T. (2014). Costeffectiveness of alternative
   conservation strategies with application to the Pacific leatherback turtle. Conservation
   Biology, 28(1), 140-149.
Gordon, H.S. (1954). The economic theory of a common-property resource: the fishery. In
   Classic Papers in Natural Resource Economics (pp. 178-203). Palgrave Macmillan,
   London.
Grafton, R.Q., Arnason, R., Bjørndal, T., Campbell, D., Campbell, H.F., Clark, C.W., ... &
   Kirkley, J.E. (2006). Incentive-based approaches to sustainable fisheries. Canadian
   Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences, 63(3), 699-710.
Grafton, R.Q., Landry, C., Libecap, G.D., O'Brien, R.J. (2010). Water markets: Australia's
   Murray-Darling basin and the US Southwest. National Bureau of Economic Research,
   Working Paper 15797. Cambridge, MA, USA.
Grant, Z.P., Tilley, J. (2019). Fertile soil: explaining variation in the success of Green
   parties. West European Politics, 42(3), 495-516.
Grip, K. (2017). International marine environmental governance: A review. Ambio, 46(4),
   413-427.
Groeneveld, R. A. (2020). Welfare economics and wicked problems in coastal and marine
   governance. Marine Policy, 117, 103945.



                                                                                         17
Guardians of Fiordland's Fisheries and Marine Environment Inc. (2003). Fiordland Marine
   Conservation Strategy. Wellington, New Zealand.
Guardians of Fiordland's Fisheries and Marine Environment Inc. (2020). Annual Report
   2019/20. Wellington, New Zealand.
Gunningham, N., Kagan, R. A., Thornton, D. (2004). Social license and environmental
   protection: why businesses go beyond compliance. Law & Social Inquiry, 29(2), 307-
   341.
Hahn, R.W. (1990). The political economy of environmental regulation: Towards a
   unifying framework. Public Choice, 65(1), 21-47.
Hanna, S. (2001). More than meets the eye: the transaction costs of litigation. Ocean &
   Coastal Law Journal, 7(1), 13-19.
Hardin, G. (1968). The tragedy of the commons. Science 162.3859: 1243-1248.
Hatcher, A., Jaffry, S., Thébaud, O., Bennett, E. (2000). Normative and social influences
   affecting compliance with fishery regulations. Land Economics, 448-461.
Hiedanpää, J., Bromley, D.W. (2016). Environmental heresies: The quest for reasonable.
   Springer.
Hobbs, Richard J., Higgs, E.S., Hall, C. (2013). Novel ecosystems: intervening in the new
   ecological world order. John Wiley & Sons.
Holland, D.S. 2018. Collective Rights­Based Fishery Management A Path to Ecosystem-
   Based Fishery Management. Annual Review of Resource Economics 10:469-85.
IPBES (2019). Summary for policymakers of the global assessment report on biodiversity
   and ecosystem services of the Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on
   Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services. Intergovernmental Platform on Biodiversity and
   Ecosystem Services, Bonn, Germany.
Johnston, R.J., Boyle, K.J., Adamowicz, W., Bennett, J., Brouwer, R., Cameron, T.A., ...,
   Vossler, C.A. (2017). Contemporary guidance for stated preference studies. Journal of
   the Association of Environmental and Resource Economists, 4(2), 319-405
Jud, S.B. (2006). Salmon as Lazarus in the Oregon Desert: The Historic Settlement and
   Relicensing of the Pelton-Round Butte Project. Natural Resources Journal, 46(4), 1043-
   1079.
Kalt, J.P., Zupan, M.A. (1984). Capture and ideology in the economic theory of politics.
   The American Economic Review, 74(3), 279-300.
Kirchgässner, G., Schneider, F. (2003). On the political economy of environmental policy.
   Public Choice, 115(3-4), 369-396.
Krutilla, K., Krause, R. (2011). Transaction costs and environmental policy: An
   assessment framework and literature review. International Review of Environmental
   and Resource Economics, 4(3­4), 261-354.
Lackey, R.T. (2017). Science and salmon recovery. pp. 69-94. In: New Strategies For
   Wicked Problems: Science and Solutions in the 21st Century, Edward P. Weber, Denise
   H. Lach, and Brent S. Steel, editors, Oregon State Press, Corvallis, Oregon, 223 pp.
Levrel, H., Scemama, P., Vaissière, A.C. (2017). Should we be wary of mitigation
   banking? Evidence regarding the risks associated with this wetland offset arrangement
   in Florida. Ecological Economics, 135, 136-149.
Libecap, G.D. (1989). Distributional issues in contracting for property rights. Journal of
   Institutional and Theoretical Economics: 6-24.
Libecap, G.D. (1994). The Conditions for Successful Collective Action. Journal of
   Theoretical Politics 6, 563­592.



                                                                                       18
Libecap, G.D. (2005). State regulation of open-access, common-pool resources. In
   Handbook of new institutional economics (pp. 545-572). Springer, Boston, MA.
Libecap, G.D. (2014). Addressing global environmental externalities: Transaction costs
   considerations. Journal of Economic Literature, 52(2), 424-479.
Libecap, G.D. (2016). Coasean bargaining to address environmental externalities. National
   Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper 21903. Cambridge, MA, USA.
Lubell, M., Mewhirter, J., Berardo, R., Scholz, J. (2019). The Origins of Conflict in
   Polycentric Governance Systems. Prepared for delivery at the Workshop on the Ostrom
   Workshop (WOW6) conference, Indiana University Bloomington.
Lute, M.L., Attari, S.Z. (2017). Public preferences for species conservation: choosing
   between lethal control, habitat protection and no action. Environmental Conservation,
   44(2), 139-147.
Marshall, G.R. (2013). Transaction costs, collective action and adaptation in managing
   complex social­ecological systems. Ecological Economics, 88, 185-194.
McCann, L. (2013). Transaction costs and environmental policy design. Ecological
   Economics, 88, 253-262.
McCann, L., Colby, B., Easter, K.W., Kasterine, A., & Kuperan, K.V. (2005). Transaction
   cost measurement for evaluating environmental policies. Ecological economics, 52(4),
   527-542.
McCoy, A.L., Holmes, S.R., Boisjolie, B.A. (2018). Flow restoration in the Columbia
   River Basin: an evaluation of a flow restoration accounting framework. Environmental
   management, 61(3), 506-519.
Mettepenningen, E., van Huylenbroeck, G. (2009). Factors influencing private transaction
   costs related to Agri-environmental Schemes in Europe. In: Bruwer, F., van der Heide,
   M. (Eds.), Multifunctional Rural Land Management: Economics and Policies. London:
   Earthscan.
Millennium Ecosystem Assessment (MEA) (2005). Ecosystems and Human Well-being:
   Synthesis. Island Press, Washington, DC.
Morrison, M., Durante, J., Greig, J., Ward, J. (2008). Encouraging participation in market
   based instruments and incentive programs. Final report prepared for Land and Water
   Australia.
Muradian, R., Rival, L. (2012). Between markets and hierarchies: the challenge of
   governing ecosystem services. Ecosystem Services 1, 93­100.
Neely, C., Bourne, M., Chesterman, S., Kouplevatskaya-Buttoud, I., Bojic, D., Vallée, D.
   (2017). Implementing Agenda 2030 in Food and Agriculture: accelerating policy
   impact through cross-sectoral coordination at the country level. FAO, Rome.
Northwest Fisheries Science Center. (2015). Status review update for Pacific salmon and
   steelhead listed under the Endangered Species Act: Pacific Northwest.
NPCC. (2019). 2018 Columbia River Basin Fish and Wildlife Program Costs Report. 16th
   Annual Report to the Northwest Governors. March 2019, Portland, OR.
Oates, W.E., Portney, P.R. (2003). The political economy of environmental policy. In
   Handbook of environmental economics (Vol. 1, pp. 325-354). Elsevier.
Ostrom, E. (1990). Governing the commons. Cambridge university press.
Ostrom, E. (2009). A general framework for analyzing sustainability of social-ecological
   systems. Science, 325(5939), 419-422.




                                                                                       19
Ovando, D., Libecap, G.D., Millage, K.D., Thomas, L. (2021). Coasean Approaches to
   Ending Overfishing: Bigeye Tuna Conservation in the Western and Central Pacific
   Ocean. Marine Resource Economics, 36 (1)
Parker, D.P. (2004). Land trusts and the choice to conserve land with full ownership or
   conservation easements. Natural Resources Journal, 44(2), 483-518.
Pashigian, B.P. (1985). Environmental Regulation: Whose SelfInterests Are Being
   Protected?. Economic Inquiry, 23(4), 551-584.
Peltzman, S. (1976) Toward a More General Theory of Regulation. Journal of Law &
   Economics 19(2): 211­240
Pigou, A.C. (1932). The Economics of Welfare. 4th ed. London: Macmillian and Co.
Rice, J.C. (2011). Achieving coherent policies for conservation and sustainable use of
   marine ecosystems. Conservation Biology, 25(6), 1065-1068.
Richter, B.D., Andrews, S., Dahlinghaus, R., Freckmann, G., Ganis, S., Green, J., ...,
   Shalvey, J. (2019). Buy Me a River: Purchasing Water Rights to Restore River Flows in
   the Western USA. Journal of the American Water Resources Association 56(1), 1-15.
Salvatori, V., Linnell, J. (2005). Report on the Conservation Status and Threats for Wolf
   (Canis lupus) in Europe. PVS/Inf (2005) 16. Council of Europe, Strasbourg.
Sanchirico, J.N., Eagle, J., Palumbi, S., Thompson, B.H. (2010). Comprehensive planning,
   dominant-use zones, and user rights: a new era in ocean governance. Bulletin of Marine
   Science, 86(2), 273-285.
Scarlett, L., Boyd, J. (2015). Ecosystem services and resource management: institutional
   issues, challenges, and opportunities in the public sector. Ecological Economics, 115, 3-
   10.
Scemama, P., Levrel, H. (2019). Influence of the Organization of Actors in the Ecological
   Outcomes of Investment in Restoration of Biodiversity. Ecological Economics, 157, 71-
   79.
Schneider, F., Volkert, J. (1999). No chance for incentive-oriented environmental policies
   in representative democracies? A Public Choice analysis. Ecological Economics, 31(1),
   123-138.
Scott, A. (1955). The fishery: the objectives of sole ownership. Journal of political
   Economy 63.2 : 116-124.
Simpson, R. D. (2019). Saving Salmon and Saving Money. How far upstream can property
   rights extend?. PERC Reports, 38(2), 35-39.
Spotila, J.R., Reina, R.D., Steyermark, A.C., Plotkin, P.T., Paladino, F.V. (2000). Pacific
   leatherback turtles face extinction. Nature, 405(6786), 529.
Tapilatu, R.F., Dutton, P.H., Tiwari, M., Wibbels, T., Ferdinandus, H.V., Iwanggin, W.G.,
   Nugroho, B.H. (2013). Longterm decline of the western Pacific leatherback,
   Dermochelys coriacea: a globally important sea turtle population. Ecosphere, 4(2), 1-
   15.
Thiel, A., Schleyer, C., Plieninger, T. (2012). Wolves are mobile, while fruit trees are not!
   How characteristics of resources and supranational regulatory frameworks shape the
   provision of biodiversity and ecosystem services in Germany. Environmental Policy
   and Governance, 22(3), 189-204.
Tomillo, P.S., Saba, V.S., Piedra, R., Paladino, F.V., Spotila, J. R. (2008). Effects of illegal
   harvest of eggs on the population decline of leatherback turtles in Las Baulas Marine
   National Park, Costa Rica. Conservation biology, 22(5), 1216-1224.




                                                                                             20
United States. Cong. (2018). Endangered Salmon Predation Prevention Act. Public Law
  115­329, 115th Cong., S 3119. Washington: GPO.
Volden, C., Wiseman, A.E. (2007). Bargaining in legislatures over particularistic and
  collective goods. American Political science review, 101(1), 79-92.
Wallace, S., Turris, B., Driscoll, J., Bodtker, K., Mose, B., Munro, G. (2015). Canada's
  Pacific groundfish trawl habitat agreement: A global first in an ecosystem approach to
  bottom trawl impacts. Marine Policy, 60, 240-248.
Williamson, O.E. (1996). The mechanisms of governance. Oxford University Press.
Williamson, O.E. (1998). Transaction cost economics: how it works; where it is headed.
  De economist, 146(1), 23-58.
Williamson, O.E. (2000). The new institutional economics: taking stock, looking ahead.
  Journal of economic literature, 38(3), 595-613.
Yandle, B. (1989). The Political Limits of Environmental Regulation: Tracking the
  Unicorn. New York, Quorum Books.
Young, O.R. (2010). Institutional dynamics: Resilience, vulnerability and adaptation in
  environmental and resource regimes. Global Environmental Change, 20(3), 378-385.




                                                                                     21
