                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           THE TWO FACES OF INFORMATION

                                       Gaetano Gaballo
                                      Guillermo Ordoñez

                                      Working Paper 28489
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28489


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   February 2021




We thank V.V. Chari, Willie Fuchs, Richard Kihlstrom, Alexandre Kohlhas, Dirk Krueger,
Andrew Postlewaite, Juan Sagredo, Tano Santos, Venky Venkateswaran, Ming Yang and seminar
participants at Columbia, Wharton, Milan, Marrakech, Helsinki, the 2017 Barcelona Summer
Forum, the 2017 SED Meetings in Edinburgh, the 2018 Barcelona Summer Meetings, the 2018
Minnesota/Chicago Accounting Theory Conference and the 2019 Workshop on "Frontiers of
Monetary Policy and Financial Studies" at the Bank of Canada for comments. The usual waiver
of liability applies. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Gaetano Gaballo and Guillermo Ordoñez. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Two Faces of Information
Gaetano Gaballo and Guillermo Ordoñez
NBER Working Paper No. 28489
February 2021
JEL No. D52,D53,D62,D8,E21,G11,G12,G14

                                         ABSTRACT

In absence of insurance contracts to share risk, public information is a double-edged sword. On
the one hand, it empowers self-insurance as agents better react to shocks, reducing risk. On the
other hand, it weakens market-insurance as common knowledge of shocks restricts trading risk.
We embody these two faces of information in a single general-equilibrium model. We
characterize the conditions under which market-insurance is superior, and then public information
­ even though costless and precise ­ is socially undesirable. In the absence of information,
however, market-insurance is still underprovided as individuals fail to internalize its general
equilibrium benefits.


Gaetano Gaballo
HEC Paris
1 rue de la Liberation
Jouy-en-Josas, Fran 78350
France
gaballo@hec.fr

Guillermo Ordoñez
University of Pennsylvania
Department of Economics
PCPSE - Room 505
133 South 36th Street
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
ordonez@econ.upenn.edu
1       Introduction
There is ample evidence that insurance against idiosyncratic shocks (to labor, to
capital, to health) is far from perfect.1 Imperfect insurance emerges from the lack of
contingent contracts to share risk that can be written before shocks materialize. One
reason is that contingencies may not be observable or verifiable, in which case ex-
post public information about these contingencies would be socially desirable. Other
non-informational forces, however, can prevent the use of contingent contracts. These
include limited commitment (agents can renege on contracts), enforcement frictions
(courts are ineective in assessing the legality of contracts), and restricted access
to insurance markets.2 In these cases, would public information still be insurance
promoting? This question is particularly relevant when a policy maker can evaluate
individual risks by pooling otherwise privately inaccessible information, such as the
geographical incidence of a disease or the individual exposure of banks to systemic
risk. Should this information be publicly disclosed?
    In this paper we study the social value of information when contingent contracts
cannot be written to share risk (that is, contract-insurance is absent), and agents
need to rely on two alternatives: either exchanging non-contingent contracts to trade
risk (what we denote as market-insurance) or relying on individual actions, without
contracts, to reduce risk (what we denote as self-insurance).3 On the one hand,
information about the realization of idiosyncratic shocks allows for better individual
reactions to these shocks. In our previous example, individuals can take actions
to protect their health or banks can learn how to better hedge their portfolios.
Self-insurance is at the center of recent developments in macroeconomics that focus
    1
     Complete markets among households have strong implications for the correlation between indi-
vidual and aggregate consumption growth and between individual consumption and income growth,
which are not consistent with empirical counterparts from micro data, as shown by Hayashi, Altonji,
and Kotliko (1996), Attanasio and Davis (1996), and many others more recently.
   2
     The relevance of non-informational frictions for market incompleteness has been highlighted
by Kehoe and Levine (1993), Kocherlakota (1996), Magill and Quinzii (2002), Krueger and Perri
(2006) and Cole et al. (2021) among many others.
   3
     For an excellent survey on specific examples of these insurance alternatives (such as changes in
labor supply, human or physical capital accumulation, within-firm insurance, within-family insur-
ance, participation in financial markets, etc.) see Heathcote, Storesletten, and Violante (2009).


                                                 1
on incomplete markets economies where individuals typically insure themselves by
saving ex-ante or adjusting labor ex-post.4 Information thus has a positive face, in
that it - ceteris paribus - increases the set of responses available to an individual
to reduce consumption risk. On the other hand, public information restricts the
scope for exchanging risky assets for safe ones by trading non-contingent securities.
In our example, individuals living in unhealthy locations may see a decline in the
price of their properties and risky banks may face an increase in the cost of funding.
Market-insurance has been emphasized by a finance tradition in the context of partial
equilibrium exchange (or exogenous production) economies.5 Information has then
also a negative face, in that it restricts trading consumption risk.
    Our contribution is providing a comprehensive analysis of the social value of in-
formation by developing a tractable general equilibrium model that captures on equal
footing both faces of information, thus merging the two traditions. We combine the
macroeconomics approach of self-insurance through production-labor choices with
the finance approach of trading risk through non-contingent assets. In our model,
(ex-ante) identical representative atomistic agents act in four roles: they are con-
sumers and producers, as usual in macroeconomics, and also buyers and sellers, as
usual in finance. We assume each agent faces an idiosyncratic shock to the pro-
ductivity of an individually owned factor of production, which we denote as capital,
which can be traded in a centralized competitive market. After trading, the agent
can combine available capital with her own labor, through a standard Cobb-Douglas
specification, to produce consumption goods.
    Because of enforceability frictions, contingent contracts are absent in our econ-
omy. However, agents can trade capital to diversify productivity risk (market-
insurance) or adjust labor to reduce the consumption implications of shocks (self-
insurance). While market-insurance entails adjustments costs of working with others'
capital, self-insurance is also costly in terms of labor disutility. These imperfect in-
surance alternatives shape how an individual's shock to capital maps into income
   4
     For earlier contributions see Deaton (1991), Hugget (1993) and Aiyagari (1994). A more recent
discussion is provided by Kaplan and Violante (2010).
   5
     This tradition follows the seminal work of Hirshleifer (1971 and 1972), and more recent contri-
butions discussed in Kurlat and Veldkamp (2015).


                                                 2
(from individual production) and then consumption.
    We study the social value of information by comparing ex-ante welfare from
market allocations in two extreme benchmarks: one where information about all id-
iosyncratic shocks is public, costless and perfectly informative and the other where
information is not available to anyone. This way we abstract from any particular
mechanism through which public information may be acquired, formed or dissemi-
nated, isolating the eects of it just being available. We then highlight underlying
market failures by comparing market allocations with social planner solutions.
    Information has a twofold impact. It enhances self-insurance because by learning
about their own shock each agent can evaluate labor supply decisions with the actual
cost and benefit in mind ­ if own capital is not very productive the agent can decide
to either compensate by working more or cut back by working less, depending on
whether substitution or income eects dominate, respectively. Information, however,
comes at the cost of preventing market-insurance: once productivity is common
knowledge, adjustment costs push buyers' reservation price below sellers', so no-
trade obtains. In contrast, without information trade happens under the veil of
ignorance, and capital is sold at a deterministic price equal to its ex-ante expected
productivity reduced by adjustment costs. By selling capital agents get rid of their
own productivity risk, without transferring the risk to buyers, who in a competitive
equilibrium fully diversify their portfolio by buying capital from all sellers. Thus,
when selling capital agents not only benefit individually by getting rid of idiosyncratic
risk, but also benefit the rest of agents by providing inputs for the creation of safe
assets in the form of perfectly diversified portfolios.
    Hence, in absence of contingent contracts, insurance alternatives are determined
by the availability of public information. With information, agents can self- but not
market-insure. Without information, agents can market- but not self-insure. The
social value of public information then depends on which insurance alternative is
most relevant for welfare. We derive a simple parametric condition which shows that
public information is socially undesirable when the net benefit of adjusting labor ­
the ratio of labor share to the Frisch elasticity ­ is small compared to the net benefit
of trading capital ­ the ratio of capital share to the adjustment cost.

                                           3
    When public information is socially desirable, just disclosing such information is
enough to implement the constrained social optimum, as agents always use it and
do not aect others when adjusting their own labor supply ­ self-insurance does not
generate externalities. In contrast, when public information is socially undesirable,
individuals would still use it if disclosed. However, absconding information (so that
agents cannot use it) would not be enough to implement the constrained social
optimum. The reason is that, in their selling choices, individuals do not internalize
the social benefit of increasing the amount of capital that buyers can use to diversify
their portfolio ­ market-insurance generates a positive externality on creating safe
assets. This externality leads to underprovision of market insurance, which could
be fixed by a government, for instance by subsidizing the supply of capital, or by a
financial intermediary, such as a competitive mutual fund owned by agents in shares
proportional to their capital contributions.

    Related Literature: To the best of our knowledge, this is the first paper pro-
viding an analysis of the social value of public information in the context of a general-
equilibrium model with endogenous imperfect insurance. It show the interaction of
the two opposing forces at play ­ the two faces of information ­ that other works
have studied in isolation.
    The positive face of public information is rooted in a long tradition in macroeco-
nomics that either focuses on complete markets or on incomplete markets generated
by asymmetric private information and/or hidden actions. In this tradition, the
potentially negative social value of information may arise from the interaction of
strategic complementarity and disperse information, as in the seminar works of Mor-
ris and Shin (2002) and Angeletos and Pavan (2007), but ultimately the socially
optimal role of public information, when costless and perfect, is maintained.6 Other
papers have found that dispersed information about technological shocks may have
perverse welfare eects because of externalities in learning from prices (Amador and
Weill (2010), Gaballo (2016)) or because of costly information acquisition (Colombo,
   6
    The insights from this literature, however, have been shown to be limited in the context of fully
micro-founded macro models without consumption risk (Hellwig (2005), Walsh (2007), Baeriswyl
and Cornand (2010), Lorenzoni (2010), Roca (2010)).


                                                 4
Femminis, and Pavan (2014), Llosa and Venkateswaran (2017)). Closer to our multi-
faceted analysis, Angeletos, Iovino, and La'O (2016) shows that information about
non-distortionary forces, such as technological shocks, cannot be welfare detrimental,
whereas information about distortionary forces, such as markups shocks, can indeed
be socially inferior. In contrast to these works, in our setting consumption risk
cannot be shared with contingent contracts, but can be traded with non-contingent
ones, showing that information about technological shocks (non-distortionary forces)
that is public (no need to learn from prices), costless (no-information cost) and com-
plete (no dispersed signals) may still be detrimental to welfare by eroding market-
insurance.
    The negative face of public information has gained more traction in finance,
mainly in eorts to understand the relation between information and both the ex-
istence as well as the organization of financial intermediaries. Even though at its
inception this literature focused on the beneficial role of information for reallocating
resources and improving the quality of assets (such as the seminal papers of Leland
and Pyle (1977), Bester (1985) and Diamond (1984 and 1991)) more recently it has
highlighted information's detrimental eect on the value of liabilities (such as Gorton
and Pennacchi (1990) and Dang et al. (2017), motivated by the original insights of
Hirshleifer (1971)).7
    There are, however, some recent notable attempts to accommodate information
trade-os in welfare analysis. Gottardi and Rahi (2014) combine the negative ef-
fect of information on insurance with the positive eect on portfolio optimization in
the context of a two-period asset trading model, while Kurlat and Veldkamp (2015)
explore the trade-o between risk and return that greater disclosure entails in the
context of dierent types of assets. Our paper is close in spirit to these works, but
we frame the trade-o in a general-equilibrium model with production. Eckwert and
Zilcha (2001), also consider both production and risk-sharing in a two-period econ-
omy with heterogeneous agents (risk-averse consumers and risk-neutral producers);
   7
   These contributions have been used for practical purposes, such as in arguments about the
benefits of opacity on promoting liquidity in markets (Andolfatto, Berentsen, and Waller (2014),
Chousakos, Gorton, and Ordo~  nez (2020)) or on improving government interventions (Nosal and
Ordo~
    nez (2016), Gorton and Ordo~  nez (2020a)).


                                               5
in contrast, we use standard assumptions in macroeconomics and finance, in partic-
ular a representative agent who performs all roles (consumer, producer, buyer, and
seller). Our approach allows for a tractable characterization of the social value of
information and provides a setting that can be easily compared to traditional models
in macroeconomics and finance.
    Our work highlights the importance of the insurance contracting environment in
an assessment of the social value of public information. A similar point has been
made by Golosov and Iovino (2020), who show that, while full revelation of private
information about employment possibilities is always desirable when governments
can commit to social insurance, in general it is suboptimal without public commit-
ment. Our setting shows instead that public information about idiosyncratic shocks
is socially desirable when private markets are complete, but not necessarily when
they are not - particularly when commitment is limited or enforcement is imperfect.
    Finally, our work relates to the more recent literature that emphasizes studying
origination and trading of assets in a single setting. Vanasco (2017) shows that in-
formation acquisition at origination deepens asymmetric information and may lead
to a freeze in trading of assets with a collapse of liquidity. In our setting, lack of
trading opportunities does not come from asymmetric information in decentralized
secondary markets, but rather by common information in centralized secondary mar-
kets. Caramp (2017) also studies, but without focusing on information, the negative
role of liquidity on the incentives to originate high quality assets. Our work strongly
suggests that the positive face of information plays a more prominent role in the
origination of assets, while the negative face is more relevant for trading assets.
    The next section presents the model. Section 3 characterizes the equilibrium and
computes the social value of public information, which is always individually pre-
ferred, but not necessarily socially desirable. Section 4 computes the social planner's
solution: both constrained to respect market compensations, as well as unconstrained
to redistribute capital at will. Section 5 extends the insights to dierent functional
forms and shows that our specific earlier assumptions indeed lean towards making
information socially desirable. Section 6 concludes.



                                          6
2    Model
In this section we present a general equilibrium model of production and trade with
imperfectly insurable idiosyncratic risk. Markets are incomplete in that contingent
contracts are unfeasible, preventing agents from sharing risks. However, imperfect
insurance is possible as agents can trade risk by exchanging non-contingent assets
and reduce risk by individually adjusting production to shocks. Our objective is to
study how the availability of public information generates a trade-o in these two
insurance alternatives.

Utility and technology. There is a single period with a continuum of agents of
mass one indexed by i 2 (0, 1). Agent i has utility function

                                            Ci1           1
                             U(Ci , Li )                      Li ,               (1)
                                            1

where Ci and Li are consumption and labor specific to agent i, > 0 is a constant
relative risk-aversion parameter and > 1 controls the convexity of labor disutility.
    Each agent produces a quantity Yi of consumption goods according to the follow-
ing production function:
                                   Yi = L   ^1
                                          i Ki
                                                   
                                                      ,                          (2)

where  2 (0, 1) is the labor share in production and K^ i denotes the quantity of
capital available for production to agent i, given by

                                      ^ i = e ki
                                      K                                          (3)

where ki denotes a quantity of homogeneous intermediate capital that is obtained by
transforming raw capital. We describe next how this transformation operates.

Production of capital Agents are ex-ante identical. Ex-post, each agent is en-
dowed with one unit of raw capital whose type is determined by a stochastic produc-
tivity  + i  N , 1 , independently distributed across agents, with  assumed large


                                            7
enough to guarantee productivity is positive almost surely8 . Agent i can transform
her own or others' raw capital into a quantity of intermediate capital, y , according
to a linear technology:

                                                         'ij   2
                          y ( i (j )) = ( + j ) i (j )         i (j ),             (4)
                                                          2

where i (j ) 2 [0, 1] is the mass of raw capital from agent j 2 (0, 1) used by agent i.
We define 'ih to be the adjustment cost (an "iceberg cost") in terms of intermediate
capital production that agent i incurs for using raw capital from agent j . Further,
we assume adjustment costs are symmetric and only exist when agents produce with
raw capital of others,                8
                                      <' > 0      if j 6= i,
                               'ij =
                                      :0          if j = i.

   Every agent chooses a fraction i (i) of her own raw capital (from here onwards
simply i ) to use in the production of intermediate capital, selling the rest to other
agents; inversely, each agent chooses how much of others' raw capital to buy: i (j )
from all j 6= i.

Trading contracts. Agents can exchange raw capital for uncontingent claims on
intermediate capital. In particular, raw capital is traded in a centralized Walrasian
market according the following protocol: each agent h 2 H (i)  (0, 1)/{i} can
sign a contract with agent i to buy raw capital at a unit price Ri , where the price
Ri represents an enforceable claim on agent h's future production of intermediate
capital. In other words, agent h can produce with raw capital from agent i in
exchange of a repayment promise backed by agent h's subsequent production of
intermediate capital.
    We will assume throughout that intermediate capital is the only pledgeable asset
in the economy, and then these transactions cannot be written in terms of consump-
tion goods. The implication of this assumption is that each agent consumes what
  8
      More precisely, such that Pr ¯ + i < 0  0.



                                                8
produces, Ci = Yi . This is useful to introduce consumption risk in a tractable way
but it is not critical for the results as it does not entail any departure from complete
markets. Indeed, we show later in section 4.2 that a social planner could implement
the unconstrained first-best allocation by operating contingent transfers in interme-
diate capital only. Next we discuss the assumptions that do generate incompleteness.

Market incompleteness. In our economy markets are incomplete as we assume
restrictions on the ability of agents to write contingent contracts, i.e. enforceable
agreements to make transfers contingent to the verifiable realizations of uncertain
events. First, we assume enforceability only holds for contracts written after agents
are endowed with raw capital, meaning that agents cannot write contracts based
on assets for which they do not yet hold property rights. Second, we assume that
verifiability obtains only with public information, meaning that contracts cannot
condition on realizations for which there will not be common knowledge.

Information benchmarks. We focus on two extreme information benchmarks.
In the full-information benchmark, public, costless and infinitely precise information
about the type of raw capital is available to all agents in the economy as soon as
endowments are distributed and property right are assigned. In this benchmark,
contingent contracts are not written before shocks realize because of the absence of
property right, and not after because there are no uncertain contingencies to share
risk. In the no-information benchmark, instead, no one has any information about
idiosyncratic productivities until production occurs. In this case contingent contracts
cannot be written due to lack of public verifiability.

Timing and Equilibrium. The timing is as follows: first, raw capital of idiosyn-
cratic productivity is assigned to agents   {i }i2(0,1) , second - based on available
information - agents set their trading positions { i (h)}(i,h)2(0,1) and choose labor sup-
ply {Li }i2(0,1) , finally, raw capital is exchanged, production of intermediate capital
takes place, intermediate capital payments are made, production of the consumption
good takes places, and agents consume their output. Given this sequence of events,


                                            9
for a given information benchmark, a market equilibrium is defined as follows:

Definition 1 (Market Equilibrium). For given productivity realizations  and an
information set  = {;, }, a market equilibrium is the cross-sectional allocation
of capital {K   ^ i }i2(0,1) and consumption {Ci }i2(0,1) induced by trading of raw capi-
tal { i (j )}j 2(0,1) and labor choices Li that maximize E [U(Ci , Li )|] for each agent
i 2 (0, 1).

Discussion. Before moving on, it is useful to highlight three key features of our
model. First, this is a general equilibrium setting: any agent in the economy is at
the same time a buyer, a seller, a producer and a consumer. Agents only dier in
the productivity of the endowed raw capital - they are otherwise ex-ante identical.
    Second, our specification of market incompleteness allows a tractable model in
which consumption risk cannot be insured away with contingent contracts, but can
be managed with labor choices and trading choices. While the first do not induce
externalities, the second are subject to general equilibrium forces, which will induce
a failure to internalize the eects of trading decisions on consumption risk.
    Third, while we model preferences and consumption good production with stan-
dard forms (CRRA utility and a Cobb-Douglas technology) the assumption that pro-
duction of capital follows an exponential function (equation 3) - increasing returns to
scale with respect to raw capital - is not. As it will become clear, this assumption is
extremely convenient for tractability. We will generalize this benchmark assumption
in section 5 and show that not only do the main insights go through for generic
production functions of capital, but also that this assumption is conservative in that
it tends to favor public information desirability.


3     Market Equilibrium
In this section, we characterize the equilibrium in three steps. In each of the infor-
mation benchmark, we, first, solve for the agent's optimum labor supply, and express
ex-ante individual utility purely as a function of the conditionally expected amount


                                           10
of intermediate capital. We then solve for the optimal individual demand and supply
of raw capital. Finally, we obtain the equilibrium for raw capital trade under the two
information benchmarks. A comparative analysis of the equilibria follows in which
we obtain simple conditions, based on the model's parameters, that dictate when
public information is socially undesirable.


3.1    Optimal Individual Labor Choice
The next Lemma shows the amount of labor that agent i chooses given her expected
(conditional on available information) distribution of intermediate capital,

Lemma 1. Agent i supplies labor optimally according to


                                   L i = E i [ Ki ] .                               (5)

with
                                               1
                                                                                    (6)
                                      1        (1       )

where Ki  eki (1   )(1   )
                             .

Proof. This results follows from maximizing expected equation (1) subject to (2).

    Note that labor is increasing in intermediate capital ki when < 1, and decreasing
when      > 1. These comparative statics come from standard trade-os between
income and substitution eects. When < 1 a substitution eect dominates: as
capital becomes abundant, labor is more productive and agents work more - the
additional variance of consumption is not punished as heavily because risk aversion
is relatively low. In contrast, when > 1 the income eect dominates: as capital
becomes abundant agents work less because they are comparatively more sensitive
to variance. When = 1, these two forces exactly oset each other and labor supply
does not depend on the amount of intermediate capital.
    The role of information on optimal labor choices is captured through the expecta-
tion operator. Without information agents can only choose labor based on expected


                                          11
capital, not on each possible realization, as could be done with full-information.
This conveys the positive face of information: information allows for labor choices to
better react to idiosyncratic shocks to capital.

Characterization of ex-ante individual utility. We can replace the optimal
choice of labor (5) into the production function (2) and take the expectation of
utility (1) to express the individual's ex-ante utility, just in terms of expected capital
under each of the information benchmarks,9
                                             "                                         #
                                                 Ki Ei [Ki ] (1   )
                                                                      1
                    E [U(Ei [Ki ])]  E                                    E i [ Ki ]       ,
                                                    (1       )

where E [·] denotes the unconditional expectation operator and Ei [·] = E [·|] denotes
the expectation operator conditional to the information set of agent i (note, E [·] =
E [·|;]). Manipulating this equation, the next Lemma characterizes in simpler form
the ex-ante expected utility of agent i in each of the extreme information benchmarks
we are considering,

Lemma 2. For given trading choices { i (j )}(i,j )2(0,1)2 ,

       · In the full-information benchmark Ei [Ki ] = Ki and


                                    E [U(Ei [Ki ])] = E [U(Ki )] = E [Ki ];                    (7)


       · In the no-information benchmark Ei [Ki ] = E [Ki ] and


                                   E [U(Ei [Ki ])] = U(E [Ki ]) = E [Ki ] ;                    (8)

               (1       )
with           (1   )
                            (i.e. positive for    < 1 and negative for          > 1).
   9
    This represents the utility that an agent expects to obtain anticipating her knowledge at the
time of making labor choices. Equivalently this is the ex-post average utility obtained across all
agents, given their information set.



                                                     12
    Our characterization unveils the relation between the quantity of capital available
and the ex-ante utility through the optimal choice of labor. In particular, it allows
for a straight interpretation of the key parameter , from equation 6 depending on
the information benchmark.
    Under no-information,       measures the elasticity of ex-ante utility to expected
capital E [Ki ]. When the substitution eect dominates, i.e. < 1, is larger than
one, meaning that an increase in expected capital is amplified in terms of ex-ante
utility because agents react by working more. When the income eect dominates
instead, i.e. > 1, is positive but smaller than one, meaning that an increase in
expected capital productivity is weakened in terms of ex-ante utility because agents
react by working less. Note that the elasticity not only depends on but also on
/ ­ the labor elasticity of production relative to the labor elasticity of utility: the
higher this ratio, the cheaper it is for agents to adjust labor, which magnifies these
amplification/weakening eects of labor choices on ex-ante utility.
    For the full-information benchmark, measures the elasticity of ex-post utility to
capital Ki . The same economic insights carry over, but instead of holding on average
(in ex-ante terms), they hold for each realization of capital (in ex-post terms).
    It is straightforward to see that, ceteris paribus, the dierence between equations
(8) and (7) that characterizes the two benchmarks, relies on the wedge created by
Jensen's inequality. In particular, for a given ex-ante distribution of Ki realizations,
when > 1 the wedge associated with full-information is positive, whereas for 2
(0, 1) the wedge is negative, but that since in this case < 0, this is an improvement
that generates a "less negative" expected utility. As a consequence, given trading of
raw capital, ex-ante utility is always higher in the full-information benchmark; this
is intuitive as there are no externalities in labor choices and so information is always
e ciently used by individuals in making these decisions.
    Equipped with this characterization we can now solve for the optimal demand
and supply of raw capital in the trading stage. As we will see, trading aects the ex-
ante distribution of Ki realizations, so our assessment of the benefits of information
has to be reconsidered in light of the possibly dierent ex-ante distributions of Ki
that arise in general equilibrium under the two benchmarks.

                                          13
3.2    Optimal Individual Demand of Raw Capital
Since the production of consumption goods is increasing in the amount of available
intermediate capital (from equations 2 and 3), each agent seeks to maximize the
total quantity of intermediate capital to operate, partly by trading raw capital in
centralized markets; in these markets, buyers compete for the raw capital supplied by
other agents. The equilibrium per unit price of agent i's raw capital, which we denote
by Ri , is determined competitively by equalizing the total demand from agents h 6= i
with the supply from agent i. That is,
                                Z
                                             h (i)dh   =1           i.                           (9)
                                    H (i )


   After selling a fraction i of her own raw capital at a price Ri , buying i (h) raw
capital from agents h 2 H (i) at prices Rh and covering adjustment costs 2 i2 (h), the
amount of intermediate capital available to agent i to produce consumption goods is
                                                                    Z
                    ki = ¯ + i         i   + (1        i ) Ri   +                i (h)dh,       (10)
                                                                        H (i )


where i (h) is agent i's profit from buying agent h's raw capital and given by

                             ¯ + h                       '      2
                     i (h) =                  i (h)             i (h)            Rh i ( h ) ,   (11)
                                                         2

for any h 2 H (i). In words, an agent will operate with intermediate capital that
comes from three sources: that proceeding from i) transforming a fraction i of her
own raw capital into intermediate capital with productivity i , ii) selling a fraction
(1     i ) of own her raw capital to other agents in exchange for (1          i )Ri units

of intermediate capital, and iii) buying raw capital i (h) from other agents and
obtaining a profit i (h), in terms of intermediate capital, after repayment.
    The objects Ri and i (h) are endogenous and depend on the availability of public
information. In what follows, we characterize these objects and also the implied
quantity of intermediate capital available to agent i after participation in the market


                                                  14
for raw capital, as function of all agents' demand for own capital { i }i2(0,1) . We
will focus our analysis on equilibria where, for a given information benchmark, the
optimal supply of assets is equal across agents and later prove that this feature, in
fact, is generically true.

Proposition 1 (Demand and equilibrium price of raw capital). Agent i's utility-
maximizing demand of agent h's raw capital is

                                            ¯ + E i [ h ]
                                                             Rh
                                
                                i (h)   =                         ,                (12)
                                                     '

which also maximizes profits (33). Given a uniform supply of raw capital (1        h) =

(1     ) 2 (0, 1), since Ei (h ) is the same for all agents, market clearing (9) implies
that the price of agent h's raw capital satisfies


                             Rh = ¯ + E i [ h ]        '(1        ),               (13)

Proof. Postponed to Appendix A.1.

    This proposition shows that the optimal individual demand for raw capital equates
expected marginal return,    ¯ + Ei [h ], and marginal cost, Rh + ' i (h), of operating
with others' capital. It boils down to a linear schedule, decreasing in price and in-
creasing in expected productivity, whereas higher marginal adjustment costs produce
downward shifts. It is instructive to notice that demand only depends on the ex-
pected productivity of raw capital - not on its conditional variance. The reason for
this is that traders simultaneously demand a continuum of capital goods, each with
an i.i.d. productivity shock, which allows them to achieve perfect diversification.
    Because of market forces, perfect diversification is indeed the only possible equi-
librium outcome when there is trade of raw capital (even if < 1 and agents like
volatility of intermediate capital). Four features combine in our setting to obtain this
convenient result: i) perfect competition among traders, ii) capital-specific, rather
than portfolio-specific, adjustment costs ' iii) CRRA utility in consumption (by
(2)), but constant absolute risk aversion (CARA) in portfolio returns (by (2) and

                                               15
(3) jointly), and iv) quadratic adjustment costs which allow asset investments to be
"self-financed." The last two features ensure that h's demand of i's raw capital is
independent from the expected returns of h's raw capital, i.e. from the only potential
source of individual heterogeneity10 ; combined with capital-specific adjustment costs,
this implies that agents have common asset valuations irrespectively of their dier-
ences as buyers. Perfect competition requires that the marginal benefit be equalized
across all buyers for each type of raw capital, so that, in equilibrium, each buyer must
absorb an equal (infinitesimal) amount of raw capital supply. Finally, since per unit
adjustment costs are homogeneous across all raw capital types, the distribution of
optimal individual demand across types within a portfolio must also be symmetric.
    In short, as long as the supply of raw capital is uniform across sellers (which we
prove in the next section), buyers perfectly diversify their portfolio as a result of
perfect competition. Thus, portfolio profits are deterministic and known by agents
in any information benchmark, leading to the following result,

Corollary 1. Suppose supply of raw capital is uniform across agents other than i,
i.e. (1    h ) = (1  ) 2 (0, 1) for any h 2 H (i). Agent i's portfolio profits are
deterministic,            Z
                                            '
                                   i (h)dh = (1    )2 .                       (14)
                            H (i )          2
and agent i's quantity of intermediate capital available for production, from (10), is
                                                             Z
                  ¯+                                                         2          '
             ki =         i i   + (1    i ) E h [ i ]    '        (1    i)       di +     (1   )2 ,   (15)
                                                                                        2

which depends on both agent i's supply (1                    i)   and other agents' supply (1         ).

Proof. Postponed to Appendix A.1.

  The corollary leads to two important insights. First, even though information
aects the selling price of an agent's raw capital, it does not aect the portfolio profits
  10
    In particular, CARA with self-financing ensure respectively that the marginal utility of portfolio
returns and the spending in others' capital does depend on one's own wealth, which in our model
is determined by the price at which the agent can sell her own raw capital in the market and,
ultimately, on the expected productivity of said capital.

                                                    16
from buying others' raw capital. By the law of large numbers, the sum of profits
obtained from buying a basket of raw capital from other agents is deterministic, so its
ex-ante and ex-post evaluations coincide. Thus, information availability is irrelevant
to agents in their role as buyers. As we will see next, it is however relevant in their
role as sellers. Second, the choices of an agent as a seller do not aect the profits that
the agent obtains as a buyer: this is key to understand the potential sub-optimal
provision of diversification possibilities by the market. The reason is that buying
others' capital is expected to be self-financed by the production of that purchase
(Ei [i (h)] = ' 2
                  (1     )2 > 0). Expected profits are positive because the purchase unit
price is '(1        ) lower than expected productivity, while average unit adjustment
              '
cost is only 2 (1       ).


3.3     Optimal Individual Supply of Raw Capital
When agent i chooses how much raw capital to sell, 1        i , she understands that

public information aects the selling price. Thus, in contrast to the problem of
agents as buyers, the optimal supply of raw capital does depend on the information
environment, which we characterize below for each information benchmark.

3.3.1   Supply of raw capital with no-information.

Exploiting the property of exponential functions and the definition of Ki from Lemma
1, we expand the expression of ex-ante expected utility from Lemma 2 as a function
of expectation and variance of intermediate capital as follows,

                 E [Ki (i )]   =   E [e(1   )(1     )k i
                                                           ]
                                                 ) E [ki ]+ 1           ))2 V (ki )
                               =   e(1   )(1                2
                                                              ((1 )(1
                                                                                      .   (16)

The utility value of supplying raw capital depends on how the ex-ante expected
quantity of intermediate capital E [ki ] and its ex-ante variance V (ki ) aect utility:
while selling raw capital (reducing i ) reduces expected intermediate capital, it also



                                            17
reduces its variance. To see this, taking unconditional expectations of equation (15),

                                       ¯                   2       '
                            E [ ki ] =     '(1        i)       +     (1   )2 .                   (17)
                                                                   2

which increases with   i.    While taking the variance of equation (15) yields,

                                                           2
                                           V ( ki ) =      i.                                    (18)

which also increases in i . In short, agents want to sell raw capital to reduce the
variance of intermediate capital, but it comes at a cost in terms of reducing the
expected amount of intermediate capital available to produce.
    Now we can map these results about intermediate capital to consumption goods.
First, while the variance of intermediate capital V (ki ) increases consumption vari-
ance, it also increases average consumption (through the exponential production
function that transforms intermediate capital into capital for producing consump-
tion goods). The first eect becomes less relevant in utility terms as declines: when
   > 1 the variance of intermediate capital decreases ex-ante utility (recall     < 0,
in this case), whereas the variance of intermediate capital increases ex-ante utility
when < 1 (recall > 0, in this case).
    This implies that in the absence of information, when         < 1 agents want to
maximize both E (ki ) and V (ki ), which is achieved by not selling any raw capital. In
contrast, when > 1, agents want to maximize E (ki ) but minimize V (ki ), facing a
trade-o that is formally captured by the first order condition of ex-ante utility with
respect to the supply of raw capital, i . Evaluating (16) with (17) and (18), we have

    @ E [Ki (i )]
                  = [2'(1          i)   + (1   )(1              ) i ](1   )(1    )   E [Ki (i )] ,
        @ i

which determines the optimal value of            i.     Combining these results, the following
proposition characterizes the result.

Proposition 2 (Supply of raw capital with no-information). With no-information,


                                                 18
agent i's optimal individual supply of raw capital is such that,
                            8
                            <                 1                                    if   < 1,
                
                i,N I   =                                                                      (19)
                            :           1 
                                              1
                                                                                   if     1.
                                    1    2'
                                            (1             )


    This proposition clarifies that the discussed trade-o only arises when variance
of intermediate capital reduces expected utility - that is when > 1. In this case,
the agent sells more raw capital when the production function is more elastic to
capital ­ i.e. 1  is large, adjustment cost ' is small, and/or risk aversion is
high. When < 1 agents do not sell raw capital, as variance of intermediate capital
increases expected utility, and then agents prefer to work with own raw capital: both
maximizing the variance and saving on adjustment costs. In addition, notice that
one agent's profits in her role as buyers do not enter in her supply choice.

3.3.2   Supply of raw capital with full-information.

In the full-information benchmark, sellers choose how much to sell once productivity
is publicly known. In this case, sellers maximize ex-post utility for any possible
realization of their raw capital productivity,

                                  Ki (  i )            =        e(1   )(1   ) ki
                                                                                               (20)

where ki is given by (15) with Eh [i ] = i . Taking derivative of ex-post utility with
respect to i

                  @ Ki (  i )
                              = [2'(1                      i )(1    )(1      ) ] Ki (  i ) ,
                    @ i

which is positive for all       and any           i.   This reasoning implies,

Proposition 3 (Supply of raw capital with full-information). With full-information
                              
agent i never sells, this is, i,F I = 1.


   The intuition here is clear, as selling raw capital just decreases available inter-

                                                               19
mediate capital - given that the selling price perfectly reflects productivity net of
adjustment costs - and there is no variance reduction benefit.


3.4       The Social Value of Information
In this section we show that public, perfect and costless information is not always
desirable from a social standpoint.11 We compare expected utility in the full-and
no-information benchmarks, as stated in Lemma 2, evaluated at the optimal labor
and optimal supply of raw capital i from Propositions 2 and 3 respectively. After
simple manipulations, we get a clear characterization of welfare in each case.

Proposition 4 (The two faces of information). Market allocations generate the fol-
lowing ex-ante utility:

       · In the full-information benchmark

                                                                               2
                                          ¯ [e(1
                           E [Ki (i ) ] = KE              )(1        ) i
                                                                           ]             8        (21)


       · In the no-information benchmark
                              8
                              <            ¯ [e(1
                                           KE           )(1    ) i
                                                                     ]             for       <1
              E [Ki (i )] =                                                                       (22)
                              :            ¯ [e(1
                                           KE           )(1    ) i
                                                                     ]
                                                                           M
                                                                                   for        1

      ¯ = e       (1 )(1    )¯
where K                          and

                                       M                  1
                                           =            1                                         (23)
                                               1         '
                                                           (1              )

with
                                    3' + (1        )(         1)
                                                                 2 (3/4, 1) .                     (24)
                                    4' + (1        )(         1)
Proof. Postponed to Appendix A.2.
  11
    Our welfare criterion is based on each identical individual agent from an ex-ante perspective,
not the representative agent which is normatively unrepresentative, as explained by Schlee (2001).

                                                    20
    This proposition helps contrasting (almost visually from comparing the exponents
of 21 and 22) the two opposite faces of information.
    Information induces self-insurance by allowing agents to optimally react to fluc-
tuations of available capital, which is captured by an exponent from adjusting
labor in response to realized productivity in addition to the single in (22) from
adjusting labor in response to expected productivity. Information, however, prevents
market-insurance as prices perfectly reflect realized productivity with a discount for
adjustment costs, which discourages agents to sell. Public information then discour-
ages the use of raw capital markets and the possibility of insurance by diversification.
    No-information allows market-insurance, when agents are su ciently risk-averse
( > 1), by creating scope for raw capital trade which eectively reduces the volatility
of labor productivity; this shows up as M in (22), which ameliorates the relative
inferiority of an uncontingent labor response (again captured by ). Naturally, the
absence of information deters self-insurance, so diversification from the market comes
at the cost of preventing contingent labor responses.
    Note how M in (23) is the mirror image of in (6). This analogy is instructive
about the similar impact of market-insurance and self-insurance on expected utility.
The trade-o that sellers face of lowering variance at a trading cost, which is typ-
ically studied in the finance literature, is essentially the same as the trade-o that
households face when adjusting labor to reduce variance at a disutility labor cost,
which is typically studied in the macro literature. The next proposition exploits this
analogy to characterize the social value of public information by directly comparing
the strength of market- and self-insurance.
    As we've discussed, when < 1, information is never socially inferior: agents
prefer to maximize the variance of intermediate capital and save on adjustment costs,
so market-insurance is not desired at all, yet adjusting their labor response allows
them to do strictly better by working most when their eort is most productive
(substitution eect dominates). The next proposition characterizes the condition
under which information is socially inferior in the other, more interesting case, in
which > 1 and agents are risk averse to intermediate capital.



                                          21
Proposition 5 (The social value of information). The market allocation attained
with full-information is socially inferior to the one attained with no-information if
and only if > 1 and M < , that is

                                              1       
                                         <               .                            (25)
                                                  '

Proof. With > 1 we have that          < 0 (from Lemma 2) and 0 <               < 1 (from
equation 6). The proposition is a direct implication of 21 and 22.

    This proposition can also be explained intuitively from comparing the two chan-
nels through which individuals can reduce the variance of consumption.
    One channel is self-insurance. When agents know productivity realizations, the
raw capital market does not provide insurance, but individuals can self-insure by
allocating labor optimally. This reduction of variance is proportional to , which
increases in / . In words, self-insurance is more powerful to reduce variance when
labor is more important in the production function (higher ) and when the Frisch
elasticity (the elasticity of labor disutility to labor supply) is low such that it is less
costly to adjust labor to compensate for lower stochastic productivity (lower ).
    The other channel is market-insurance. When individuals do not know shocks,
                                                                     
they cannot self-insure for the own capital not sold (this is for i,N  I ), but the market
can provide insurance for the rest, at an adjustment cost '. In the absence of infor-
                                                           
mation, agents get more market-insurance (decrease i,N       I ) when (1    )/' increases
by (19). In words, market-insurance is more powerful to reduce variance when cap-
ital is more important in the production function and when adjustment costs are
smaller; the former increasing the utility cost of productivity fluctuations and the
latter reducing the cost of both trade as well as working with others' capital.
    The relative benefit of market-insurance is adjusted by , which monotonically
increases in . Intuitively, a larger increases the relevance of market-insurance
and decreases the social benefits of information. This result comes from agents
not internalizing that, by selling raw capital they eectively increase the amount of
raw capital that other agents can use to build safe assets, in the form of perfectly


                                             22
diversified portfolios, when acting as buyers. The role of this externality will be
better appreciated in the next section, when we explicitily solve the social planners'
problem.
    Let us conclude this section by discussing the source of the discrepancy between
the social and individual evaluation of information in our setting. Public informa-
tion, even if perfect and costless, can be socially undesirable and yet still used by
individuals because of a coordination failure. The reason is that agents would never
ignore information about own and others' raw capital, if available. Intuitively, if
nobody else has information in the economy, an agent can always (at least weakly)
exploit such information in the market, when buying raw capital from others12 . In
this sense, the availability of socially inferior information generates a coordination
failure among agents, who would be better o by coordinating not to use public in-
formation. How does this lack of coordination manifest itself? As the variance of raw
capital prices. No agent internalizes the fact that, by buying conditional on public
information, prices react, introducing uninsurable ex-ante consumption variance to
the seller. This is why the availability of information to agents that cannot commit
to buy without using the information creates an externality to sellers that can only
be negative.


4      Social Planning
In this section, we define the problem of a social planner that maximizes the ex-ante
expected utility of the representative consumer. First, we solve a constrained social
optimum, in which the planner is constrained by the same trading restrictions that
agents face, i.e. compensation implied by market prices. Even though the planner
does not trade in a market, she has to respect the mapping between information and
allocations imposed by the market, such that agents with raw capital of known high
  12
    The strength of incentives to have information individually depends on how expectations are
formed in the market. In one extreme, when other agents learn perfectly from prices, information
gains from trading are strictly positive only when no other agent is informed. In the other extreme,
when agents do not learn from prices, information gains from trading are always strictly positive.



                                                23
productivity receive high intermediate capital in exchange. We show that the planner
would like agents to supply more raw capital than in equilibrium, highlighting the
nature of a typical externality in the provision of market-insurance.
    Second, we solve an unconstrained social optimum, thus, replicating the allo-
cation with complete markets - a situation in which public information is always
socially desirable. We endow the planner with full-information about productivity
shocks and allow her to implement contingent transfers in intermediate capital freely,
without being subject to the allocations implied by market prices. We show that,
while markets use information to allocate intermediate capital "regressively" (more
intermediate capital to agents with raw capital of higher productivity), a planner
would use information to allocate it "progressively" so as to equalize intermediate
capital across agents (more intermediate capital to agents with raw capital of lower
productivity).


4.1    Constrained Social Optimum
We analyze the fraction of raw capital that the planner would like each agent to trade
in the market. The planner's problem is the same as that of any individual agent,
but internalizes that marginally increasing the supply of raw capital of an agent
increases the possibilities of diversification and improves insurance for other agents.
Individual sellers are not compensated for these "pooling gains" by the market.
    With public information, the planner chooses i to maximize equation (20), with
the result being the same as in Proposition 3. This means the planner's solution
coincides with the equilibrium allocation in which all agents work with their own
raw capital and do not interact with each other. Intuitively, as the planner has to
respect the market's compensations, agents with high productivity raw capital end
up working with more intermediate capital - with or without the market - and, as
individuals in equilibrium, the planner prefers not to waste on adjustment costs by
trading. In other words, by trading the planner does not eliminate conditionally
expected variance of intermediate capital, but loses on adjustment costs.
    Without public information, the planner chooses i to maximize equation (16),


                                          24
where expected intermediate capital is as in equation (17), but with i = , so that
the planner internalizes the eect of supplying more raw capital on increasing other
agents' insurance via diversification. Then, equation (17) becomes

                                           ¯        '
                                E [ ki ] =            (1   )2 ,
                                                    2

and taking the derivative of ex-ante utility with respect to      leads to the plan-
ner's optimal supply of raw capital, which is characterized in a "planner-version" of
Proposition 2 as follows,

Proposition 6 (Social supply of raw capital with no-information ). With no-information
the planner's optimal supply of raw capital is such that,
                            8
                            <         1                           if   <1
                P
                i,N I   =
                            :       1 
                                      1
                                                                  if    1
                                1    '
                                       (1      )


    Notice, comparing Propositions 2 and 6 that the planner would like agents to
supply more raw capital (lower i ), than they do in equilibrium. Intuitively, in equi-
librium, individuals only internalize the role of selling raw capital for own insurance,
not for the insurance of others as they are not compensated for it. The market
fails to compensate each individual for the "insurance value" of selling raw capital
because buying a single type raw capital of idiosyncratic productivity does not pro-
vide insurance unless combined with additional purchases of many other units of raw
capital of dierent idiosyncratic productivity, but transactions are bilateral. This
complementarity that is not priced-in induces an under-supply of raw capital. The
planner fixes this failure of coordination.
    Now, we obtain the set of parameters under which information is socially unde-
sirable. We evaluate welfare in Proposition 4 at the socially optimal supply of raw
capital in Proposition 6, which delivers the next "Ramsey-version" of Proposition 5,

Proposition 7 (Socially Undesirable Information). The planner's allocation attained
with full-information is inferior to the one attained with no-information if and only


                                                   25
               P
if   > 1 and   i,N I   < , that is,
                                             1        
                                         <               .                          (26)
                                                  '
Proof. With > 1 we have that           < 0 (from Lemma 2) and 0 <          < 1 (from
equation 6). The proposition is a direct implication of comparing 21 and 22 evaluated
at M = i,NP
             I from Proposition 6.

    The extent of the wedge between the planner's solution and the market equilib-
rium is captured by the dierence between the conditions in Propositions (25) and
(26), which is given by from equation (24). Since < 1, the region of parameters
under which information is undesirable is larger for the planning problem, as the
planner can operate market-insurance more e ciently than the agents and informa-
tion denies this avenue. Furthermore, since increases with , the wedge declines
with risk aversion. Intuitively, as risk aversion increases, the supply choices of agents
in equilibrium becomes more similar to those of the planner: both converging to per-
                                                                           P
fect diversification (in the limit, lim !1 = 1, and lim !1 i,N      I ! i,N I ! 0). As
market-insurance becomes more desirable (when risk aversion increases), the speed
at which the planner and agents' decisions converge depends on the extent of adjust-
ment costs; seen by examining (24).
    Interestingly, condition (26) does not depend on the level of risk-aversion - just
on the benefits and costs of self-insurance (the left-hand side) and market-insurance
(the right-hand side). In our setting, both sources of insurance are equally eective
at reducing consumption variance, so the decision regarding whether to exploit one
or the other (and the social desirability of public information) only depends on the
net benefit of each.

A note on implementation with a financial intermediary. A competitive
(zero-profit) mutual fund could induce the coordination that sellers cannot achieve
in a decentralized market and allow them to reach the constrained socially optimal
raw capital allocations. Each agent "invests" in the mutual fund 1            i units of

raw capital, the mutual fund pools all the raw capital, and produces intermediate
capital subject to identical adjustment costs. Given perfect diversification, the agent

                                             26
receives back  ¯(1    i)
                          '
                            (1      2
                                 i ) . This implies that the agents' return in terms of
                          2
expected intermediate capital is lower in expectation, but deterministic. A mutual
fund eectively sells insurance at a "fee", '  2
                                                (1       2
                                                      i ) , thereby turning an agent's

expected amount of intermediate capital, from equation (17), into E [ki ] =   ¯ ' (1
                                                                                   2
  )2 , which makes the agent's objective function mathematically identical to that of
the constrained social planner; thus, agents optimally contribute to the mutual fund
the socially optimal amount from Proposition 6. Being that all agents contribute the
same amount 1       , the mutual fund produces in total     ¯(1   ) '   (1    )2 , which
                                                                      2
is what it repays to investors, making zero profits. This potential implementation
suggests the importance of financial intermediation in increasing the supply of "safe
assets" in the economy, for instance, by securitization which indeed follows the logic
of an originator pooling assets with idiosyncratic quality and, at a cost, generating
a "new asset" of lower variance, as discussed in Gorton and Ordo~    nez (2020b).

A note on implementation with subsidies. Which tax scheme could a govern-
ment use to implement the constrained socially optimal supply of raw capital? As
we noted, agents' failure to internalize the positive eect of supplying raw capital for
other agents' insurance stems from market prices' under-compensation. A govern-
ment could therefore subsidize the sale of raw capital by an amount s( i ); financing
the subsidies with lump-sum taxes T , in terms of intermediate capital. Given this
subsidy scheme, the expected amount of intermediate capital from equation (17) be-
comes E [ki ] = ¯ '(1         2  '
                           i ) + 2 (1    )2 + s( i ) T and the socially optimal supply
of raw capital from Proposition 6 can be implemented by setting s( i ) = '   2
                                                                               (1      2
                                                                                     i) .

Note this scheme does not require information on productivity, just on actual supply.
In the previously mentioned example of asset backed securities, policymakers should
thus not only tax information, to encourage the origination of these safe assets (en-
courage the trade of certain assets that are used as inputs of private safe assets, such
as mortgages for MBS, or bonds for CDOs), but also to subsidize such trading.




                                           27
4.2    Unconstrained Social Optimum
Now, we study a planner that has full-information about the idiosyncratic produc-
tivity of all raw capital, seeks to maximizes the ex-ante utility of a representative
agent, and can freely redistribute intermediate capital. Individuals could implement
this allocation if they were able to write ex-ante contracts which specify transfers of
intermediate capital contingent on productivity realizations.
    In particular, the planner can choose both the proportion of in-house production
of intermediate capital i and the exchange of intermediate capital after production
i . Given that, in this benchmark, the planner's hands are not tied by market
compensations, her problem becomes,

                              max               E [U(Ki (i ))] = E [Ki (i ) ]
                      { i (h),i }(i,h)2(0,1)2


subject to
                                                   Z            h                                   i
                        ¯ + i )                                      ¯ + h ) i ( h )   '   2
                ki   = (              i   + i +                     (                      i ( h)       dh ,
                                                       H (i )                          2
          Z
               i di = 0 ,
                      Z
             1    i =              h (i) dh
                          H (i )


In other words, the planner maximizes ex-ante utility by controlling the production
of intermediate capital, through i , and its distribution, through i .

Proposition 8 (Unconstrained planner's solution). The unconstrained planner al-
location is characterized by no-trade in raw capital (that is i = 1 for all i) and
redistribution of intermediate capital as follows,
                                    8
                                    <         0                         if   <1
                             i =
                                    :       i                           if      1

Proof. Postponed to Appendix A.3.

                                                        28
    Intuitively, an unconstrained planner wants to employ raw capital where it is
most productive - with the original owners who don't face adjustment costs - and,
having maximized aggregate intermediate capital, go on to achieve perfect insurance,
when market-insurance is desired ( > 1), by equalizing allocations via redistribu-
tion. Further, in stark contrast to the market, which allocates more intermediate
capital to the agents with higher productivity (regressive redistribution), the uncon-
strained planner allocates more intermediate capital to agents with lower raw capital
productivity (progressive redistribution).
    For the unconstrained planner, it is always optimal to have full-information, as
this allows her to make transfers contingent on productivity (more transfers to less
productive agents when > 1) which equalize labor eorts and consumption. In
other words, when the planner is not constrained to redistribute, information is
unequivocally beneficial as the planner will use it to both increase production and
equalize consumption. This is not the case in equilibrium because the market uses
information in a way that increases production but prevents risk sharing; indeed,
when the planner is constrained by the limitations imposed by the market there are
situations in which she would prefer no-information (Proposition 7).

A note on an implementation by a government. With incomplete markets, a
government could implement the planner's desired allocation by imposing taxes and
subsidies that achieved zero-trade along with redistribution as per i (i ). Naturally,
the feasibility of such transfers would critically depend on observability, pledgeability,
and verifiability of raw capital productivity by the government. This result stresses
once more an important assumption of the standard view that information is im-
portant for insurance to work properly by facilitating the fulfillment of contingent
contracts.13
  13
    Notice that the optimal set of taxes and subsidies (public insurance) eliminates the need of
(private insurance), an extreme version of a rich literature that claims that public insurance may
crowd out private insurance (such as Golosov and Tsyvinski (2007), Krueger and Perri (2011) and
Park (2014)).




                                               29
4.3       An Illustration: Market vs. Planner Allocations
In this section, we illustrate the dierence between the market equilibrium and the
constrained planner solutions with a numerical example. Being that the constrained
planner and the market allocations coincide under full-information, the first panel
of Figure 1 shows the origin of dierences in the alternative benchmark: no public
information. We plot how 1        (the fraction traded) changes in both cases with the
risk-aversion parameter . When  1, both in equilibrium and in the planning
solution there is no trade so 1       = 0. When > 1, there is a strictly positive
supply of raw capital (identical for all agents under no-information), increasing in
risk-aversion and converging to trading all own raw capital as ! 1. For all > 1,
however, the planner (dashed line) would trade more than agents in equilibrium
(solid line). With information (not plotted), there is never trade.

                     Figure 1: Information Social (Un)desirability

 1




0.5                                                  0




 0
      0   1                                              0   1


Note: We assume  = 0.66, ' = 1 and = 2.4. For the sake of graphical clarity the axes display
monotonic transformations of and E [U(Ei [i ])]. More precisely, on the x-axis e2 1, whereas on
the y-axis the arctang(·) of (E [U(E [i ])] E [U(i )])/E [U(i )].

      The second panel of Figure 1 shows the welfare implications of this dierence.

                                              30
We plot the dierence in welfare between no-information and full-information bench-
marks for both the constrained planner and market outcomes. When < 1, these
allocations coincide, and welfare under full-information is superior (the dierence
between no-information and full-information welfare is negative when < 1), as the
productivity variance increases the level of consumption more than the variance of
consumption. When = 1, both information benchmarks yield identical welfare
outcomes as labor does not respond to information about capital productivity.
    When      > 1, the dierence in the supply of raw capital from the first panel
critically aects the desirability of information. For the planner, the desirability
of information depends purely on parameters, as described in Proposition 7. In
this particular example, we have assumed parameters such that the planner prefers
market- to self-insurance for all > 1, thus welfare under no-information, which priv-
ilege market-insurance, is higher than welfare under full-information, which privilege
self-insurance, i.e. the dashed line takes on strictly positive values. In equilib-
rium, however, agents ine ciently underprovide market-insurance. This deficiency
is particularly egregious when risk-aversion is relatively low, so for these levels of
full-information welfare is, in fact, higher than no-information welfare, hence the dip
in the solid line. Information becomes socially undesirable in equilibrium (solid line
becomes positive) once is large enough: in these cases, individuals preferentially
value market-insurance, which are only able to use it eectively by engaging in ro-
bust trade in the absence of public information. Formally, this condition is expressed
in Proposition 5, where it is made clear that the relative bite of this externality on
welfare, as measured by , diminishes as increases.


5    Generalizing Results
Even though the previous results are mostly based on a set of standard functional-
form assumptions in macroeconomics and finance, we have also resorted to speci-
fications that enhanced tractability and expositional clarity. First, the production
function of capital is special: exponential on intermediate capital, which implies that
individuals are risk lovers on intermediate capital (even though being risk averse on

                                          31
consumption goods), when < 1. Second, the production function of intermediate
goods is also special: linear in the productivity of raw capital.
    An unattractive implication of combining these two features is that the uncon-
ditional distribution of capital is not mean invariant (expected capital production is
not the same as the capital production of expected intermediate capital), that is

                                             1
                      ^ i (i )] = eE [ki ]+ 2 V (ki ) 6= K
                   E [K                                  ^ i (E [i ]) = eE [ki ] .

This means that the expected capital available to produce consumption goods in-
creases with the variance of intermediate capital and always exceeds the capital
obtained by using the average amount of intermediate capital.
    One may wonder to which extent our result about the social undesirability of
free and perfect public information could be an artifact of these assumptions. In
fact, it is the opposite. The exponential shape of capital production function im-
plies that average production increases with variance, and as information induces
more variance, information is more, not less, desirable. Intuitively, when public in-
formation is available prices are volatile. On the one hand, the uncertain amount of
capital to produce generates utility losses from consumption uncertainty: the neg-
ative face of information. On the other hand, the uncertain amount of capital to
produce generates and increase in expected consumption, and utility gains. This
gain from intermediate capital variance is purely mechanical when compared to the
more relevant conceptual gain of information that comes from correlating labor to
productivity shocks: our positive face of information. Thus, our functional forms
overestimate the social benefits of information.
    Once we relax this mechanical eect of variance increasing expected capital pro-
duction from our functional forms, we can show that there is always a low enough
adjustment cost ' under which free and perfect public information is socially unde-
sirable. We defer the formal proof of this result to Appendix B, but illustrate the
pattern with a version of our model that employs an ad-hoc formulation of produc-
tion functions which maintains the tractability of the exponential specification and
makes expected capital production a function of only average intermediate capital


                                                 32
(i.e. mean preserving production of capital).


5.1     A tractable setting with mean-preserving production
Let production of capital remain exponential on intermediate capital and the pro-
duction of intermediate capital linear in raw capital, but adjusted such that the
unconditional distribution of consumption goods is mean invariant. Formally, we
                                                  ~i
                                     ~ i ( i )  e k
modify (3) and assume instead that K                 where

                                     ~i = ki            1
                                     k                    V ( ki ) ,                     (27)
                                                        2

with ki given by (15) and V (ki ) by (18).
    The additional term 1       2
                                  V (ki ) corrects for the eect of a change in uncondi-
tional variance V (ki ) via the unconditional mean E [k      ~i ] = E [ki ] 1 V (ki ), so that
                                                                            2
   ~
E [Ki (i )] = e  E [k i ]   ~
                          = Ki (E [i ]). This additional term is deterministic, because
V (E [ki (i )]) = 0, which makes extending previous results simple: only requiring
a downward adjustment of the unconditional expectation by the (scaled) variance of
intermediate capital. This term does depend on information however.
    Take the no-information case. The variance of k      ~i is the same as in the main text
benchmark V (k   ~i ) = V (ki ) = 2 by equation (18). Nevertheless, its unconditional
                                      i
expectation is dierent,

                          ~i ] = ¯                  2       '               1
                       E [k          '(1       i)       +     (1       )2       2
                                                                                i,
                                                            2               2

which is smaller than the main text benchmark from equation (17) precisely because
of the downward adjustment entailed by subtracting the variance. The ex-ante util-
ity equation (16) for the no-information case still holds, but evaluated at the re-
vised expectation and variance. The next Proposition, which combines a version of
Propositions 2 (for the market) and 6 (for the planner), shows that this adjustment
increases trading of raw capital compared to the main text environment.

Proposition 2' and 6' (Adjusted propositions 2 and 6 with mean-preserved pro-


                                               33
duction of capital). With no-information, agent i0 s and planner's optimal supply of
raw capital are, respectively, such that:

~                  1                                ~P                           1                   P
 i,N I   =       (1 )(1   ) 1
                                <   i,N I    and            i,N I   =       (1 )(1         ) 1
                                                                                                 <   i,N I   8 .
             1       2'
                                                                        1        '


Proof. Postponed to Appendix A.4.

     In words, when expected capital production is not increasing in intermediate
capital variance, both the agents and the planner choose to sell raw capital more
aggressively than in the main text benchmark. Importantly, in contrast to that
benchmark, in which there is no trading for low values of risk aversion ( < 1),
here there is trading for all levels beyond risk neutrality ( > 0). Hence, market-
insurance becomes relatively more desirable when fluctuations in productivity don't
have a built in expected production upside. This, naturally, makes a setting which
negates the possibility of obtaining market-insurance even less socially desirable; so
much, in fact, that when there is su cient trade (as we shall see) even under < 1,
it is possible for full-information to be the inferior benchmark.
     So, consider the full-information case. The variance of k  ~i is the same as in the
main text, V (k ~i ) = V (ki ) = 1, while the unconditional expectation is equal to,

                              ~i ] = ¯                  2       '                    1
                           E [k             '(1    i)       +     (1        )2         ,
                                                                2                    2

also smaller by the variance adjustment. Similarly, the ex-ante utility equation (20)
for the full-information case continue to hold, but evaluated at these expectation and
variance values. Since trading of raw capital does not reduce conditionally expected
variance but working with the raw capital of others continues to have adjustment
costs, there is no trading ( ~i,F
                              M       ~P
                                  I = i,F I = 1); replicating the result of Proposition 3.
    We can now compare the ex-ante utilities in the two information benchmarks
under these alternative production specifications. Formally, the analogous version of
Proposition 4 reads follows,




                                                   34
Proposition 4' (Adjusted proposition 4 with mean-preserving production of capi-
tal). Ex-ante utility takes the following values:

   · In the full-information benchmark

                                                    (1                            2
                                   ~ i (i ) ] = KE
                                E [K            ¯  e         )(1         ) i
                                                                                      R             (28)

   · In the no-information benchmark:

                                              (1                               ~M         ~M
                              ~ i (i )] = KE
                           E [K           ¯  e             )(1     ) i
                                                                                      R             (29)

                   1
                     (1   )(1    )
     where R = e   2                 and

                                     ~M =             1                     M
                                                                 <                                  (30)
                                            1   ~ (1 )(1
                                                       '
                                                           ) 1



     since
                      3' + (1         ) (       1) + 1
                 ~=                                    2 (3/4, 1)                 and          ~>   (31)
                      4' + (1         ) (       1) + 1

Proof. Postponed to Appendix A.4.

    Note that equations (28) and (29) dier from the corresponding ones in the
previous setting (equations 21 and 22), in part, by the deterministic term R, which
is greater than 1 for > 1 and smaller than one for < 1. Comparing equations
(28) through (31) leads to a result, analogous to a combination of Propositions 5 and
7, that identifies a su cient condition for the undesirability of public information.

Proposition 5' and 7' (Adjusted propositions 5 and 7 with mean-preserved pro-
duction of capital). When > 1, information is socially undesirable for a larger set
of parameters than those implied by condition (25). When < 1, there is always a
low enough transaction cost for which information is socially undesirable, with the
su cient condition,
                                       (     1)
                                  '<            .                              (32)
                                        1 

                                                 35
Proof. Postponed to Appendix A.5.

    This adjusted proposition establishes that with an exponential mean-preserving
production of capital, information is less likely to be desirable for all . Take the
case > 1, in which < 0 and public information is undesirable when equation (28)
is greater than equation (29) in absolute value. In our baseline setting, the condition
corresponding to (25) is simply given by > M . When comparing equations (28)
                                                          ~M
and (29), however, not only is ~M < M , but also R < R (given that R > 1 when
   > 1), thus enlarging the set of parameters for which information is undesirable.
    More interestingly, when < 1, and > 0, there is no trading in the baseline
model and public information is undesirable when equation (28) is smaller than
equation (29) in absolute value. With a mean-preserving adjustment, there are two
countervailing eects. On the one hand, ~M < 1, which increases the gains of
                                         ~M
information. On the other hand, R           > R given that R < 1 when < 1, which
reduces the gains of information. We show that, while the first eect is bounded,
the second eect dominates when ' is low enough. To see this, notice that equation
                                                  2
(28) is smaller than K    ¯ , as E e(1 )(1 )i R = R[1 (1 )(1 ) ] < 1, (since 1 >
(1 )(1          ) and R < 1). While equation (28) does not depend on ', equation
(29) does: as ' ! 0, ~i,N
                            I ! 0 so agents choose to trade all raw capital and
                                                                                  ~M ! 0.
In the limit then, equation (29) is K    ¯ and greater than equation (28) for ' small.
    We summarize these findings graphically in Figure 2 using the same parameters
as in Figure 1, but under exponential mean-preserving production of capital. We
report in light gray the corresponding curves of Figure 1 so that it is easy to contrast
the two cases. In the first panel, as Proposition 2' and 6' states, the supply of raw
capital is higher both for the market and for the planner under the current production
technology (blue lines); being also positive in the range < 1. The second panel
displays the welfare consequences, illustrating that, as stated in Proposition 5' and 7'
and consistent with condition (32), (i) for all , public information is always socially
inferior (blue lines taking on strictly positive values) and (ii) since ~ > , the strength
of externalities that generate a gap between planner and market outcomes is smaller.




                                           36
          Figure 2: Information Social (Un)desirability: mean-preserving production

 1




0.5                                                  0




 0
      0     1                                            0   1


Note: We assume  = 0.66, ' = 1 and = 2.4. For the sake of graphical clarity the axes display
monotonic transformations of and E [U(Ei [i ])]. More precisely, on the x-axis e2 1, whereas on
the y-axis the arctang(·) of (E [U(E [i ])] E [U(i )])/E [U(i )].


6          Final remarks
What is the social value of public, costless, and perfect information about agents'
idiosyncratic shocks? An immediate intuition suggests that such information is al-
ways socially desirable. We show that in an economy with restrictions for individuals
to share risks, the role of information is more nuanced. It has a positive face, by
permitting self-insurance, as it improves how agents reallocate their resources (labor,
for instance) to face idiosyncratic shocks that aect their consumption. It also has a
negative face however, by constraining market-insurance, as it weakens how agents
can trade resources (selling volatile assets and buying safe ones) to reduce their ex-
posure to idiosyncratic shocks. We show that this trade o between ex-post optimal
labor allocation and ex-ante creation of safe assets makes public information socially
desirable only if welfare reacts more to self-insurance than to market-insurance.


                                              37
     When is self-insurance superior? This is the case when consumption depends
heavily on resources that can be cheaply adjusted upon idiosyncratic shocks. When
is market-insurance superior? This is the case when consumption is heavily exposed
to idiosyncratic shocks that can be hedged by buying safe assets that can be cheaply
originated and traded. While information is always desirable in the presence of in-
surance markets, it may be undesirable in their absence, as it improves one insurance
alternative at the expense of the other.
     This insight shows that a reduction in the cost of originating and trading safe
assets should (optimally) be accompanied with steps that discourage the availability
of information about idiosyncratic shocks. This is in stark contrast with the informa-
tion disclosure implication that arises when insurance markets are complete, in which
case it would be better to encourage information if it is free, public, and perfect. The
application of this insight is relevant, for instance, in the discussion about the design
of financial regulations, or the disclosure of information about lending programs.
     The trade-o we explore in general equilibrium can also be applied in partial
equilibrium to inform recent regulatory reforms. Take the case of banking stress
tests, for instance. When regulators reveal to a bank results about stress scenarios,
they reveal pieces of information (mostly about sources of systemic risk) that are
useful for the bank to rebalance its own portfolio (the positive face of improving
self-insurance). Those pieces of information, however, also become available to other
banks, who may revise their own beliefs about the bank's individual portfolio and its
market valuation, introducing additional volatility and inhibiting the functioning of
interbank markets (the negative face of weakening market-insurance). This trade-o
is critical in designing information disclosure of stress tests once regulators weight
the relevance of portfolio rebalancing vs. interbank market operations.


References
 Aiyagari, S. Rao. 1994. "Uninsured Idiosyncratic Risk and Aggregate Saving."
    Quarterly Journal of Economics 109:659­684.




                                           38
Amador, Manuel, and Pierre-Olivier Weill. 2010. "Learning from Prices: Public
  Communication and Welfare." Journal of Political Economy 118 (5): 866­907.
Andolfatto, David, Aleksander Berentsen, and Christopher Waller. 2014. "Optimal
  disclosure policy and undue diligence." Journal of Economic Theory 149:128 ­
  152. Financial Economics.
Angeletos, George-Marios, Luigi Iovino, and Jennifer La'O. 2016. "Real Rigidity,
  Nominal Rigidity, and the Social Value of Information." American Economic
  Review 106 (1): 200­227 (January).
Angeletos, George-Marios, and Alessandro Pavan. 2007. "E cient Use of Informa-
  tion and Social Value of Information." Econometrica 75:1103­1142.
Attanasio, Orazio, and Steven Davis. 1996. "Relative Wage Movements and the
   Distribution of Consumption." Journal of Political Economy 104:1227­1262.
Baeriswyl, Romain, and Camille Cornand. 2010. "The signaling role of policy
   actions." Journal of Monetary Economics 57 (6): 682­695.
Bester, Helmut. 1985. "Screening vs. Rationing in Credit Markets with Imperfect
   Information." American Economic Review 71:393­410.
Caramp, Nicolas. 2017. "Sowing the Seeds of Financial Crises: Endogenous Asset
   Creation and Adverse Selection." Working Paper, MIT.
Chousakos, Kyriakos, Gary Gorton, and Guillermo Ordo~
                                                    nez. 2020. "The Macro-
  prudential Role of Stock Markets." NBER Working Paper 27113.
Cole, Harold, Dirk Krueger, George Mailath, and Yena Park. 2021. "Coalition-Proof
   Risk Sharing Under Frictions." Working Paper, University of Pennsylvania.
Colombo, Luca, Gianluca Femminis, and Alessandro Pavan. 2014. "Information
   Acquisition and Welfare." Review of Economic Studies 81:1438­1483.
Dang, Tri Vi, Gary Gorton, Bengt Holmstr¨om, and Guillermo Ordo~nez. 2017.
  "Banks as Secret Keepers." American Economic Review 107:1005­1029.
Deaton, Angus. 1991. "Saving and Liquidity Constraints." Econometrica 59:1221­
   1248.
Diamond, Douglas. 1984. "Financial Intermediation and Delegated Monitoring."
   Review of Economic Studies 51:393­414.
      . 1991. "Monitoring and Reputation: The Choice between Bank Loans and
   Directly Placed Debt." Journal of Political Economy 99:689­721.
Eckwert, Bernhard, and Itzhak Zilcha. 2001. "The Value of Information in Produc-
   tion Economies." Journal of Economic Theory 100:172­186.

                                      39
Gaballo, Gaetano. 2016. "Rational Inattention to News: The Perils of Forward
  Guidance." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 8:42­97.
Golosov, Mihkail, and Aleh Tsyvinski. 2007. "Optimal Taxation with Endogenous
   Insurance Markets." Quarterly Journal of Economics 122:487­534.
Golosov, Mikhail, and Luigi Iovino. 2020. "Social Insurance, Information Revela-
   tion, and Lack of Commitment." Working Paper, University of Chicago.
Gorton, Gary, and Guillermo Ordo~
                                nez. 2020a. "Fighting Crises with Secrecy."
   American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, vol. Forthcoming.
      . 2020b. "The Supply and Demand for Safe Assets." NBER Working Paper
   18732.
Gorton, Gary, and George Pennacchi. 1990. "Financial Intermediaries and Liquidity
   Creation." Journal of Finance 45 (1): 49­72.
Gottardi, Piero, and Rohit Rahi. 2014. "Value Of Information In Competi-
   tive Economies With Incomplete Markets." International Economic Review 55
   (February): 57­81.
Hayashi, Fumio, Joseph Altonji, and Laurence Kotliko. 1996. "Risk Sharing
   Between and Within Families." Econometrica 64:261­294.
Heathcote, Jonathan, Kjetil Storesletten, and Giovanni Violante. 2009. "Quan-
   titative Macroeconomics with Heterogeneous Households." Annual Review of
   Economics 1:319­354.
Hellwig, Christian. 2005. "Heterogeneous Information and the Welfare Eects of
   Public Information Disclosures ." Working Paper, UCLA.
Hirshleifer, Jack. 1971. "The Private and Social Value of Information and the
   Reward to Inventive Activity." American Economic Review 61 (4): 561­674.
       . 1972. Chapter Liquidity, uncertainty, and the accumulation of informa-
   tion. of Uncertainty and Expectations in Economics: Essays in Honor of G.L.S.
   Shackle., edited by Ford J.L. Carter, C.F. Basil Blackwell, Oxford.
Hugget, Mark. 1993. "The Risk-Free Rate in Heterogeneous-Agent Incomplete-
  Insurance Economies." Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 17:953­969.
Kaplan, Greg, and Giovanni Violante. 2010. "How Much Consumption Insurance
  beyond Self-Insurance?" American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2:53­
  87.
Kehoe, Timothy, and David K. Levine. 1993. "Debt-Constrained Asset Markets."
   Review of Economic Studies 60:865­888.

                                      40
Kocherlakota, Narayana. 1996. "Implications of E cient Risk Sharing without
  Commitment." Review of Economic Studies 63:595­609.
Krueger, Dirk, and Fabrizio Perri. 2006. "Does Income Inequality Lead to Consump-
   tion Inequality? Evidence and Theory." Review of Economic Studies 73:163­
   193.
      . 2011. "Public versus Private Risk Sharing." Journal of Economic Theory
   146:920­956.
Kurlat, Pablo, and Laura Veldkamp. 2015. "Should We Regulate Financial Infor-
  mation?" Journal of Economic Theory 158:697­720.
Leland, Hayne, and David Pyle. 1977. "Informational Asymmetries, Financial
   Structure, and Financial Intermediation." Journal of Finance 31:371­387.
Llosa, Luis Gonzalo, and Venky Venkateswaran. 2017. "E ciency with Endogenous
   Information Choice." Working Paper, NYU Stern.
Lorenzoni, Guido. 2010. "Optimal Monetary Policy with Uncertain Fundamentals
   and Dispersed Information ." Review of Economic Studies 77 (1): 305­338.
Magill, Michael, and Martine Quinzii. 2002. Theory of Incomplete Markets. MIT
  Press.
Morris, Stephen, and Hyun Song Shin. 2002. "Social Value of Public Information."
  American Economic Review 92 (5): 1521­1534.
Nosal, Jaromir, and Guillermo Ordo~
                                  nez. 2016. "Uncertainty as Commitment."
   Journal of Monetary Economics 80:124­140.
Park, Yena. 2014. "Optimal Taxation in a Limited Commitment Economy." Review
   of Economic Studies 81:884­918.
Roca, Mauro F. 2010, April. "Transparency and Monetary Policy with Imperfect
   Common Knowledge." Imf working papers 10/91, International Monetary Fund.
Schlee, Edward. 2001. "The Value of Information in E cient Risk-Sharing Ar-
   rangements." American Economic Review 91:509­524.
Vanasco, Victoria. 2017. "The Downside of Asset Screening for Market Liquidit."
   Journal of Finance 72:1937­1981.
Walsh, Carl E. 2007. "Optimal Economic Transparency." International Journal of
  Central Banking 3 (1): 5­36.




                                      41
A      Proofs
A.1     Proof of Proposition 1 and Corollary 1
Proof. Our first step is deriving the first order condition relative to asset demand in
the two information benchmarks. By the discussion preceding Lemma 2, for a given
 i 2 (0, 1), the first order conditions relative to h (i) are:

    · In the full-information benchmark Eh [Kh ( h (i))] = Kh ( h (i)), agent h maxi-
      mizes U(Kh ( h (i))) = Kh ( h (i)) choosing h (i) such that, for all i,
                                R
                            @       H (h )   h (i)di        kh
         (1      )(1    )             @   h (i )
                                                       e         = 0.

    · In the no-information benchmark Eh [Kh ( h (i))] = E [Kh ( h (i))], agent h max-
      imizes U(E [Kh ( h (i))]) = E [Kh ( h (i))] choosing h (i) such that, for all i,

                                     R                                                    R         
                                @ E [ h (i)di]                                       @ V ( h (i)di)
            (1    )(1       )        @ h (i )
                                                            +1
                                                             2
                                                               (1       )2 (1   )2        @ h (i )
                                                                                                     e E [kh ]+ 2 V (kh )   =0

Since portfolio returns enter exponentially in the utility function, constant absolute
risk aversion obtains, and the optimal individual asset demand is invariant in the
expected value of the rest of the portfolio (total amount of intermediate capital) - as
in standard CARA asset pricing models.
    In what follows we solve for the profit-maximizing demand of raw capital and
then show that it is also the utility-maximizing demand of raw capital satisfying
the first order conditions above. Suppose instead agent h chooses the quantity h (i)
of raw capital to demand from agent i to maximize her expected profits (which are
given by agent h's version of equation (33)); then, an interior h (i) demand (required
by i 2 (0, 1) and agent homogeneity) must satisfy,
                                                                     
              @ Eh [h (i)]      @ Eh   ¯ + i h (i) ' 2 (i) Ri h (i)
                                                         2 h
                             =                                         =0         (33)
                 @ h ( i)                         @ h ( i)
                                 ¯ + E h [ i ] Ri
                                 
                         
                =) h      (i) =
                                         '
Since the supply of agent i's raw capital is 1   i , market clearing implies,
                                Z
                                      
                                     h (i)dh = 1      i,
                                                   H (i )


                                                                  42
and the equilibrium price in the market of agent i's raw capital would be

                                Ri = ¯ + E h [ i ]         '(1         i ),                 (34)

where agents have identical information under both benchmarks so Eh [i ] is the same
for all h.
    The actual profit of agent h as a buyer of agent i's raw capital can then be
rewritten as                                         '        2
                     h (i) = (i Eh [i ])(1     i) +    (1   i) .
                                                     2
    Under full-information, Eh [i ] = i ; meanwhile, under no-information, Eh [i ] =
E
R i ] = 0 and by a law of large
  [                              numbers with a continuum of iid random variables
                            14
       di = 0 almost surely. As such, aggregate portfolio profits,
 (0,1) i
                           Z                         Z
                                                '                           2
                                      h (i)di =                   (1   i)       di
                               H (i )           2        H (i )

are deterministic, agents attain perfect diversification, and (since this quantity is
strictly positive) agent's total demand for raw capital can be "self-financed".
    Now, we prove the conjecture that profit-maximizing demand isthe same as
                                                                              R
utility-maximizing demand. Since portfolio profits are deterministic, V H (i) h (i)di =
0 and,
           R                              Z                  Z                
      @ V ( H (i) h (i)di)       @ h ( i)
                           = 2E                    h (i)di E          h (i)di   =0
             @ h ( i)            @ h (i)    H (i )             H (i )

                                           
which shows, jointly with (33), that       h ( i)   also satisfies utility-maximizing first-order
conditions.

    Finally, the expression for the quantity of intermediate capital available to agents
at the end of the period (15), as stated in the Corollary 1, comes from substituting
the price received from selling raw capital (equation (34)) and the profits from buying
raw capital (equation (14)) into (10).
 14
    Sun, Yeneng and Yongchao Zhang (2009), "Individual risk and Lebesgue extension without
aggregate uncertainty", Journal of Economic Theory 144, 432-443.




                                                43
A.2     Proof of Proposition 4
                                                               
In the full-information benchmark, there is never trade so i,F    I = 1 for all i from
Proposition 3. Further, given that V (ki ) = 1, according to (20) we have,
                                                                               ¯+ 1 ((1 )(1                 ))2     2
                        E [ Ki (  i ) ] =               e(1        )(1       )    2                                     =
                                                             (1 )(1          ) ¯            (1 )(1            ) i       2
                                            =           e                           E [e                            ]
                                                                                                                                                             
   In the no-information benchmark, trade is possible, as characterized by                                                                                   i,N I   in
                                        ,2                                                                                                                    
proposition 2. In this case, V (ki ) = i,N I so (16), (17), and the fact that                                                                                i,N I    is
identical for all i imply,
                                                              ¯    '        ,2 2                                                 ,2
                                                             (                        )+ 1                        ))2
        E [Ki (i )]       =          e(1    )(1         )          2
                                                                     (1     i,N I )      2
                                                                                           ((1          )(1                     i,N I      =
                                                                                                 ,2         '                               ,2 2
                          =          e(1    )(1         ) ¯
                                                              e
                                                                  1
                                                                  2
                                                                    (1    )2 (1      )2     (   i,N I    (1 )(1             )
                                                                                                                                (1         i,N I )   )
                                                                                                    ,2           '                              ,2 2
                                                                                            ] (                                                          )
                                                             ¯                                                                        (1       i,N I )
                          =          e(1    )(1         )    
                                                              E [e(1       )(1        ) i          i,N I      (1 )(1              )



   where we define
        M       ,2                   '                                      2                                       1
                i,N I                                   (1          i,N I )     =               3'+(1 )(                1) 1 
                          (1         )(1            )                                1                                        (1                         )
                                                                                                4'+(1 )(                1) '


A.3     Proof of Proposition 8
Proof. Substituting for E [U(Ki (i ))] with (20), we can rewrite the problem as,
                                                                            ) E [ki ]+ 1                          ) )2 V ( ki )
               max{ ^i (h),i }                          e(1       )(1                  2
                                                                                         ((1 )(1
                                                                                                                                                                (35)
                                     (i,h)2(0,1)2


where
                                                Z                                     Z
                    ¯+                                                                             '       2
               ki =            i i      i +                   i ( h ) h     dh                             i (h) dh ,
                                                    H (i )                                H (i )   2

subject to the resource and balance-budget constraints,
                                        Z
                               1    i =          h (i)dh
                                          H (i )
                                        Z
                                   0 = i di

The first observation is that necessarily in any equilibrium 1      i = h (i) = j (i) for
any h, j 2 H (i). If this condition were violated, let us say h (i) < j (i), the planner

                                                                   44
could save on quadratic costs without loosing on expected production by moving raw
capital type i from agent j to agent h. The result of this observation is that by a law
of large numbers result, as in the proof of Proposition 1, and using the constraints,
                    Z             Z                  Z Z                                                      Z Z
            ¯+                                                                                            '                                  2
  E [ki ] =             i i di            i di                         (1           h )h dh di                               (1         h)          dh di
                                                              H (i )                                      2         H (i )
                  Z
           ¯ '                        2
         =          (1           i)       di ,
              2
           Z                      Z                  2
 V (ki ) =      i i    i                    i i di           di.

                      R
where we used E [i ] = i di = 0 and,
  Z                    Z                   Z                                                                         Z
                                                                                                          2                                     2
       (1    h )h dh =   (1    h )h dh and                                                   (1      h)       dh =           (1         h)          dh
    H (i )                                                                          H (i )

As such,

                           @ E [ ki ]
                                      = '(1   i)
                              @ i
                                                    Z          
                           @ V ( ki )
                                      = 2 i i i i       i i di
                             @ i
                                                  Z          
                           @ V ( ki )
                                      = 2 i i i       i i di
                             @i

all of which are equal to zero at i = 1, i = i and therefore imply that all the
necessary first order conditions of problem (35) (factoring in the constraints) for
optimality are also satisfied.

A.4          Proof of Propositions 2', 6', and 4'
Ex-ante utility in the no-information benchmark is given by
                                                          ¯                      2 + ' (1     )2                                  ))2
                ~ i (i )] = e(1
             E [K                          )(1       )   (     '(1          i)       2
                                                                                                   1 2
                                                                                                   2 i   )+ 1
                                                                                                            2
                                                                                                              ((1   )(1                 2
                                                                                                                                        i   .


   The optimal individual supply of raw capital is given by the first order condition

@ (1         ) (1   )       '(1             i)
                                                 2
                                                     +   '
                                                         2
                                                             (1         )2            1 2
                                                                                      2 i
                                                                                                  +1
                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                     ((1        ) (1                ))2             2
                                                                                                                                                    i
                                                                                                                                                         =0
                                                              @    i


                                                                   45
which yields:
                                                ~ =                    1
                                                                  (1 )(1             ) 1
                                                          1           2'

   By evaluating                     ~ i (i )] at this expression, we get
                                  E [K
                                                                       ¯    1
                                                                                                                   ) 1) ~M
                      ~ i (i )]
                   E [K                 =       e(1 )(1 )  e 2 (1 )(1 )((1 )(1
                                                              ~M 1 (1 )(1 )                                    ~M
                      ~ i (i )]
                   E [K                 =       ¯ e(1 )(1 )i
                                                K                 e 2


   where
                                              ~M =                      1
                                                       1        ~ (1       )(1
                                                                             '
                                                                                      ) 1


with
                                                3' + (1               ) (             1) + 1
                                           ~=
                                                4' + (1               ) (             1) + 1
       3
and    4
           < ~ < 1.
   The planner's optimal supply of raw capital is given by the first order condition
@ (1        ) (1          )          '(1      )2 +    '
                                                      2
                                                          (1           )2        1
                                                                                 2
                                                                                      2
                                                                                               +1
                                                                                                2
                                                                                                  ((1     ) (1               ))2    2
                                                                                                                                        =0
                                                            @
which yields
                                              ~P =                     1
                                                                (1 )(1           ) 1
                                                                                           .
                                                          1          '

By evaluating                ~ i (i )] at this expression, we get
                          E [K
                                                                  1                                                   1
                                                                       (1 )(1           )((1 )(1        ) 1)
                                                            ¯     2                                                (1 )(1     ) 1
                ~ i (i )]
             E [K                  =       e (1 )(1       ) 
                                                              e                                                1        '

                                                                       ~P        1
                                                                                                  ) ~P
                ~ i (i )]
             E [K                  =       ¯ e(1
                                           K       )(1        ) i
                                                                            e    2
                                                                                   (1      )(1




   Ex-ante utility in the full-information benchmark is given by
                                         ¯ '(1 )2 + ' (1 )2 1 )+ 1 ((1                                                  ))2
             ~ ( ) ] = e(1 )(1 ) (
          E [K        i       i                     2       2    2
                                                                                                               )(1            2



 Both individual and planner optimal supply of raw capital gives a corner solution
with no trading, (this is = 1), so that
                                                                 ¯ 1                                       ))2
                                                      e(1 )(1 ) ( 2 )+ 2 ((1 )(1
                                                                       1                                            2
                              ~ i ( i ) ] =
                           E [K
                                                                   2
                              ~ i ( i ) ] =
                           E [K                       ¯ e(1 )(1 )i e 1
                                                      K                   2
                                                                            (1 )(1                             )



                                                                46
A.5       Proof of Proposition 5' and 7'
Compare the expressions in Proposition 4'. First, consider the case > 1 (so that
   < 0). Ex-ante utility under no-information is greater than under full-information
in the market and constrained planner solutions respectively, if and only if,

(1    ) (1    ) ((1     ) (1   )      1)        >     (1   ) (1         ) ((1    ) (1   )      1) ~A

with A 2 {M, P } depending on comparing market allocations or planner solutions.
This inequality becomes

                   (1   ) (1   )      1 < ((1              ) (1         )     1) ~A

and so,
                                                 1                       
                           > ~A +                                 1    ~A .
                                      (1        ) (1       )
To see that this condition necessarily holds whenever (25) holds, it is su cient to
observe that ~A < A , but also that the extra term (1 ~i,N   A
                                                               I )/(1  )(1      ) is
negative.
    Consider now the other case,       < 1 (so that    > 0 and > 1). Then, no-
information ex-ante utility is greater if and only if,

(1    ) (1    ) ((1     ) (1   )      1)        <     (1   ) (1         ) ((1    ) (1   )      1) ~A

with A 2 {M, P }. This inequality becomes

                   (1   ) (1   )      1 < ((1              ) (1         )     1) ~A

and so,
                                                 1                       
                           < ~A +                                 1    ~A .
                                      (1        ) (1       )

given that > 1 and ~A < 1, there exists a su ciently high such that the inequality
holds. Furthermore note that,
                                                    
                        @ ~M + (1 )(1 1
                                           )
                                              1  ~M
                                                        =
                                      @
                     +         
               2                                (2'    '              ' +  + ' +                 )>0
(1    ) (    1) (' +  +                    )2

                                                47
meaning that the right-hand side of the inequality is always satisfied for                                 = 0.
Evaluating the inequality at = 0 for the case A = M we get,
                                                                                     
                              1                1                     1           ~   1'

                                     <                      +                                  ,
                          1               1+   ~       1'       1        1+          ~    1'


that is, any value of ' satisfying,
                                                                     
                                     ' <           (        1)               .
                                                                 1        
also satisfies the inequality for any .


B      General results for given supply choice
In this section we discuss the robustness of our results by evaluating how the value of
information changes with an exogenous supply 1         of raw capital. Intuitively, for a
given , the benefit of information comes from setting contingent labor supply (pro-
portional to ), while the cost is inducing a higher volatility of capital (proportional
to 1     ): when is low the cost dominates, whereas when is high the opposite oc-
curs. The following proposition establishes that our intuition generally holds true for
the generic class of mean preserving production functions (even if not-exponential).
                               ~ i (·) production function such that,
Proposition 9. Given a generic K
    1. information increases ex-ante uncertainty of labor productivity, i.e. for any
        i =  2 (0, 1),
                                    ~ i ( i )) < V (K
                                 V (K               ~ i (i ))                    (36)
    2. the unconditional median coincides with the unconditional mean,
                                            ~ i (i )] = K
                                         E [K           ~ i (E [i ]) ,                                     (37)
                        ~ i (i )] = E [K
       which implies E [K              ~ i ( i )].
                                                                A
Then, in the limit of ' ! 0 for which lim'!0                    i,N I    = 0 information is always inferior
to no-information.
Proof. We repeat the logic of lemma 2 for i 2 [0, 1] and the new production function.
In the benchmark case of complete information, i.e. when Ei [K     ~ i (i )(1 )(1 ) ] =
K~ i (i )(1 )(1 ) , we get that
                           ~ i (i )(1
                      E [U(K             )(1 )             ~ i (i )(1
                                                   )] = E [K                            )(1        )
                                                                                                       ]

                                                       48
                                                             ~ i ( i i )(1
whereas in the extreme case of no-information, i.e. when Ei [K                                )(1 )
                                                                                                         ] =
   ~ i ( i i )(1 )(1 ) ], we have instead
E [K
                        ~ i ( i i )(1
                   U(E [K                )(1 )           ~ i ( i i )(1
                                                 ]) = E [K                   )(1 )
                                                                                     ] ,
where > 0 and > 1 if and only if < 1.
  Now we can study the role of information in the limiting supply of raw capital.
   · The limit at      = 1: With         > 1 we have          < 0 and        < 1. Because of Jensen:
                 ~ i ( i )(1
          lim E [K              )(1 )          ~ i (i )(1
                                        ] = E [K               )(1 )          ~ i (i )(1
                                                                       ] > E [K             )(1 )
                                                                                                    ],
            !1

     with    < 1 we have         > 0 and         > 1 and because of Jensen:
                 ~ i ( i )(1
          lim E [K              )(1 )          ~ i (i )(1
                                        ] = E [K               )(1 )          ~ i (i )(1
                                                                       ] < E [K             )(1 )
                                                                                                    ],
            !1

     Then information is preferred.
   · The limit at                              ~ i ( i i )(1
                       = 0: As the variance of K                       )(1    )
                                                                                  is degenerate, then
                             ~ i ( i i )(1
                          E [K               )(1 )        ~ i (E [i ])(1
                                                       ] =K                  )(1 )
                                                                                        .

     With        < 1, we have with (1            )(1     ) 2 (0, 1) since
                                                          (  1)
                                            >0>                  ,
                                                         (1 ) + 
     and because of Jensen's inequality,
                           ~ i (E [i ])(1
                           K                 )(1 )           ~ i (i )(1
                                                        > E [K             )(1 )
                                                                                   ],
     that is, no-information is preferred as               > 0.
     With > 1, we have with (1                )(1        ) < 0, in which case, due to Jensen's
     inequality once again,
                           ~ i (E [i ])(1
                           K                 )(1 )           ~ i (i )(1
                                                        < E [K             )(1 )
                                                                                   ],
     that is, no-information is preferred as               < 0.


    This proposition shows that, under the generic requirement of a mean preserving
production function, there is always a su ciently low for which no-information
is socially preferred, since for the same expected production agents can completely
eliminate any production risk.

                                                   49
