                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   AGGREGATE IMPLICATIONS OF BARRIERS TO FEMALE ENTREPRENEURSHIP

                                      Gaurav Chiplunkar
                                     Pinelopi K. Goldberg

                                      Working Paper 28486
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28486


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   February 2021




We would like to thank Rafael Dix-Carneiro, Rohini Pande, and Gabriel Ulyssea for many
helpful comments. Chiplunkar would like to acknowledge research support from the Insititute for
Business in Society, Darden School of Business. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Gaurav Chiplunkar and Pinelopi K. Goldberg. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Aggregate Implications of Barriers to Female Entrepreneurship
Gaurav Chiplunkar and Pinelopi K. Goldberg
NBER Working Paper No. 28486
February 2021
JEL No. J16,J70,O17,O40

                                         ABSTRACT

We develop a framework for identifying and quantifying barriers to entry and operation faced by
female entrepreneurs in developing countries, and apply it to the Indian economy. We find that
despite considerable progress over time, female entrepreneurs still face substantial entry and
business registration costs (almost twice their male counterparts'). The costs of expanding a
business, conditional on entry, are also substantially higher for women. However, there is one
area in which female entrepreneurs have an advantage: hiring female workers is easier for them.
We show that this pattern is not driven by the sectoral composition of female employment.
Counterfactual simulations indicate that removing all excess barriers faced by women
entrepreneurs would: (a) increase the fraction of female-owned firms significantly (nine times);
(b) increase the real wages of female relative to male workers; and (c) generate substantial
aggregate productivity and welfare gains (ca. 7% and 18% respectively). These large gains are
due to reallocation: low productivity male-owned firms previously sheltered from female
competition are replaced by higher productivity female-owned firms previously excluded from
the economy.


Gaurav Chiplunkar
University of Virginia,
100, Darden Blvd.
Charlottesville, VA 22905
chiplunkarg@darden.virginia.edu

Pinelopi K. Goldberg
Yale University
Department of Economics
37 Hillhouse Ave.
P.O. Box 208264
New Haven, CT 06520-8264
and NBER
penny.goldberg@yale.edu
1       Introduction

Low female labor force participation coupled with a sustained lack of female entrepreneurs have

been a policy concern in many developing countries, especially in South Asia. Figure 1(a) plots the

fraction of female-owned firms across 25 sectors using a sample of around 140k firms, surveyed under

the Enterprise Surveys (World Bank, 2020), which covers 141 countries across 13 years (2006-2018).1

The lack of business ownership by women is striking. On average, less than a quarter (22.5% to

be exact) of businesses across the world are owned by women, with women's share of ownership

ranging from 3-6% in petroleum, leather and wood products to at most 35% in textiles, services and

garments. Using the same sample, Figure 1(b) plots the fraction of female workers in male-owned

versus female-owned firms, as well as the probability that the top manager in the firm is a woman.

While 25% of employees in male-owned firms are women, the share of female employees is 43% in

female-owned firms. More strikingly, while only 6.2% of male-owned firms have a woman as their

top manager, the probability of a top manager being a woman is over 50% in women-owned firms.

These patterns suggest that female entrepreneurship may have important implications for women's

employment patterns.


Taking the above observations as a starting point, this paper develops a framework for examining

potentially differential barriers to entry and operation faced by female-owned as opposed to male-

owned firms in developing countries, as well as their aggregate implications. Earlier work has

shown that eliminating distortions in the allocation of talent can result in sizeable productivity

and welfare gains in advanced economies2 . Such gains could be even more important in settings

characterized by misallocation of resources, low productivity, and low per capita income levels, as

in many developing economies (Hsieh and Klenow, 2009; Restuccia and Rogerson, 2017). While

there are many sources of identity-based distortions, gender-based distortions are a common theme

in developing countries3 . With around half of the world's population women, such distortions are

likely to have important aggregate implications. If it were possible to improve aggregate productivity
    1
    The Enterprise Surveys are firm-level surveys of a representative sample of the economy's private sector.
More details on the methodology and data can be found in: https://www.enterprisesurveys.org.
  2
    Hsieh, Hurst, Jones and Klenow (2019) estimate large such gains for the U.S. between 1960 and 2010.
Their study focuses on race- and gender-based distortions.
  3
    See Jayachandran (2020), Quinn and Woodruff (2019), and Cuberes and Teignier (2014) for reviews.

                                                     2
and welfare in developing countries by allocating the talent available in such economies efficiently,

irrespective of gender, then policies promoting gender equality would be more than human rights

initiatives, they would be effective development policies.


In the vein of this proposition, this paper aims to identify and analyze a particular type of distortion,

namely gender-based distortions that affect female entrepreneurship. The focus of our analysis is

India, a country in which female labor participation and entrepreneurship are particularly low

(Fletcher, Pande and Moore, 2019; Lahoti and Swaminathan, 2016). While total female labor

force participation has remained stagnant in India in the past three decades (Fletcher, Pande and

Moore (2019), Figure 1), female entrepreneurship, has shown signs of progress, as we show in this

paper. Moreover, female entrepreneurs tend to hire more female than male workers. Therefore,

the advancement of female entrepreneurship could offer a way to promote general participation of

women in the labor market. We utilize data from two waves of the Economic Census, which­in

contrast to the World Enterprise Surveys­are nationally representative, and include the informal

sector. The latter feature of the Census offers an important advantage relative to other data sets

given that the majority of female-owned businesses are informal. Using this data and a model-

based approach, we identify entry and operation frictions faced by female-owned firms and use

counterfactual simulations to assess the productivity and welfare implications of various policy

interventions.


Our analysis is guided by a simple, stylized model that nevertheless captures some important fea-

tures of developing economies. The model features an economy with multiple industries. Within

each industry, there are two sectors, a formal and an informal sector. Accounting for the informal

sector is important, as it commands a large share of economic activity in developing countries (La-

Porta and Shleifer, 2008, 2014; Ulyssea, 2018, 2020). Moreover, women, while under-represented

among entrepreneurs, are over-represented in the informal sector (World Bank, 2012). Firms (en-

trepreneurs) need to pay an entry cost to operate in either sector and an additional registration

cost to formalize4 . Firms in the informal sector avoid paying the registration cost as well as taxes,
   4
    The importance of these fixed entry and registration costs has been emphasized across many contexts.
See Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de Silanes and Shleifer (2002), and comprehensive reviews by Jayachandran
(2020) and Quinn and Woodruff (2019).


                                                   3
but face a size-dependent penalty. This penalty captures both the cost of the actual penalty firms

may have to pay if they are caught evading taxes and the implicit cost informal firms face by being

denied access to formal finance, for which they have to be registered with a government agency5 .

There is only one input in production: labor. Conditional on entry (either in the formal or informal

sector), firms make hiring decisions. We assume perfect competition in both product and labor

markets.


Gender enters the model in four ways: First, we allow for male and female workers to be imperfect

substitutes in the production function. Second, we allow for the productivity distributions of men

and women entrepreneurs to be different. Third, we allow men and women entrepreneurs to face

different entry and registration costs. Fourth, we assume that there are hiring frictions in the

labor market that prevent firms from expanding, and allow these frictions to differ both by the

gender of the firm owner and by the gender of the worker, i.e., we allow for women entrepreneurs

to face different hiring frictions than men, and we also allow frictions to be different depending

on whether the (male or female) entrepreneur hires a man versus a woman. This formulation is

general and covers many of the factors that the literature has offered as potential explanations for

gender inequality (e.g., legal barriers, cultural norms and attitudes, comparative advantage)6 . We

do not attempt to measure such factors or relate them to observables7 . Rather, we model them as

"wedges", and use the structure of the model in conjunction with the rich data of the Census to

back them out and examine their implications for aggregate outcomes.


We have three key findings. First, even though the excess costs faced by female entrepreneurs (both

on the intensive and extensive margins) decrease between the two rounds of the Census, they never-

theless remain substantial. For example, despite a significant decline, entry and formalization costs

are 1.5-2 times larger for women entrepreneurs than for men. Similarly, on the intensive margin,

women entrepreneurs face two to three times the cost of expanding their business through hiring
   5
     See Beck and Hoseini (2014) and Nikaido, Pais and Sarma (2015).
   6
     For comprehensive surveys of this literature, see Altonji and Blank (1999), Bertrand (2011), Blau et al.
(2014).
   7
     Some of the most important drivers of gender inequality in developing countries, i.e., norms and culture,
may be difficult to measure. For the importance of such factors, see the work of Fernández (2013), Fernández
and Fogli (2009), Fernández, Fogli and Olivetti (2004), and Ashraf, Bau, Nunn and Voena (2020) among
others.


                                                      4
(both in the informal and formal sectors), as compared to their male counterparts. Second, average

numbers mask substantial heterogeneity across industries and regions. For example, the excess

fixed costs (both entry and formalization), though punitive across all sectors, are concentrated in

manufacturing and services. Furthermore, excess entry barriers faced by women entrepreneurs are

concentrated geographically in the Northern and Central states of India, consistent with what is re-

ported in Evans (2020). On the intensive margin, the hiring frictions faced by women entrepreneurs

are pervasive across all regions and sectors, but particularly high the services sector. Third, the only

area where female entrepreneurs seem to have a significant advantage over their male counterparts

is in hiring female workers (both in the informal and formal sectors). We show that this advantage

is not driven by sectoral effects ­ it holds even within narrowly defined industries (at the 4-digit

National Industry Classification level). This is especially important in a context like India, where

female labor force participation is low and women workers are scarce. Put together, our results

suggest that while there has been progress over time, women entrepreneurs face substantially larger

costs to operate both on the extensive (entry and registration costs) and intensive (hiring workers)

margins.


Given these results, we investigate the potential gains to the economy in a series of counterfactual

scenarios where these barriers are eliminated. Specifically, we examine the impact of four affirmative

action policies that aim to sequentially reduce the various excess costs faced by women entrepreneurs.

We label these scenarios "affirmative action" policies because in all industry-regions where women

entrepreneurs face higher costs than men, we equalize costs across women and men; however, in

the one case where women have an advantage over men (i.e., attracting female workers), we do

not eliminate this advantage. The first scenario we consider is a policy that eliminates excess

formalization costs. In the second scenario, we eliminate excess entry costs as well, thus eliminating

all excess fixed costs. The third scenario leaves fixed costs unchanged, but eliminates all intensive

margin hiring frictions. Finally, the last scenario considers the elimination of all excess costs (both

on the intensive and extensive margins).


The counterfactual simulations lead to four policy-relevant insights. First, removing the excess

barriers has quantitatively meaningful impacts on the gender composition of entrepreneurs. Elimi-


                                                   5
nating the excess costs on the extensive (intensive) margin increases the fraction of women-owned

firms in the economy by around two (six) times, from around 6% to 12% (38%). With no excess

barriers (both on the intensive and extensive margins), around 56% of the firms in the economy

would be owned by women, a nine-fold increase. Second, eliminating these barriers disproportion-

ately helps female workers as compared to male workers. Under all counterfactual scenarios, the

increase in real wages for women workers is greater than for male workers. This is intuitive given

the low female labor force participation in India coupled with the fact that female workers are

more likely to be hired by women entrepreneurs. Third, the counterfactual scenarios highlight the

presence of low-productivity male entrepreneurs, who operate in the economy only because they do

not face competition from more productive female-owned firms facing higher entry and operation

barriers. Removing these barriers allows the marginal, higher-productivity woman entrepreneur to

enter, thus reducing the misallocation of talent and resources in the economy. Lastly, this more

efficient reallocation results in substantial gains in aggregate productivity and welfare (as measured

by real income). The median increase in aggregate productivity (welfare) across regions is 2.2%

(0.5%) if all excess fixed costs of entry and registration were to be eliminated. Removing hiring

frictions results in substantially larger gains, namely an increase of aggregate productivity by 8.9%

and of welfare by 12.3%. The larger gains under this scenario are consistent with the observation

that since women entrepreneurs face substantive barriers on the intensive margin, removal of ex-

cess fixed costs alone does not result in significant gains. Lastly, removing both types of barriers

increases aggregate productivity by 7% and welfare by 18%. These gains are large and suggest that

promoting gender equality in entrepreneurship contributes to economic development.


Our paper speaks to a nascent literature focusing on the aggregate implications of eliminating

gender-based distortions. While the literature on gender-based disparities is voluminous, studies

focusing on the macroeconomic implications of such disparities are relatively scarce. The two studies

that are closest in spirit to our work are the U.S.- focused paper by Hsieh, Hurst, Jones and Klenow

(2019) and the cross-country analysis of Cuberes and Teignier (2016). However, our model differs

from the models used in the aforementioned papers in several respects as it is geared towards

capturing key features of developing economies, most importantly the prevalence of informality and

its significance for women entrepreneurs.

                                                  6
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 outlines the theoretical model. Section

3 discusses the data and provides descriptive evidence on the entrepreneurial landscape of India.

Section 4 discusses the quantification of the model. Section 5 discusses the results, and in particular,

the nature and extent of the barriers faced by women entrepreneurs. Section 6 examines the impacts

of counterfactual affirmative action policies that eliminate these excess barriers. Section 7 concludes.




2       Theory


2.1     Setup

The economy consists of J industries. Each industry j has two sectors (denoted by s), the informal

(I ) and formal sector (F ). Firms in both sectors produce a homogeneous product that is sold in a

competitive market at price p. Hence, we do not allow for product differentiation across the formal

and informal sectors. The only difference between firms in the formal and informal sectors is in

their compliance with regulations.


There is a mass of potential male (m) and female (f ) entrepreneurs Mg , g  {m, f } in each industry

(j will be dropped for notational convenience), and each entrepreneur is indexed by her/his indi-

vidual productivity z  G(z ). Entrepreneurs (or firms - we will use the two terms interchangeably

in the rest of the paper) make two decisions: (a) whether to pay a sector- and gender-specific fixed

cost and enter sector s  {I, F }, or not enter at all; and (b) conditional on entry, how many male

and female workers to hire. The setup is static so that after entry, firms stay active forever8 . Labor

is the only input in production. We allow for men and women to be imperfect substitutes in the

production function. A worker of gender g  {m, f } can be hired in a competitive labor market at

a wage wg .


For notational consistency, we will henceforth use xg
                                                    g,s to denote a variable x (e.g., wages, labor,

etc.) that refers to an entrepreneur of gender g , in sector s, and a worker of gender g (that is, the
    8
    In fact, as reported by Hsieh and Klenow (2009), most firms in India are born small, never grow, and
never die.

                                                   7
subscripts in our notation will refer to the gender of entrepreneurs and the superscripts to the gender

of workers). We present the components of the model as follows. Section 2.2 presents the problem

facing incumbent firms in the informal and formal sectors respectively. Section 2.3 discusses entry,

and section 2.4 characterizes the model equilibrium.




2.2     Incumbents

Output y of a firm with productivity z is given by:

                                                                  1
                                                                  
                                                      m      f 
                                            l = (l ) + (l )

                                            y = zl


where: the elasticity of substitution between male and female workers is given by 1/(1 -  ), and

0 <  < 1. The production decision in the formal and informal sector differs as follows. Firms in

the formal sector have to pay a per-unit sales tax t.9 Firms in the informal sector do not pay any

taxes, but face a size-dependant penalty of being informal.



Informal sector incumbents:                 In the informal sector, firms do not pay taxes, but face a

size-dependent penalty of operating in the informal sector. The profit maximization problem of a

firm in the informal sector, owned by an entrepreneur g with productivity z , is given by:



                                                     m m       f f
                                   gI = max pzlgI - wgI lgI - wgI lgI
                                            m ,lf }
                                          {lgI  gI


where  = / and  > 1. The parameter  captures a size-based penalty faced by the firm for

operating in the informal sector.10 This implies that it is less desirable for larger firms to remain

informal. This is plausible given that according to the law, firms with more than 10 employees
   9
     In reality, firms in the formal sector face many regulations in addition to sales taxes. We do not model
these regulations in this paper, but use the per-unit sales tax as a shorthand for all measures that effectively
reduce the net revenues of formal firms.
  10
     An alternative way to model the size-based penalty is as a convex cost (as in Ulyssea (2018), for example).
However, without separate data on revenues and costs, these two will be isomorphic in the model.

                                                       8
must be registered and pay taxes, and larger firms have a higher probability of being detected and

penalized.11

           m and w f denote the effective wages facing entrepreneurs in the informal sector.
The terms wgI     gI

Entrepreneurs, especially women, may face frictions in hiring workers. We capture these in a

reduced form way, as "wedges", i.e., additional costs over and above the nominal wages paid to

workers. We assume that an entrepreneur with gender g , may face an additional per-unit cost
                                                                  f
gI for hiring a worker in the informal sector, and a further cost gI for hiring a female (relative

to male) worker. These additional costs serve as a shorthand for many factors that may affect

the hiring experience of women, on both sides of the labor market. For example, cultural norms

may make it hard for some men to work for women, so that women entrepreneurs may have a

harder time recruiting employees. Conversely, in some environments, cultural norms may inhibit

women from working outside the home. But outside work may be considered more acceptable if the

employer is a woman, making it easier for female entrepreneurs to recruit female workers. While

such "cultural" factors and norms are considered important for employment decisions, they are

hard, if not impossible, to quantify based on existing data. Accordingly, we do not attempt to

measure them in this paper, but model them in a reduced form way as distortions that increase the

effective cost of labor. It is important to note that since these additional costs will be estimated in

the empirical part of the paper, in principle, they could also be zero or negative. While the model

structure allows for them, it does not impose them.

                                                                                         m , wf } =
The effective wages paid by an entrepreneur g in the informal sector are given by wgI  {wgI   gI
                    f
(1 + gI ){wm , (1 + gI )wf }. The first order conditions imply that demand for male and female

workers, optimal firm size, and profits are given by:
  11
    In appendix C.2, we show that this size-based penalty can be re-written as a per-unit tax. As we explain
in the Data Section, firms with fewer than 10 workers or fewer than 20 workers and no electricity do not
have to pay taxes in India. Hence, failing to register is not illegal for such small firms. Nevertheless, such
firms face an economic penalty in that they do not have access to formal credit channels. The parameter
 captures both the actual penalty larger firms may have to pay if they are caught evading taxes and the
implicit penalty smaller informal firms may face because of financing constraints.




                                                      9
                                                 g       1
                                                wgI   - 1- 
                                       g
                                      lgI   =                 × lgI (z )                          (1)
                                                wgI
                                                              1
                                               p              1-
                                  lgI (z ) =      ×z                                              (2)
                                              wgI
                                                      
                                     gI = (1 - ) × pzlgI (z )                                     (3)
                                                                                  1-
                                                                                 - 
                                                                           
                                          m           - 1-        f     - 1-
                           where: wgI = (wgI )                + (wgI )       




See derivation in appendix C.1.



Formal sector incumbents: A firm in the formal sector, owned by an entrepreneur g with
productivity z , chooses labor to maximize variable profits given by:



                                                   m m       f f
                          gF = max (1 - t)pzlgF - wgF lgF - wgF lgF
                                     m ,lf }
                                   {lgF  gF




As with the informal sector, we assume that an entrepreneur g faces hiring frictions, modeled as an
                       f
additional cost gF and gF of hiring a worker and female worker respectively in the formal sector.
                                                 m , w f } = (1 +  ){w m , (1 +  f )w f }.
Therefore, the effective wage is given by wgF  {wgF   gF          gF            gF


The first order conditions imply that demand for workers of gender g , optimal firm size, and profits

are given by:

                                                 g       1
                                                wgF   - 1- 
                                      g
                                     lgF    =                 × lgF (z )                          (4)
                                                wgF
                                                                    1
                                              (1 - t)p             1-
                                  lgF (z ) =           ×z                                         (5)
                                                wgF
                                                            
                                    gF = (1 - ) × (1 - t)pzlgF (z )                               (6)
                                                                                  1-
                                                                                 - 
                                                                            
                                          m           - 1-        f      - 1-
                           where: wgF = (wgF )                + (wgF )        




See derivation in appendix C.1.

                                                      10
2.3        Firm Entry

We now turn to the entry decision of firms. There is a mass of potential entrepreneurs (Mg ) of

a gender g  {m, f } in each industry j (we remind the reader that we suppress the index j for

notational convenience, but that in the quantification of the model we allow all parameters to vary

by industry and, when appropriate, by region). These entrepreneurs observe a pre-entry signal of

productivity, x  F (x), of their post-entry productivity z . We assume that F (x) is continuous

with support (0, ), has finite moments, and is the same and independent for all firms within a

gender and industry, but can vary across these. An entrepreneur g pays a fixed sunk cost of entry

(denominated in units of output) EgI to enter the informal sector, and EgF = EgI + EgR > EgI to

enter the formal sector, where EgR is a fixed cost of registration, i.e., formalization. As the notation

suggests, we allow entry and formalization costs to differ by gender to accommodate the possibility

that women face higher costs of bureaucracy, and more difficulty getting access to credit, electricity,

and other services. The descriptive results based on the World Enterprise Surveys presented in

Appendix B, as well as comprehensive reviews by Jayachandran (2020) and Quinn and Woodruff

(2019) suggest that this possibility is borne out by the data.


After entry occurs, the entrepreneur draws her/his actual productivity from a conditional cumulative

distribution G(z |x), which is assumed to be continuous in both z and x but is strictly decreasing

in x. This implies that a higher pre-entry signal x is indicative of a better chance of getting a high

post-entry draw z as well. The entry structure is similar to Ulyssea (2018) and offers the advantage

of allowing for an overlap of firm size distributions of the informal and formal sectors, which is a

salient feature of the data. Figure A1 plots the fraction of `formal' firms by firm size using the 1998

and 2005 rounds of the Economic Census of India (see section 3 for a detailed discussion on the

data). As shown in figures A1(a) and A1(b), across both rounds, less than 10 percent of firms with

fewer than 20 workers operate in the formal sector while over 70 percent of the larger firms (more

than 60 workers) are formal12 . While on average, larger firms are more likely to be formal, i.e.,

registered, we also see a substantial overlap in the firm size distribution of formal and informal firms

in the data. Our entry structure allows for this overlap whereas entry decisions similar to Melitz
  12
       Firms with less than 10 workers do not pay taxes anyway and we therefore categorize them as informal.


                                                      11
(2003) for example, would result in a perfect sorting of firms into either the formal or informal

sector based on firm size, which is inconsistent with the data.


Therefore, an entrepreneur with pre-entry productivity x (dropping g for notational convenience)

has an expected profit Vs (x), s = {I, F } given by:


                                   Vs (x, w) =       F (z, w)dG(z |x)


where w denotes the vector of effective wages. Accordingly, (s)he will enter the formal sector as

long as: VF (x) - pEF  max{VI (x) - pEI , 0}, and the informal sector as long as: VI (x) - pEI 

max{VF (x) - pEF , 0}. Since entry into both sectors is positive, this implies that there is a threshold

level of productivity in each sector xs such that:



                                                     VI (xI , w ) = pEI

                                   VF (x               
                                        F , w ) - VI (xF , w ) = pER                                    (7)


Entrepreneurs with x < x                                                  
                        I will not enter at all, entrepreneurs with x  [xI , xF ] will enter the

informal sector, and entrepreneurs with x > xF will enter the formal sector.




2.4     Equilibrium

To close the model, we specify the demand side. We assume that representative households inelas-
                    ¯ m, L
               ¯ = {L
tically supply L         ¯ f } units of male and female workers at wages w = {wm , wf } respectively.

Consumers do not derive any disutility from work, cannot save, and hence consume their income.
                                                    ¯ +  + T .  denotes the total profits of the
Total household income is accordingly given by I = wL

economy net of the total entry costs    j   pj   s   g   Ngjs Egjs , where Ngjs is the mass of entrepreneurs

of gender g that enter sector s of industry j . T denotes the total taxes collected in the formal sector

that are redistributed lump-sum to households. Lastly, we assume a simple demand system where

the representative household consumes a composite bundle C whose price is normalized to 1, and a

constant share j of the household's income I is spent on industry j .


                                                     12
The equilibrium in this economy is defined by the following conditions:


                                                        ¯g =               g
    (i) the labor markets clear for both genders, i.e., L         j     s Lj ,   g = {m, f }.

  (ii) the zero-profit condition in (7) holds in both sectors with equality.

 (iii) the goods market clears for each industry so that        s Yjs   = j I/pj +       s   g   Ngjs Egjs , where

       Yj is the total output produced in industry j and Egjs are the total fixed costs paid by an

       entrepreneur g .




3      Data

Our primary data comes from two rounds of the Economic Census of India (EC) for 1998 and

2005.13 The EC is meant to be a complete enumeration of all (formal and informal) non-farm

business establishments in India in a given year. It is the only database in India that measures

the unconditional distribution of establishment size. Other databases such as CMIE's Prowress

Database, the Annual Survey of Industries (ASI) or the National Sample Surveys (NSS) only cover

certain parts of the distribution and hence are unsuitable for our analysis.


Though it has uniform coverage, the EC has information only on a handful of variables, such as

total number of workers, workers by gender, registration status, identity of the firm owner, 4-digit

NIC industry code, and the source of finance for each establishment. It does not have information

on output, capital, or profits, and the data are cross-sectional. We use the 2000 and 2005 rounds of

the ASI and NSS to complement the EC when necessary. Formality in the model relates to firms

paying taxes to the government. Accordingly, we define as "informal", those firms who have either

not registered with the government or do not have to pay taxes (i.e., firms with fewer than 10

workers or fewer than 20 workers and no electricity). We omit from our analysis: (a) public-sector

firms and co-operatives, since they do not have information on gender-ownership; (b) firms that
  13
    We do not use the 2013 round of the Economic Census since it does not report whether a firm has
registered or not. Hence in the 2013 data, we cannot measure informality, which is an important feature of
India as well as most developing countries (LaPorta and Shleifer (2008), LaPorta and Shleifer (2014), Ulyssea
(2018), Ulyssea (2020)).

                                                     13
do not hire any workers (owner-only firms). Lastly, we restrict our sample to the 18 major states

of India14 , which cover 94.6 (97.25) percent of firms and 96 (97.5) percent of female-owned firms

in 1998 (2005). Our final sample consists of 12.48 million firms in 1998 and 38.75 million firms in

2005.15


Table 1 presents summary statistics from the Economic Census data. We classify each firm into

four categories based on gender (Male or Female) and formality (Formal or Informal). Columns (1),

(3) and (5) report on the 1998 round of the EC, while columns (2), (4) and (6) report on the 2005

round. Four stylized facts stand out. First, more than 99 percent of firms (both male and female)

operate in the informal sector, and the fraction of informal firms increased slightly between the two

rounds of the EC from 99.33% in 1998 to 99.54% in 2005. Second, female-owned firms account for

less than 10% of the total firms (6.59% in 1998 and 8.86% in 2005). Third, as reported in columns

(3) and (4), female-owned firms are smaller than male-owned firms in the informal sector, but larger

than male-owned firms in the formal sector. Lastly, from columns (5) and (6), female-owned firms

employ more female workers compared to male-owned firms, and more so in the informal sector.


A comparison between 1998 and 2005 reveals further interesting patterns. The average number

of workers (columns (3) and (4)) decreased for all categories between 1998 and 2005 suggesting

a decline in entry costs; but the decline is particularly pronounced for formal firms (both male-

and female-owned) suggesting a decline in the costs of formalization. This is consistent with a

package of policy reforms (fiscal, financial, technology and infrastructural support) implemented

in the early 2000s primarily for the micro, small and medium firms (Govt. of India, 2000). The

fraction of female employees (columns (5) and (6)) remained relatively stable for male-owned firms,

but increased substantially for female-owned firms, both in the formal and informal sectors. The

latter pattern provides further support for the idea the female ownership matters for women's labor

force participation.


To explore whether these patterns are driven by firm sorting either across space (districts in India),
  14
      These states are Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Haryana, Jharkhand, Kar-
nataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh
(including Uttarakhand) and West Bengal.
   15
      The change in the total number of firms over time comes from growth in the total number of firms over
time, as well as a decline in the number of single-owned firms, which are dropped from our sample.

                                                    14
or across industries, we run regressions of the form:


                      yf jd = d + 1 Femalef + 2 Formalf + 3 Femalef × Formalf                       (8)

                          + Xf jd + j + f jd


where yf jd is an outcome variable (either log-labor or fraction of female employees) for a firm

f that operates in industry j and district d. "Female" and "Formal" are dummy variables that

take the value 1 if the firm is female-owned and operates in the formal sector respectively, and 0

otherwise. Industry j is the 4-digit National Industry Classification (NIC) code, and Xf jd are a set

of firm controls, such as access to electricity, dummy variables for different forms of financial access

(formal, informal, government etc.), a dummy for whether the firm is primarily agriculture-based,

and a dummy for whether the firm operates in a rural or urban area. We cluster standard errors at

the district level.


Table A1 in the Appendix reports the results. Panel A of table A1 reports the regressions with

district fixed effects (d ), but without industry fixed effects (j ), whereas Panel B adds industry

fixed effects. Columns (1) and (3) report the results for the 1998 round of the EC while columns (2)

and (4) report results for the 2005 round. The findings are consistent with the simple descriptive

patterns discussed earlier. For example, as we can see from Panel B, in 2005, within each district

and industry, female-owned informal firms are approximately 11.3 log-points (11%) smaller in size

than male-owned informal firms, but 16.6 log-points (18%) larger than male-owned formal firms. In

both the formal and informal sectors, female-owned firms employ more female workers than male-

owned firms; in 2005, this difference is 52.4 pp in the informal sector, and 31.7 pp in the formal

sector. Interestingly, a comparison of the estimates in Panel A to those in Panel B shows that the

magnitude of these differences is hardly affected by the inclusion of industry fixed effects. This

indicates that the advantage that female entrepreneurs have in hiring female workers is not driven

by sectoral composition effects.




                                                  15
4     Model quantification

The purpose of quantifying the model is twofold. First, we estimate the hiring wedges and fixed costs

of entry and registration. Second, we evaluate the impact of counterfactual policies that eliminate

the excess entry, registration and hiring barriers faced by female entrepreneurs. Table 2 lists the

model parameters. Given data limitations, we use a combination of calibration and estimation to

set their values. Section 4.1 discusses the parameterization of the model and section 4.2 provides

the implementation details.




4.1    Parameterization

We treat every state in India as a separate closed economy (or region r) and aggregate all four-

digit industries into three broad industries (denoted by j ), namely (i) agriculture and mining; (ii)

manufacturing and (iii) services. As noted earlier, we use the 1998 and 2005 rounds of the Economic

Census and allow for different parameters for each round.


We classify our parameters into two sets:


                                                              2 , 2 , }
  (a) Fundamental parameters {, } = {j , j , j , tjr }, {j , {x,gj ,gj g,j,r }       and

 (b) "Barriers" faced by entrepreneurs, such as fixed costs  = {EI , ER }g,j,r and hiring wedges
                      f    f     f
       = {f I , f F , mF , f I , f F }j,r .



The parameters in  are determined based on statutory values or taken from the literature. The

parameters in  and all barriers faced by entrepreneurs (,) are estimated.


We assume that the pre-entry productivity distribution for an entrepreneur g in an industry j (in

the following, we drop g and j for notational ease) follows a log-normal distribution with mean
               2 , i.e., x  log N (0,  2 ). Further, we assume that post-entry productivity in the
0 and variance x                      x

informal sector does not change, but in the formal sector, it differs from the pre-entry signal by

a log-additive i.i.d shock F , so that zF = xF , where F  log N (0, 2 ). The product of the



                                                 16
log-normal distributions therefore produces a gender-specific log-normal distribution of post-entry

firm productivity z in the formal sector.


Lastly, we normalize mI = mF = 0, i.e., we set the hiring barriers faced by male entrepreneurs equal

to zero. This normalization is harmless, but implies that the interpretation of the hiring barriers

faced by female entrepreneurs (i.e., f I and f F ) is relative to their male counterparts. Finally,

we set any additional barriers faced by male entrepreneurs to hire female workers in the informal
                            f
sector equal to zero, i.e., mI = 0. Accordingly, the additional barriers to hire female workers
                              f             f           f
in the formal sector are (1 + mF ) and (1 + mF ) × (1 + f F ) for male and female entrepreneurs
                             f       f
respectively. The parameters f I and f F therefore capture the additional barriers faced by female

entrepreneurs to hire female workers in the informal and formal sectors respectively, relative to their

male counterparts.




4.2     Implementation

This section discusses how the values of the various parameters are determined and provides some

heuristic identification arguments. A more detailed discussion is provided in Appendix D. The

parameters in  are displayed in the first three rows of Table 3. They are determined based on

statutory values or values taken from the literature as follows.


With regard to the demand structure, we fix  to be the total sales across all firms (as reported

in the ASI and NSS) in a particular industry as a fraction of the total sales in the economy. This

yields values of 0.216, 0.357, and 0.427 for agriculture and mining, manufacturing, and service

industries respectively. The parameter  = 0.738, capturing (decreasing) returns to scale in the

production function, is calibrated as the average labor share across firms in the ASI and NSS.

The term 1/(1 -  ) measures the elasticity of substitution between male and female workers in

production. We set  = 0.68 for manufacturing based on Acemoglu, Autor and Lyle (2004), and

use the fraction of female workers in male-owned informal firms to identify  for the other two

industries. The implied values (as reported in Table 3) are 0.42 for agriculture and 0.69 for services.

These imply an elasticity of substitution of 1.72, 3.12 and 3.23 between male and female workers

                                                  17
for agriculture, manufacturing and services respectively.16 Lastly, sales tax (t) for each industry j

in region r is taken to be the average tax paid by a formal firm in that industry-region as reported

in the ASI, which is a representative dataset for formal firms in India. As reported in Table 3, the

tax rates we use are between 5-8%, consistent with the sales tax on most products in India during

that period.


Since we normalize mI and mF to be equal to zero, from equations (2) and (5), the difference in

the average firm size in the formal and informal sectors (conditional on entry) for male-owned firms

help us identify , and hence . Similarly, the variance in the log-firm size (conditional on entry)
                                                    2 and  2 respectively. We accordingly estimate
in the informal and formal sectors help us identify x     

, and the parameters of the productivity distribution for entrepreneurs in each industry () from

their counterparts in the data using: (i) average firm size; and (ii) variance in firm size of male- and

female-owned firms in the formal and informal sectors. We employ a Simulated Minimum Distance

(SMD) estimator, to minimize the distance between the simulated and actual moments in the data.


Having estimated the above parameters, we back out the fixed costs of entry and registration ()

from the zero-profit conditions in (7).


The hiring distortions () consist of two sets. The first set includes the distortions facing female

entrepreneurs (relative to male) in hiring workers in the informal and formal sectors, i.e., f I and

f F respectively. To identify these distortions, we compare the average firm size of male-owned

to the average size of female-owned firms in the informal and formal sectors, conditional on entry

(equations (2) and (5)). The second set of distortions includes the distortions entrepreneurs face
                                 f    f     f                  f    m -1/(1- ) be the ratio of female
in hiring female workers, i.e., {mF , f I , f F }. Let Rgs = (wgs /wgs )

to male workers hired by an entrepreneur g in sector s. From equations (1) and (4), this ratio of

female to male workers hired by a male- and female-owned firm in the informal and formal sector
                  f . Specifically, R               f   -1/(1- ) , R /R           f -1/(1- )
helps us identify gs                 mF /RmI = (1 + mF )            fI  mI = (1 + f I )      ,
                     f -1/(1- )
and Rf F /RmF = (1 + f F)       .


Appendix D provides the precise equations used and a more detailed discussion of which moments
  16
    As an independent validation of our approach, the  estimates for agriculture are consistent with Udry
(1996).

                                                   18
in the data identify which parameters.




5     Results

Productivity distribution and monitoring costs: Table 3 reports the estimates for the
                           2 ,  2 } and informality penalty ( ), which are estimated separately for
productivity distribution {x   

each industry j . Column 1-3 report results across industries for 1998 while columns 4-6 report

results for 2005. The size-based penalty of operating in the informal sector () ranges from 1.05 to

1.99 in 1998, and from 1.01 to 1.05 in 2005. The decrease in 2005 (among other things) is consistent

with the increase in the share of informal firms between the two rounds, as discussed earlier. In

Appendix C.2, we discuss how these estimates relate to size-based penalties (such as the probability

of detection, etc.).



Fixed costs of entry and formalization: We now turn to the fixed costs of entry and
formalization, reported in Table 4. Column 1 reports the values for 1998, column 2 reports the

values for 2005, and column 3 reports the difference between the first two columns. We estimate

these fixed costs separately for male and female entrepreneurs, and separately for each industry (j ),

region (r), and year (t). To make meaningful comparisons, we normalize the entry costs for a male

entrepreneur in 1998 to have mean 1, so that relative comparisons across gender and over time can

then be easily made.


As reported in the table, in 1998, female-owned firms faced on average 2.4 times the entry costs

of male-owned firms. We find a sizeable reduction in entry costs for both genders over time, with

those for female-owned firms declining almost twice as much as for male-owned firms. Specifically,

entry costs declined by 23% for male entrepreneurs and by 44% for female entrepreneurs. However,

despite this significant decline, entry-costs for female entrepreneurs were still 1.75 times those of

male-owned firms in 2005 (column 2). Formalization costs were almost twice as large for female

relative to male entrepreneurs in 1998. Despite the drastic reduction of formalization costs for both

genders (23% for male and 39% for female entrepreneurs according to column 3), they remained

                                                 19
almost 1.5 times higher for female relative to male entrepreneurs in 2005 (column 2). Overall,

these patterns suggest that while significant progress has been made over time, a wide gender gap

remains as high fixed costs of entry and formalization continue to excessively penalize women. This

resonates with the findings of Hyland, Djankov and Goldberg (2020), who report a similar pattern

in their investigation of a broad set of gendered laws across countries.


The average numbers reported in Table 4 mask considerable heterogeneity across industries and

Indian states, as well as over time. Using the 2005 estimates, we plot for each industry-region pair,

the ratio of female to male entry costs, i.e., Ef I /EmI . A ratio that is less than 1 indicates that female

entrepreneurs face lower entry costs than their male counterparts, while a ratio greater than 1 would

indicate the opposite. Figures 2(a) and 2(b) reveal substantial heterogeneity across industries as

well as across states within an industry. Figure 2(a) shows that for almost all regions and industries,

the ratio of female to male entry costs is greater than 1, with women facing more than three times

the entry costs of men in some cases. Figure 2(b) breaks down the distribution across industries

(i.e., shows the ratio of female to male entry costs across states within each industry). We see that

women face barriers across all industries. For formalization costs, women face around around 1.5

times the formalization costs of men in 2005 on average, as discussed in Table 4 earlier. However,

this ratio is greater than 3 in some industry-regions (Figure 2(c)), and seems particularly high in

manufacturing (Figure 2(d)).


Figures 3(a) and 3(b) show the variation in women's relative entry and formalization costs (described

earlier) across states in 2005. We see a stark pattern: relative to the southern states, the central

and northern states have higher entry, and in many cases, formalization costs for women. These

patterns are consistent with the geographical differences highlighted by Evans (2020).


Lastly, Figure 3(c), shows how the fixed costs have changed for male and female entrepreneurs

between 1998 and 2005. Figure 3(c) shows a box plot with the 25-75th percentile and the median

reported within the box, and with the intervals indicating the range. The substantial reduction in

entry costs between the two years for both male and female entrepreneurs is evident. For women, the

reductions are largest in agriculture (around 70%) and smallest in services. Median formalization

costs decreased for both men and women across all industries as well, except possibly for services,

                                                    20
where there is large variation for women.



Frictions in hiring workers: For each industry j , region r, and year t, we quantify two types
of barriers that distort firms' hiring decisions. First, f s is the additional cost of hiring a worker for

a female entrepreneur in sector s relative to a male entrepreneur. We remind the reader that we

have normalized ms = 0. Accordingly, the marginal cost faced by female entrepreneurs (relative
                                                                       f
to male entrepreneurs) is expressed in relative terms as 1 + f s . 1 + mF is the additional marginal

cost incurred by a male entrepreneur in hiring a female worker in the formal sector relative to the
                                                                     f                       f
informal sector (again, we remind the reader that we have normalized mI = 0). Similarly, 1 + f s

is the additional marginal cost incurred by women entrepreneurs in hiring female workers (relative

to male entrepreneurs) in sector s.

As shown in Table 5, women entrepreneurs in the informal sector faced a 2.46 times higher cost per

worker relative to their male counterparts in 1998. Although this cost was reduced by 24% by 2005

(column 3), the cost of hiring a worker for informal women entrepreneurs was still approximately

double that for male entrepreneurs in 2005. In the formal sector, the marginal cost of hiring a

worker was 2.9 times higher for female entrepreneurs as compared to their male counterparts in

1998. Despite a 28% reduction (column 3), female entrepreneurs still paid more than twice to hire

a worker in the formal sector compared to male-owned firms in 2005.

As with the fixed costs, hiring frictions facing women exhibit substantial heterogeneity across indus-

tries, Indian states, and time. Figures 4(a) and 4(b) show the variation in the excess hiring barriers

facing female-owned firms in the informal sector, while figures 4(c) and 4(d) show the variation in

the formal sector. A ratio greater than 1 implies female-owned firms face a higher marginal cost

in that sector, compared to male-owned firms. From figures 4(a) and 4(c), we see that this is true

almost across all industry-regions (ratio is greater than 1), and especially pronounced in informal

and formal services sector as well as the formal agricultural sector.

Turning to the gender composition of hired workers, the estimates indicate that this is the only area

in which female entrepreneurs have an advantage, and more so in the informal sector. According to

Table 5, female entrepreneurs in the informal sector incurred 4% (9%) lower costs to hire a female

                                                   21
(relative to male) worker in 1998 (2005), relative to male entrepreneurs. This advantage is still

pervasive, but muted in the formal sector, where though the average is 1 in 2005, the median is

less than 1. Figures 5(a)-5(c) further examine the heterogeneity in this hiring barrier, i.e., in the
    f
1 + f s across industries and states. Of special note is that the advantage for female entrepreneurs

in hiring women (relative to men) in the informal sector is quite substantial, over 15-20% in some

industry-regions. This advantage is also present in all cases in the formal sector, except for the

agricultural sector in a few states.


The comparative advantage that female entrepreneurs have in hiring female workers may reflect

social norms and attitudes. For example, women workers may feel more comfortable working for

other women; or, to the extent that women face resistance from male members of their household if

they seek work outside the home, such resistance may be less pronounced in cases where they work

for other women.


Finally, in Figure 5(d), we show the change of 1 + f s across the three industries for both the

informal and formal sectors. The relative barriers facing women in both the formal and informal

sectors have decreased in agriculture and manufacturing, but not as much in services. Turning to
                                                                                  f
the relative barriers women entrepreneurs face in hiring women workers, i.e., 1 + f s , we do not

see any substantial changes at the median (see Figure 5(e)), which is intuitive, since women-owned

firms already had an advantage in hiring women in the informal sector, as discussed previously.


To summarize the above discussion, these results suggest that while the excess barriers faced by

female entrepreneurs have been reduced over time, there nevertheless remains a substantial gender

gap across all industries and regions. The only exception is in the hiring of female workers, where

female entrepreneurs appear to have an advantage.



Model fit: Tables 6 and 7 show the fit of the model for the 2005 data17 . We start by discussing
the model fit for the four types of firms, namely male-owned and female-owned firms in the formal

and informal sectors. We focus on three types of moments, namely the fraction of firms, the fraction
  17
    We show the fit only for 2005 since this is the data that we use to evaluate counterfactual policies in the
next section.


                                                      22
of workers, and the average firm size (number of hired workers) in each group. We accordingly have

a total of 12 moments. Since these moments are generated at the industry-region level for each

firm type, we report the average and standard deviation of each of these moments across industry-

regions in Table 6. The model fits the data moments across all categories very well. In Table 7,

we aggregate the data and report for same moments, the average across sectors or gender. Again,

the table indicates that the model fits the data well. Figure A2 in the appendix suggests a good fit

across all disaggregate moments, which are at the industry-region for each firm type.




6     Impact of Affirmative Action Policies

Apart from quantifying the various types of barriers faced by female entrepreneurs, the advantage

of the outlined theoretical framework is that it allows us to evaluate the aggregate effects of coun-

terfactual affirmative action policies (in general equilibrium). In particular, we evaluate the impact

of four such policies that sequentially eliminate the excess barriers faced by female entrepreneurs

on both the extensive (i.e., entry and formalization) and intensive (i.e., expansion through hiring)

margins. This exercise allows us to identify the barriers that are most consequential for productivity

and welfare. We consider the following scenarios that eliminate:



(i) Excess formalization costs: In this scenario, we eliminate excess formalization costs faced by

women entrepreneurs, i.e., we set Ef R = min{EmR , Ef R }.

(ii) Excess fixed costs: We eliminate all excess fixed costs (both entry and formalization) for

female entrepreneurs, i.e., in addition to the previous policy, we also set Ef I = min{EmI , Ef I }.

(iii) Excess hiring barriers: Under this policy, we eliminate excess hiring barriers on the inten-

sive margin, but not the fixed costs, i.e, {EgI , EgR } are set to their baseline values, but we set
                       f         f
f s = min{f s , 0} and f s = min{f s , 0}, for s = {I, F }.

(iv) All excess barriers: Lastly, we eliminate all excess fixed costs as well as all hiring barriers.


We examine the effects of these policies on various outcomes, such as the fraction of female-owned

firms (in both the formal and informal sectors), the entry thresholds (and hence average produc-

                                                  23
tivity), and real wages for male and female workers. Finally, we examine their impact on aggregate

productivity and real income. For each region, aggregate productivity is measured as the average

productivity of its firms across industries. Given our preference structure, real income is a natural

candidate for measuring welfare. Aggregate consumption (or utility) is given by: C =             
                                                                                              j cj j   = I/P ,

where P =                  j
              j (j /pj )       is normalized to 1. Therefore, compared to the baseline, C0 , the percentage

change in utility in any counterfactual scenario will be equivalent to the percentage change in real

income.



Removing excess formalization costs: We begin by discussing the impact of removing
excess formalization costs for female-owned firms. From Figure 6(a), this policy increases the

median fraction of female-owned firms in the formal sector from less than 1% to 2%. However, the

median fraction of female-owned firms in the informal sector or in the economy as a whole does not

change. This policy has little effect on the median real wage (Figure 6(b)), productivity (Figures

6(c), 6(d), and 7(a)) or welfare (Figure 7(b)).



Removing all excess fixed costs (entry and formalization): From section 5, we know
that entry costs are substantially higher for female- than for male-owned firms. We therefore

examine the impact of removing all excess fixed costs (both entry and formalization costs) for

female-owned firms. From Figure 6(a), this policy increases the median fraction of female-owned

firms in the informal (formal) sector to 13% (2.1%). The median fraction of female-owned firms in

the economy also doubles to 12%. Real wages for female workers also increase by almost 1.5 times

relative to those of male workers (Figure 6(b)).


Turning to productivity, while the average productivity of male entrepreneurs changes very little

(compared to the baseline), the average productivity of female entrepreneurs decreases by 13.2%

percent. Though counter-intuitive at first, these effects can be perfectly rationalized by Figure

6(d), which shows, for the baseline as well as for all counterfactual scenarios, the productivity of the

marginal entrepreneur, i.e., the entrepreneur who makes zero profits in expectation, after paying the

fixed cost of entry and formalization. To make the comparison easier, we normalize the productivity


                                                       24
of the marginal male entrepreneur to be 1 at baseline. It is interesting to note that at baseline,

the marginal woman entrepreneur has to be almost twice as productive as her male counterpart.

The removal of the excess fixed costs allows more women to enter, presenting male entrepreneurs

with more competition. Accordingly, the productivity of the marginal female (male) entrepreneur

decreases (increases). This implies that the average female (male) entrepreneur is now less (more)

productive. Moreover, the set of female entrepreneurs who now enter are more productive than

their male counterparts, which translates into aggregate productivity gains, as shown in Figure 7.

The median increase in the average productivity is 2.2% across all Indian states (with a 25th-75th

percentile increase of 2.1-2.4%), and median welfare increases by 0.5% (with a 25th-75th percentile

increase by 0.4-0.6%).



Removing excess hiring frictions: As discussed in the previous section, hiring frictions for
female-owned firms are substantial and quantitatively important, in both the formal and informal

sectors. Therefore, we now construct a counterfactual where we do not change the baseline fixed

costs, but remove the excess hiring costs for female-owned firms. One of the most notable impacts of

this policy is that it helps female-owned firms enter the formal sector (Figure 6(a)). The fraction of

informal (formal) firms that are female-owned increases to 34% (44%). The share of female-owned

firms in the economy increases to 38%. Further, real wages for both male and female workers

increase substantially by 11% and 27% respectively (Figure 6(b)), suggesting that female workers

gain relatively more than male workers. Finally, the average productivity of male-owned (female-

owned) firms increases (decreases) by 8.1% (26%). This translates into a 8.9% median increase

across regions in the average productivity (with the 25th-75th percentile increasing by 8.5-10.15%),

and a 12.25% increase in aggregate welfare (with the 25th-75th percentile increasing by 9.5-15.8%).

Put together, these results suggest that removing hiring barriers implies substantial gains in both

productivity and welfare. These gains are higher than those realized by removing excess fixed costs.



Removing all excess barriers: The last counterfactual we consider is one where we remove
all excess barriers for female entrepreneurs, both on the extensive and intensive margins (though

we do not change anything in cases where female entrepreneurs have an advantage over their male

                                                 25
counterparts). Removing all excess costs implies that female-owned firms now form a substantial

share of firms in both the informal and formal sectors, with 56% of firms in the economy now owned

by women (Figure 6(a)). Further, real wages for both male and female workers increase substantially

by 15.4% and 29.8% respectively (Figure 6(b)), which implies that female workers gain almost twice

as much as male workers.


The large wage gains for female relative to male workers arise in our model because the supply

of female workers is fixed. Hence, as demand for them increases (due to the increased entry of

female entrepreneurs), female wages have to increase by more than male wages to match demand

with supply. Our primary motivation for this modeling choice was the observation that while the

number of female-owned firms increased during this time period (as discussed in section 3), female

labor force participation in India has not changed (and if anything, has slightly declined). A more

general model would allow for the supply of female workers to increase in response to higher wages.

While this supply response would mitigate the wage gains we currently estimate, we note that it

would result in an increase in female labor force participation which would imply additional welfare

gains for women and the economy as a whole. Our stylized model misses this positive labor force

participation effect while exaggerating the wage response. Since these two biases go in opposite

directions, it is therefore possible that the welfare gains in a more general model would not be

substantially different from the ones we currently estimate. Of course, we cannot assess the net

effect without developing a more general framework, an endeavor we leave to future research.


The average productivity of male-owned (female-owned) firms increases (decreases) by 10.4% (33%)

Figure 6(c). However, the marginal female entrepreneurs who now enter the economy are on average

more productive than the male entrepreneurs who exit (Figure 6(d)). This implies that overall, there

is an increase in the average productivity of the economy (Figure 7(a)). The median increase across

regions in the average productivity of a firm is 7% (with the 25th-75th percentile increasing by

6.6-7.9%), and aggregate welfare increases by 17.7% (with the 25th-75th percentile increasing by

15.2-22.1%).




                                                26
Discussion: The counterfactual scenarios considered above lead to a few key policy-relevant
insights. First, the barriers faced by women entrepreneurs are substantial, both on the intensive and

extensive margins. Their removal has quantitatively meaningful impacts on aggregate productivity

and welfare. On the extensive margin, policies targeting removal of excess entry costs, rather than

formalization costs, have larger effects. But policies that target the intensive margin have a far

greater impact than those targeting the extensive margin. Second, removing excess barriers not

only helps female entrepreneurs, it also benefits female workers more relative to male workers.

This can have potentially important implications in the Indian setting, where female labor force

participation is low. Third, the counterfactual scenarios highlight the presence of low productivity

male-owned firms, who operate in the economy only because they do not face competition from

female-owned firms. The latter cannot enter or grow post-entry because they face excessive barriers.

Removing these barriers results in the marginal (low-productivity) male entrepreneurs exiting the

market, allowing for the marginal (higher-productivity) female entrepreneurs to enter. Put together,

affirmative action policies that eliminate all excess barriers result in substantial aggregate gains in

productivity and real income.




7     Conclusion

We conclude with some final thoughts. Our results demonstrate that eliminating excess barriers

to entrepreneurship facing women is beneficial not only to women, but to the entire economy.

However, they do not speak to the question of which specific policies would lead to elimination of

such barriers. Barriers at both the extensive and intensive margins are modeled as "wedges" in

our framework, and are identified based on the data patterns in the Economic Census related to

entrepreneurship. Further research needs to relate the estimated wedges to actual policies to assess

which interventions are most effective in reducing them. The main challenge is that several of the

barriers women face are not due to legal constraints, but to norms and attitudes that are more

difficult to measure. Combining case studies of specific interventions to empower women with our

framework can be a fruitful approach towards assessing not only whether such interventions were


                                                  27
successful, but also their aggregate impacts.




                                                28
References
Acemoglu, Daron, David H Autor, and David Lyle, "Women, War, and Wages: The Effect

  of Female Labor Supply on the Wage Structure at Mid-century," Journal of Political Economy,

  2004, 112 (3), 497­551.

Altonji, Joseph G and Rebecca M Blank, "Race and Gender in the Labor Market," Handbook

  of Labor Economics, 1999, 3, 3143­3259.

Ashraf, Nava, Natalie Bau, Nathan Nunn, and Alessandra Voena, "Bride Price and Female

  Education," Journal of Political Economy, 2020, 128 (2), 591­641.

Beck, Thorsten and Mohammad Hoseini, "Informality and Access to Finance: Evidence from

  India," Center Discussion Paper Series, 2014.

Bertrand, Marianne, "New Perspectives on Gender," Handbook of Labor Economics, 2011, 4,

  1543­1590.

Blau, Francine D., Marianne A. Ferber, and Anne E. Winkler, "The Economics of Women,

  Men and Work," Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Pearson, 7th Edition, 2014.

Cuberes, David and Marc Teignier, "Gender Inequality and Economic Growth: A Critical

  Review," Journal of International Development, 2014, 26 (2), 260­276.

   and    , "Aggregate Effects of Gender Gaps in the Labor Market: A Quantitative Estimate,"

  Journal of Human Capital, 2016, 10 (1), 1­32.

Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez de Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer,

  "The regulation of entry," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2002, 117 (1), 1­37.

Evans, Alice, "Why are North and South India so Different on Gender?," 2020. https://www.

  draliceevans.com/post/why-are-southern-north-eastern-indian-states-more-gender-equal.

Fernández, Raquel, "Cultural Change as Learning: The Evolution of Female Labor Force Par-

  ticipation over a Century," American Economic Review, 2013, 103 (1), 472­500.


                                              29
  , Alessandra Fogli, and Claudia Olivetti, "Mothers and Sons: Preference Formation and

  Female Labor Force Dynamics," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2004, 119 (4), 1249­1299.

   and    , "Culture: An Empirical Investigation of Beliefs, Work, and Fertility," American Eco-

  nomic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2009, 1 (1), 146­77.

Fletcher, Erin, Rohini Pande, and Charity Maria Troyer Moore, "Women and Work in

  India: Descriptive Evidence and a Review of Potential Policies," 2019.

Govt. of India, "Comprehensive Policy Package for Small Scale Industries," 2000. http://www.

  dcmsme.gov.in/MSME-DO/policypkg.htm.

Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Peter J Klenow, "Misallocation and manufacturing TFP in China and

  India," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2009, 124 (4), 1403­1448.

  , Erik Hurst, Charles I Jones, and Peter J Klenow, "The Allocation of Talent and US

  Economic Growth," Econometrica, 2019, 87 (5), 1439­1474.

Hyland, Marie, Simeon Djankov, and Pinelopi Koujianou Goldberg, "Gendered Laws and

  Women in the Workforce," American Economic Review: Insights, 2020.

Jayachandran, Seema, "Microentrepreneurship in developing countries," 2020.

Lahoti, Rahul and Hema Swaminathan, "Economic Development and Women's Labor Force

  Participation in India," Feminist Economics, 2016, 22 (2), 168­195.

LaPorta, R. and A. Shleifer, "The Unofficial Economy and Economic Development," Brooking

  Papers on Economic Activity, 2008, 105 (3), 473­522.

   and    , "Informality and Development," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2014, 28 (3), 109­

  126.

Melitz, Marc J, "The Impact of Trade on Intra-industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry

  Productivity," Econometrica, 2003, 71 (6), 1695­1725.




                                               30
Nikaido, Yuko, Jesim Pais, and Mandira Sarma, "What Hinders and What Enhances Small

  Enterprises' Access to Formal Credit in India?," Review of Development Finance, 2015, 5 (1),

  43­52.

Quinn, Simon and Christopher Woodruff, "Experiments and Entrepreneurship in Developing

  Countries," Annual Review of Economics, 2019, 11, 225­248.

Restuccia, Diego and Richard Rogerson, "The causes and costs of misallocation," Journal of

  Economic Perspectives, 2017, 31 (3), 151­74.

Udry, Christopher, "Gender, Agricultural Production, and the Theory of the Household," Journal

  of Political Economy, 1996, 104 (5), 1010­1046.

Ulyssea, Gabriel, "Firms, Informality, and Development: Theory and Evidence from Brazil,"

  American Economic Review, 2018, 108 (8), 2015­47.

  , "Informality: Causes and Consequences for Development," Annual Review of Economics, 2020,

  12 (1), 525­546.

World Bank, World Development Report 2012 : Gender Equality and Development 2012. Wash-

  ington, DC.

World Bank, "World Bank Enterprise Surveys," 2020. Data from http://www.enterprisesurveys.

  org.




                                                 31
Tables and Figures

                                  Table 1: Summary statistics

   Firm type                Total firms                Firm size        Frac. Female Emp.
                          1998       2005           1998      2005      1998      2005
                           (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)      (5)         (6)
   Male, Informal     11.58            35.15    3.29           3.13   0.19           0.10
                    (92.75%)         (90.71%) (3.68)         (2.35) (0.25)          (0.21)
   Male, Formal        0.08             0.17    77.47         60.83   0.21           0.24
                     (0.65%)          (0.43%) (438.82)      (153.52) (0.25)         (0.29)
   Female, Informal    0.82             3.42    2.96          2.92    0.57           0.75
                     (6.57%)          (8.83%)  (2.98)        (2.25) (0.33)          (0.37)
   Female, Formal     0.003             0.01   97.87         62.44    0.45           0.59
                     (0.02%)          (0.03%) (1118.2)      (109.24) (0.37)         (0.41)
   Total                  12.48        38.75
     Notes: A firm is classified as "informal" if it is either not registered with the govt. or
     does not have to pay taxes (fewer than 10 workers or fewer than 20 workers without elec-
     tricity), and "formal" otherwise. Numbers in columns (1)-(2) are reported in millions.
     Percentage of the total are reported in parentheses below. Firm size in columns (3)
     and (4) report the average employees within a firm. Frac. of Female Emp. in columns
     (5) and (6) are the fraction of female employees within a firm. Standard deviations are
     reported in parentheses below.



                                  Table 2: List of parameters

Parameters     Level                     Details
               Industry              Share of each industry in consumer demand.
               Economy               Returns to scale in production
                                      1
               Industry              1-
                                         is elasticity of substitution b/w male and female workers
               Industry              Size-based penalty for being in the informal sector
           t   Industry-State        Average sales tax
    2    2
  {x ,  }      Industry-Gender       Productivity distribution
 {EI , ER }    Industry-Gender-State Fixed costs of entry and formalization
        f
 {gs , gs  }   Industry-Gender-State Hiring barriers




                                               32
                                   Table 3: Parameter values

                  Year:             1998                              2005
               Industry:   Agri.   Manfc. Services      Agri.        Manfc. Services
                            (1)       (2)       (3)      (4)          (5)      (6)
                       0.216         0.357     0.427    0.216        0.357    0.427
                       t 0.05         0.07      0.07    0.05          0.07     0.08
                       0.42           0.68      0.69    0.42          0.68     0.69
                       1.99           1.05      1.07    1.01          1.03     1.05
                    x,m 0.01          0.37      0.26    0.13          0.33     0.25
                    x,f 0.46          0.47      0.37    0.26          0.38     0.36
                    ,m 0.23           0.25      0.26    0.22          0.23     0.21
                    ,f 0.18           0.26      0.19    0.19          0.22     0.16
                 Notes: Each row reports the average value for the parameter across
                 regions. Columns (1)-(3) reports the parameter value for each in-
                 dustry in 1998 while columns (4)-(6) report the values for each
                 industry in 2005.



                              Table 4: Estimates for fixed costs

                                       1998    2005        (2)-(1)
                                        (1)     (2)            (3)
                            Normalized Entry Costs (EI ):
                              Male     1.00     0.77      -0.23***
                                      (0.35)   (0.21)
                            Female     2.43     1.35      -1.08***
                                      (1.13)   (0.32)
                            Normalized Formalization Costs (ER ):
                              Male     1.00     0.77      -0.23***
                                      (0.37)   (0.34)
                            Female     1.84     1.13      -0.71***
                                      (1.24)   (0.80)

Notes: Each row reports the average (across industries and regions) value of each parameter with
standard deviations in parentheses below. Entry and registration costs across all firms have been
normalized so that male-owned firms in 1998 have mean 1. Columns (1) and (2) report the value
for 1998 and 2005 respectively. Column (3) reports the difference between columns (2) and (1). *
for p<0.1, ** for p<0.05 and *** for p<0.01.




                                               33
                            Table 5: Estimates for hiring wedges

                                         1998          2005   (2)-(1)
                                          (1)          (2)    (3)
                               1 + f I    2.46      1.87      -0.59***
                                         (0.61)    (0.22)
                              1 + f F     2.88      2.07      -0.81***
                                         (1.28)    (0.63)
                                  f
                              1 + mF      1.00      0.80      -0.21***
                                         (0.35)    (0.28)
                                   f
                               1 + f I    0.96      0.91      -0.05***
                                         (0.04)    (0.04)
                                  f
                              1 + f F     1.07      1.00      -0.07
                                          (0.5)    (0.77)

Notes: Each row reports the average (across industries and regions) value of each parameter with
standard deviations in parentheses below. Columns (1) and (2) report the values for 1998 and
2005 respectively. Column (3) reports the difference between columns (2) and (1). * for p<0.1, **
for p<0.05 and *** for p<0.01.




                                                  34
                                     Table 6: Model Fit I

                             Male entrepreneurs Female entrepreneurs
                             Data      Model     Data      Model
                               (1)           (2)         (3)        (4)
                Panel A: Fraction of firms
                Informal      0.90          0.88        0.09       0.10
                             (0.11)        (0.16)      (0.11)     (0.13)
                Formal        0.01          0.02        0.00       0.00
                             (0.01)        (0.06)      (0.00)     (0.01)
                Panel B: Fraction of workers
                Informal      0.84          0.80        0.08       0.05
                             (0.12)        (0.25)      (0.09)     (0.04)
                Formal        0.08          0.13        0.00       0.01
                             (0.09)        (0.22)      (0.01)     (0.03)
                Panel C: Average firm size
                Informal       3.37          2.95        3.17       2.47
                              (0.48)        (0.84)      (0.52)     (0.64)
                Formal        56.39         54.89       58.97      59.25
                             (17.10)       (29.30)     (36.44)    (40.53)
                  Notes: Each row reports the average value for the param-
                  eter with the standard deviation in parentheses.




                                 Table 7: Model Fit II

          Frac. of firms        Frac. of workers                Average firm size
        Informal Female        Informal Female          Informal Formal Male Female
                   owned                  owned                            owned owned
          (1)        (2)             (3)       (4)        (5)       (6)      (7)      (8)
 Data     0.99       0.09        0.91          0.08       3.32     56.64     3.74     3.43
         (0.01)     (0.11)      (0.09)         (0.1)     (0.45)   (17.68)   (0.81)   (0.63)
Model     0.98       0.10        0.86          0.06       2.89     59.35     4.52     3.02
         (0.06)     (0.13)      (0.24)        (0.06)     (0.84)   (56.07)   (5.05)   (2.43)
 Notes: Each row reports the average value with the standard deviation in parentheses.



                                               35
             Figure 1: Share of women entrepreneurs, employees and managers

                            (a) Fraction of female entrepreneurs across industries




                              (b) Fraction of women employees and managers




Notes: Both figures use the World Bank Enterprise Surveys. Figure 1(a) plots the average fraction
of female-owned firms across 25 sectors. Figure 1(b) plots the fraction of women employees and
the probability that the top manager in a firm is a female.



                                                     36
           Figure 2: Excess entry barriers for female entrepreneurs across industries




        (a) Ratio of female-male entry costs             (b) Ratio of female-male entry costs within industries




     (c) Ratio of female-male formalization costs        (d) Ratio of female-male form. costs within industries

Notes: Figures 2(a) and 2(c) show the distribution of the female to male ratios of entry and
formalization costs using the 2005 data. Figures 2(b) and 2(d) then show the breakdown within
industry across states. Green corresponds to a ratio less than 1 (favorable for females), pink
represents a ratio between 1-2, and red represents a ratio greater than 2.




                                                    37
          Figure 3: Excessive entry barriers for women entrepreneurs across states




               (a) Relative entry costs                                   (b) Relative formalization costs




                                  (c) Changes in fixed costs between 1998 and 2005

Notes: Figures 3(a)-3(b) shows the distribution of excess entry and formalization costs faced by
female entrepreneurs, i.e., Ef I /EmI and Ef R /EmR across Indian states in 2005. Figure 3(c) plots
the 25-75th percentile with the median reported inside the box. Blue shows the changes for
male-owned firms, while red shows the changes for38 female-owned firms.
                 Figure 4: Hiring barriers in the formal and informal sectors




                  (a) 1 + f I                                    (b) (1 + f I ) across industries




                       (c) 1 + f F                          (d) (1 + f F ) across industries

Notes: Figures 4(a) and 4(c) show the distribution of hiring barriers faced by women in the
informal and formal sector relative to men in 2005. Figures 4(b) and 4(d) show the breakdown
within industry across states. Green corresponds to a ratio less than 1 (favorable for females),
pink to a ratio between 1-2, and red to a ratio>2.




                                                39
            Figure 5: Hiring barriers of hiring female (relative to male) workers




                                               f
                                       (a) 1 + f I




                          f                                             f
                  (b) 1 + f F
                                                               (c) (1 + f F
                                                                            ) across industries




                                                                                      f
            (d) Change in (1 + f s )                               (e) Change in (1 + f s
                                                                                          )

Notes: Figures 5(a) and 5(b) show the distribution of hiring barriers faced by women-owned firms
in hiring women workers in the informal and formal sectors respectively in 2005. Figure 5(c) shows
the breakdown within industries across states and figures 5(d)-5(e) show box plots of the changes
over time with the 25-75th percentile shown in the box, and the median reported inside the box.

                                                     40
   Figure 6: Impact of affirmative action policies on female entrepreneurship and prices




             (a) Fraction of female firms                          (b) Real wages




           (c) Average productivity changes                 (d) Normalized entry thresholds

Notes: The above figures report the median impact of four affirmative action policies on
male-owned and female-owned firms. Figure 6(a) plots the number of female firms as a fraction of
informal, formal, and total firms. Figure 6(c) reports the percentage change in the average
productivity of a firm of gender g for each of the counterfactuals as compared to the baseline.
Figure 6(b) shows the percentage change in real wages for male and female workers as compared
to the baseline.




                                              41
         Figure 7: Impact of affirmative action policies on productivity and welfare




          (a) Aggregate productivity changes                 (b) Aggregate welfare changes

Notes: Figures 7(a) and 7(b) report the percentage changes in aggregate productivity and welfare
(measured by real income) for each counterfactual policy as compared to the baseline. We report
the median change along with the 25-75th percentile range in the shaded area around the median.




                                               42
A   Appendix Tables and Figures

      Table A1: Total firm size and composition across gender and sectors

                                      Log(L)              Frac. female emp.
                               1998         2005           1998        2005
                                (1)            (2)          (3)           (4)
       Panel A: Without industry fixed effects
                  Female     -0.0162     -0.0604***      0.298***     0.587***
                            (0.0176)      (0.00856)      (0.0138)      (0.0145)
                  Formal    2.448***      2.415***      0.0647***     0.149***
                            (0.0328)       (0.0308)     (0.00941)     (0.00972)
       Female × Formal       0.234*       0.195***      -0.122***     -0.262***
                             (0.141)       (0.0328)      (0.0401)      (0.0277)
                       R2     0.210          0.18          0.34          0.457
       Panel B: With industry fixed effects
                  Female     -0.0123      -0.113***      0.233***      0.524***
                            (0.0135)      (0.00749)      (0.00956)     (0.0112)
                  Formal    2.132***      2.221***      0.0428***     0.108***
                            (0.0340)       (0.0355)      (0.00818)    (0.00918)
       Female × Formal       0.329**      0.279***      -0.0920***    -0.207***
                             (0.166)       (0.0349)       (0.0282)     (0.0271)
                       R2     0.338         0.256          0.472         0.509
                       N     12.48m        38.75m         12.48m        38.75m
          Male, Informal      1.007          1.02          0.19           0.1
           Firm controls       Yes             Yes          Yes           Yes
             District FE       Yes             Yes          Yes           Yes
         Notes: Female and Formal are dummy variables that take the value 1 if
         the firm is female-owned or if it is in the formal sector and 0 otherwise.
         Firm controls used are: whether the firm has access to power; dummy
         variables for different forms of financial access; whether the firm is
         primarily agriculture-based; and whether the firm is in the rural or
         urban area. Industry fixed effects are at the four-digit level using the
         NIC98 for 1998 and NIC04 for 2005. Standard errors are clustered
         at the district level. * p< 0.1, ** p<0.05 and *** p< 0.01 level of
         significance.




                                          43
                       Figure A1: Fraction of formal firms and firm size

                                              (a) 1998




                                              (b) 2005




Notes: The above graphs plot the fraction of formal firms within each bin of firm size. Firm size is
categorized into 11-20 workers, 21-40 workers, 41-60 workers, and more than 60 workers. Graph
(a) plots the distribution in 1998, while plot (b) plots the distribution in 2005.

                                                44
                Figure A2: Model fit across firm types, industries and regions




                (a) Fraction of firms                            (b) Fraction of workers




                                         (c) Average firm size

Notes: Figures A2(a), A2(b) and A2(c) show the fit of the model with the data for the fraction of
firms, fraction of workers, and average firm size for the four types of firms, namely: male and
female firms in the formal and informal sectors. The color shows the industry, where red is
agriculture, blue is manufacturing and green is services. Each point is therefore the data/model
pair for a firm type in an industry and region. The dotted line is the 45-degree line of equality.
The horizontal axis shows the data, while the vertical axis shows the model.




                                                 45
B      Firm ownership in the Enterprise Surveys

We use the World Bank's Enterprise Surveys World Bank (2020), henceforth WBES, to compare the

characteristics of male-owned and female-owned firms. As discussed earlier, the WBES are detailed

firm-level surveys of a representative sample of the economy's private sector. In particular, they

have detailed questions with respect to the output and revenue of firms, along with the composition

of their employment, interactions with the government (inspections, bribes, taxes, etc.) and lastly,

the subjective evaluation of the respondent on the obstacles faced by the firm. We use a sample of

around 140k firms across 141 countries and 13 years (2006-2018). We report the difference across

male-owned and female-owned firms. We define a firm as female-owned if a majority of its owners

are women.

To begin, in table B1, we report the characteristics of these firms and examine whether they differ

based on the gender of the owner. For each charactersitic y , the average value for male and female-

owned firms is reported in columns (2) and (3). Column (4) reports the raw difference between

these means, while column (5) reports the coefficient  from the following regression:


                               yict = c + t + s + Fi + Xict + ict                                     (9)


where: yi is the characteristic of interest for a firm i in country c in year t (such as sales, wage bill,

etc.); c , t , s are country, year and sector fixed effects respectively; Fi is a dummy variable for

whether the firm is female-owned or not; Xi are a set of firm-level controls (such as firm age). We

cluster the standard errors at the country-level.  , our coefficient of interest is reported in column

(5) or table B1. Lastly, for a better interpretation of the values in columns (5) and (6), we report

them as a percent of the male-owned firm average (column (2)) in parentheses below.

We now turn to interpreting the results in table B1, where it is evident from column (4) that

female-owned firms are smaller than male-owned firms along almost every dimension. First, they

have around 5-8% lower sales and wages, 8% less number of establishments and 32% lesser workers.

They are also around 30% less likely to take out formal loans, spend 11% more time on dealing

with bureaucracies and 33% less likely to have secured a government contract in the last year. As

                                                   46
reported in column (6), these results are robust after controlling unobservable differences across

countries, sectors and over time, and the differences remain substantial in magnitude. One striking

difference between these two types of firms however is the fraction of female workers is 17.9 pp (over

70%) higher in female-owned firms, while the probability that a firm with a top manager (not the

owner) as a female is almost 45 pp (over 700%) more likely to be a female-owned firm.


                Table B1: Differences in male-owned and female-owned firms

                                                         Male       Female                (3)-(2)
                                              N         Mean/SE    Mean/SE         Raw        Coefficient
                                             (1)          (2)         (3)           (4)             (5)
                 Sales (USD millions)      101024         2.773      2.625      -0.147***      -0.547***
                                                         [0.025]    [0.053]       [-5.3%]      [-13.44%]
            Wage bill (USD millions)        98847         0.268      0.246      -0.022***     -0.0498***
                                                         [0.002]    [0.005]      [-8.21%]      [-12.15%]

           Number of Establishments        109490         1.685      1.551       -0.134***        -0.135
                                                         [0.014]    [0.026]       [-7.95%]       [-8.1%]
                         Total workers     118436        55.024     37.558      -17.466***     -21.74***
                                                         [1.079]    [1.753]      [-31.74%]     [-22.95%]
                 Frac. Female workers      118392         0.249      0.428        0.179***      0.124***
                                                         [0.001]    [0.002]       [71.89%]      [55.86%]
     Frac. With top manager female          96373         0.062      0.509        0.447***     0.455***
                                                         [0.001]    [0.004]      [720.97%]       [700%]

                   Frac. Formal loans      106579         0.112      0.079      -0.032***       -0.00784
                                                         [0.001]    [0.001]     [-28.57%]       [-6.17%]
    Pct. Time spent on bureaucracy         110131         0.090      0.080      -0.010***      0.0142***
                                                         [0.001]    [0.001]     [-11.11%]       [13.65%]
 Secured govt. contract in last year?      101571         0.142      0.096      -0.046***      -0.0397**
                                                         [0.001]    [0.002]     [-32.39%]      [-22.69%]
   Notes: The mean for every variable is reported for male-owned firms in column (2) and female-owned
   firms in column (3). The standard errors are reported in parentheses for both these columns. Column
   (4) reports the raw difference between columns (3) and (2), while column (5) reports the regression
   coefficient for the regression. The coefficient as a percentage of the male-owned mean in column
   (2) are reported in parentheses below. All regressions have country, year and sector fixed effects.
   Standard errors are clustered at the country-level. * p< 0.1, ** p<0.05 and *** p< 0.01 level of
   significance.




                                                   47
C      Mathematical Proofs


C.1     Incumbent firm decisions

Informal Sector


The problem of a firm with productivity z in the informal sector is given by:


                                 max pzl - wm lm - wf lf - pfe


where  = /. Define:

                                                                    -(1- )
                                                -             -       
                                                1-            1-
                                   wI = wm           + wf


Then we can rewrite the maximization problem as a two-step problem where in the first step, the

firm chooses labor l to maximize profits: max pzl - wl - pfe and then minimizes expenditure on

male and female workers, given this choice of l. Taking the FOC and solving we get:

                                                          1
                                             pz          1-
                                    lI   = ×
                                             w
                                                 
                                   I = 1 -  × pzlI - pfI


Cost minimization in the second stage implies:


                                         min wm lm + wf lf
                                                              1
                                                              
                                                                      
                                         s.t.   lm   +   lf        = lI




                                                     48
Taking the first order conditions and rearranging, we get:


                                   1-        
                                  lg  =         , g  {m, f }
                                             wg
                                                                             
                                                              -            - -
                                   l =   -1 × wm  -1 + wf                      1



                                                                          
                                                                       -  -1
                                                                  =w
                                              w
                                  =
                                             l1-
                                                         1
                                                      - 1-
                                              wg           
                                   lg =                       × l(z )
                                              w



Formal sector


The problem in the formal sector is the same as that in the informal sector, except that a firm earns

(1 - t)p per unit of output sold and there is no size-based monitoring, implying that  = 1. Putting

this together, we have that the optimal firm-size and profits of a firm with productivity z in the

formal sector will be given by:

                                                                      1
                                             (1 - t)pz               1-
                                    lF   = ×
                                                wF
                                                  
                                    F = 1 -  × pzlF - pfF




C.2     Cost function and probability of detection

An alternative way to present the model is to allow for a size-dependent probability of detection

by the government in the informal sector. This implies that larger firms operating in the informal

sector face a penalty for evading taxes. Let  (l) be the probability of detection such that  (0) = 0,

 (l) > 0 and liml  (l) = 1. The firm's maximization problem can be written as:


                                     max(1 -  (l)) × pzl - wl
                                         l




                                                        49
                          Figure C1: Probability detection function




Notes: The above graph plots the size-based penalty of operating in the informal sector, as implied
by the model calibration in the paper.


Our baseline profit maximization condition for the informal sector is given by:


                                                1
                                     max l-(1-  ) × pzl - wl
                                         l


                                     1
This implies that:  (l) = 1 - l-(1-  ) . A larger  therefore implies a higher probability of being

detected conditional on the same firm-size (l). From the calibration exercise in the paper, we have

 = 0.738 and  = {1.01, 1.03, 1.05} in 2005. This would imply a size-based penalty function shown

in Figure C1.




                                                50
D      Identification of Model Parameters

Table D1 provides the key relationships used to identify the relevant parameters.



                                       f                                f can be identified
Distortions for hiring female workers (gs ): As evident from the table, gs
by comparing the ratios of female-to-male workers hired across different types of firms. Note that
             f                                  f
we normalize mI = 0. Therefore, RmF /RmI = (1 + mF )-1/(1- ) . Similarly, Rf I /RmI = (1 +
f -1/(1- )                              f -1/(1- )
f I)       and lastly, Rf F /RmF = (1 + f F)       .



                                                                                     2 ,  2 };
Productivity distribution parameters: For each gender g , and a given value of: (i) {x   

(ii) the mass of potential entrants Mg ; (iii) the number of firms in the informal and formal

sectors (NgI and NgF respectively), we can identify the (gender-specific) productivity thresh-

olds x                                                         
      gI and xgF of entering each sector, which are given by: xgF = F
                                                                      -1 (1 - N /M ) and
                                                                               gF g

xgI = F
        -1 (1 - (N
                   gI + NgF )/Mg ). From table D1, the variance of log-labor in each sector can

be given by:

                                                         2
                                                        xI
                                         Var(ln lI ) =
                                                     ( - )2
                                                      2 +    2
                                        Var(ln lF ) = xF
                                                      (1 - )2

      2 = Var(x|x  (x , x )) and  2 = Var(x|x  x ). The observable data moments on the
where xI             I   F       xF             F
                                                    2 ,  2 } for each gender separately.
variance of log-firm size, can be used to identify {x   




Informal sector penalty (): From table D1, note that the average firm size in each sector
(for each firm owned by gender g ) is given by:




                                        1        p            ln xgI
                            ln lgI =      ln  ×           +
                                       1-       wgI           1-
                                        1               p              ln xgF
                            ln lgF =      ln (1 - t) ×             +
                                       1-              wgF              1-


                                                   51
where: ln xgI = E (ln x|x  {xgI  , xgF  }) and ln xgF = E (ln x|x  xF ) is the average firm produc-

tivity on entry into the formal and informal sectors respectively. Therefore, note that the difference

in the log-firm size for male-owned firms in the formal and informal sectors can be used to identify

, and hence , as follows:

                                                                              
                                                                 1-      1 + RmF
  (1 - )ln lmF - (1 - )ln lmI = ln((1 - t)) - ln  +                 × ln            + ln xmF - ln xmI
                                                                         1 + RmI




Hiring distortions (f s ): Since we normalize the hiring distortions faced by male-owned firms
(ms ) to be equal to zero in both the informal and formal sector, we can compare the average log-

firm size for male- and female-owned firms to identify hiring distortions for the female-owned firms

relative to male-owned firms (f s ) as follows:

                                                                    
                                                       1-      1 + RmI
          (1 - )(ln lmI - ln lf I ) = ln(1 + f I ) +      × ln               + ln xmI - ln xf I
                                                               1 + Rf I
                                                                    
                                                       1-      1 + RmF
         (1 - )(ln lmF - ln lf F ) = ln(1 + f F ) +       × ln                + ln xmF - ln xf F
                                                               1 + Rf F




Fixed costs: Lastly, to calculate the fixed costs, we need to know the labor used by the marginal
                           be the labor used by the firm with threshold productivity x . Note
firm in each sector. Let lgs                                                          gs

from Table D1 that:

                                                             1
                                                    
                                                   zgI
                                                            1-
                                           lgI =                 × lgI
                                                   zgI
                                                             1
                                                    
                                                   zgF      1-
                                          
                                         lgF   =                 × lgF
                                                   zgF




We can then use the zero-profit conditions in (7) to calculate the fixed costs of entry and registration.




                                                       52
                  Table D1: Relationships used for parameter identification

                      Male owned firms                                Female owned firms
                                                 1                                             1
                                             1-                                                1-
                                    p
                      lmI =  wmI × z                                  lf I =    wp
                                                                                 fI
                                                                                          ×z
Informal sector                                       -1                                                 -1
                                                     1-                         f              f        1-
                               f
                              lmI           ~f
                                            w                                  lf          (1+f    ~f
                                                                                                  )w
                      RmI      m
                              lmI
                                        =   ~m
                                            w
                                                                      Rf I      m
                                                                               lf
                                                                                  I
                                                                                      =       ~m
                                                                                              w
                                                                                                I
                                                                                  I

                                                           - 1-
                                                              
                                                                
                                                                                                                - 1-
                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                     


                            ~ m 1 + (RmI )
                      wmI = w                                                          ~ m 1 + (Rf I )
                                                                      wf I = (1 + f I )w

                                                      1                                             1
                                                     1-                                            1-
                                  -t)p                                             -t)p
                      lmF =    (1
                                wmF
                                            ×z                        lf F =    (1
                                                                                 wf F
                                                                                           ×z
Formal sector                                                    -1                                              -1
                                                                1-              f              f      f         1-
                               f
                              lmF              f
                                            (1+mF  ~f
                                                  )w                           lf           (1+mF )(1+f    ~f
                                                                                                          )w
                      RmF      m
                              lmF
                                        =      ~m
                                               w
                                                                      Rf F      m
                                                                               lf
                                                                                  F
                                                                                      =           w~m
                                                                                                        F
                                                                                  F

                                                            - 1-
                                                               
                                                                 
                                                                                                                 - 1-
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                      


                            ~ m 1 + (RmF )
                      wmF = w                                                          ~ m 1 + (Rf F )
                                                                      wf F = (1 + f F )w




                                                           53
