                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                SKIPPING THE BAG:
                  THE INTENDED AND UNINTENDED CONSEQUENCES
                         OF DISPOSABLE BAG REGULATION

                                       Tatiana Homonoff
                                         Lee-Sien Kao
                                        Javiera Selman
                                       Christina Seybolt

                                      Working Paper 28499
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28499


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2021




We are grateful to Emma Berndt, Jacob Goldin, Doug Palmer, Travis St. Clair, and Becca Taylor
for providing helpful feedback. Betsy Priem, Claire Costelloe, May-May Chen, Juliana Tu, Ilve
Bayturk, Tyler He, Grace Martin, Chimdi Obienu, Kaiti Zolton, and Anirudh Duvvuru provided
excellent research assistance in collecting data for this project. The City of Chicago provided
original funding for the data collection for this work. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Tatiana Homonoff, Lee-Sien Kao, Javiera Selman, and Christina Seybolt. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Skipping the Bag: The Intended and Unintended Consequences of Disposable Bag Regulation
Tatiana Homonoff, Lee-Sien Kao, Javiera Selman, and Christina Seybolt
NBER Working Paper No. 28499
February 2021
JEL No. H23,H71,Q53

                                          ABSTRACT

Regulation of goods associated with negative environmental externalities may decrease
consumption of the targeted product, but may be ineffective at reducing the externality itself if
close substitutes are left unregulated. We find evidence that plastic bag bans, the most common
disposable bag regulation in the US, led retailers to circumvent the regulation by providing free
thicker plastic bags which are not covered by the ban. In contrast, a regulation change that
replaced the ban with a small tax on all disposable bags generated large decreases in disposable
bag use and overall environmental costs. Our results suggest that narrowly-defined regulations
(like plastic bag bans) may be less effective than policies that target a more comprehensive set of
products, even in the case when the policy instrument itself (a tax rather than a ban) is not as
strict.

Tatiana Homonoff                                 Javiera Selman
New York University                              New York University
Robert F. Wagner School of Public Service        Robert F. Wagner School of Public Service
295 Lafayette Street, 2nd Floor                  295 Lafayette Street, 2nd Floor
New York, NY 10012                               New York, NY 10012
and NBER                                         jselman@nyu.edu
tatiana.homonoff@nyu.edu
                                                 Christina Seybolt
Lee-Sien Kao                                     Social Impact, Inc.
ideas42                                          2300 Clarendon Blvd #1000
80 Broad St, Floor 30                            Arlington, VA 22201
New York, NY 10004                               christinaseybolt@gmail.com
lee-sien@ideas42.org
       I. Introduction

Many recent government and corporate policies aimed at reducing a variety of negative externali-


ties include regulations that ban the provision of externality-generating products. However, these


policies often ban only a narrow subset of products associated with the underlying externality. For


example, the Department of Justice banned bump stocks which assist in rapid re shooting after


a Las Vegas mass shooting (White, 2019) rather than placing stricter regulations on all assault


weapons. Similarly, Starbucks recently banned distribution of plastic straws at its stores to reduce


environmental waste (Rochman, 2018) and New York City attempted to pass a restaurant ban on


sugar-sweetened beverages over 16 ounces to curb obesity (Grynbaum, 2014).


       But do these policies achieve their intended goal? One concern with narrowly-dened bans is


that they may leave close undesirable substitutes unregulated, creating unintended consequences


of the policies. In the case of assault weapon bans, gun manufacturers devised several adaptations


to comply with the ban while still providing consumers with a nearly identical product.
                                                                                                           1 Along


with the plastic straw ban, Starbucks introduced a new strawless cold-cup lid which required                    more
plastic than the original lid and straw combined (Britschgi, 2018).
                                                                               2


       One potential reason for the relatively narrow scope of these types of regulations is that, in


many cases, it is politically infeasible to ban a broader class of products, such as a ban on all sugar-


sweetened beverages (Brescoll, Kersh and Brownell, 2008).                  However, there are several cases of


governments successfully passing incentive-based policies, such as a tax or a fee, on a wider range of


products. For example, many state and local governments levy taxes on sugar-sweetened beverages


(of all sizes and sold in all establishments) (Allcott, Lockwood and Taubinsky, 2019; Cawley et al.,


2019). These policies are less strict in one sense  all products are still available for consumption 


but may nonetheless be more eective since they leave fewer substitutes unregulated.


       We examine the relative eectiveness of these two policy designs  a narrowly-dened ban versus


a tax on a broader base of products  in the context of recent regulations on the use of disposable

   1
       For example, gun manufacturers created a device called a binary trigger which serves the same purpose as a
bump stock, but circumvents the federal ban (White, 2019).
   2
       The New York City ban was ruled unconstitutional before it was ever in eect, however, lab experiments suggests
that if retailers had responded to the policy by bundling smaller sodas together at the same price as a larger, banned
soda (i.e., one 24 ounce soda versus two 12 ounce sodas), this could lead to higher consumption of soda (Wilson,
Stolarz-Fantino and Fantino, 2013).




                                                           2
shopping bags.
                    3 Disposable bag regulations were rst introduced in the United States only a little


more than a decade ago, but have experienced rapid growth in this short period: as of 2017, one


out of six people lived in a jurisdiction covered by a state or local government ordinance regulating


plastic bags (Wagner, 2017). Regulations of disposable bags commonly take two forms: a ban on


plastic bags (a subset of all disposable bags) or a tax on all disposable bags. To date, no regulations


have considered an outright ban on all disposable shopping bags.


       In this paper, we examine the eect of two such regulations in the city of Chicago. In 2015,


Chicago passed an ordinance banning all single-use plastic bags less than 2.25 mils thick  the


most common design of disposable bag regulations in the US  leaving all other types of disposable


bags unregulated.
                       4 This policy was repealed starting in 2017 and replaced with a 7-cent tax on all


disposable bags (both plastic and paper bags of all thicknesses) one month later.


       To estimate the eect of these policies on disposable bag use, we collected a unique individual-


level data set on bag use for 24,002 shoppers by observing customers at grocery stores in the city


of Chicago (treatment stores) and in the surrounding suburbs that were not regulated by either


policy (control stores) from November 2016 to March 2018. This sample period spans three policy


regimes:      (i) the Chicago plastic bag ban, (ii) a period of no regulation, and (iii) the Chicago


tax on all disposable bags, allowing us to estimate the relative eectiveness of the two regulation


designs as well as the impact of the repeal of the ban and the implementation of the tax using a


dierence-in-dierences design.


       We nd that disposable bag use in Chicago remained high during the plastic bag ban: 82 percent


of customers in Chicago used an unregulated disposable bag  either a paper bag or a plastic bag


thicker than 2.25 mils  which continued to be distributed for free during the ban. Additionally,


we observe no change in the proportion of customers using a disposable bag after the repeal of the


ban. In contrast, we nd that the implementation of the tax in the subsequent months led to a


large decrease in disposable bag use.
                                             5 When comparing the relative eectiveness of the two policies,


we nd that the proportion of customers using a disposable bag decreased by 33 percentage points

   3
       In this study, we dene disposable bags to include all plastic bags, both low- and high-density polyethylene (which
we refer to as thin and thick plastic, respectively), and paper bags provided by the retailer for immediate use.
   4
       Similar stand-alone bans are the statewide regulation of New York and Delaware and will soon be in Connecticut
(July 2021) as well.
   5
       While the estimate of the repeal of the ban is likely a lower bound estimate for the eect of the ban's implemen-
tation due to potential habit formation, the estimate of the eect of the tax is likely an underestimate for the same
reason.




                                                             3
during the tax relative to during the ban leading to a decrease of just over one disposable bag per


trip. This eect appears largely persistent: the reduction in the share of customers using a disposable


bag remained large and statistically signicant throughout the rst year of tax's implementation,


though we do observe a rebound eect equivalent to roughly one quarter of the initial eect of the


tax by the end of the sample period.


   The results on overall disposable bag use suggest that the tax was signicantly more eective


than the ban at reducing disposable bag use. Moreover, these results mask an important unintended


consequence of the plastic bag ban. When we consider the eects of the two policies on the type


of disposable bag used, we nd that the ban successfully eliminated lightweight plastic bag use (as


designed). However, it led retailers to provide free    thick   plastic bags with a thickness roughly just


over the 2.25 mils dened in the ban, ve times the amount of plastic in a standard plastic grocery


bag. During the ban, over 40 percent of customers shopping in Chicago used a free thick plastic


bag with the remaining disposable bag users taking a paper bag. These thick plastic bags were then


phased out once the ban was repealed.


   Taking the composition of bags used into account, we nd that during the tax policy, customers


used signicantly less plastic   and   paper than during the ban  a decrease equivalent to the amount


of plastic in roughly four thin plastic bags and one paper bag per trip. As a result, analyses that


take into account the composition of bags used (rather than just the number of disposable bags


used), including those considering the life-cycle environmental impact of the dierent types of bags


used, substantially increase our estimate of the relative eectiveness of the tax compared to the ban.


While we do not have data on bag reuse, our estimates decrease only slightly if we assume that thick


plastic bags and paper bags are reused, for example, as bin liners  in fact, customers must reuse


these bags at least six times as often as thin plastic bags to no longer statistically conclude that


the tax is more eective than the ban, far more often than suggested in the literature (Prendergast,


Wai Ng and Lee Leung, 2001).


   This paper contributes to a recent literature on the eect of disposable bag regulations on


consumer behavior by comparing the relative eectiveness of two of the most common regulation


designs. Previous research in the US nds decreases in disposable bag use in response to disposable


bag taxes as well as hybrid bans that are similar in magnitude to our estimates of the eect of


the Chicago tax: Homono (2018) nds that a ve-cent disposable bag tax in the DC area led to



                                                    4
a 42 percentage point decrease in disposable bag use and Taylor and Villas-Boas (2016) estimate


a 35 percentage point decrease in response to a California policy that combined a plastic bag ban


with a ve-cent paper bag fee.
                                          6 However, to our knowledge, we are the rst paper to rigorously


evaluate the eect of a stand-alone ban on plastic bags in the US.
                                                                                      7 Importantly, we are able to


compare the two competing policy designs within the same city rather than relying on cross-state


comparisons which may be biased due to dierences in the populations. Our ndings suggest that


the success of the policies estimated in prior research relies on the fact that those policies regulated


all       forms of disposable bags. We nd that plastic bag bans  stricter, but more narrowly-dened


regulations that leave close substitutes unregulated  are signicantly less eective at reducing the


use of disposable bags than disposable bag taxes and, in fact, may increase overall environmental


costs by changing the composition of types of bags used.


          Our paper also contributes to a broader literature on the unintended consequences of bans on


goods associated with negative externalities. This literature largely focuses on behavioral responses


taken on the part of the consumer that undermine the eectiveness of the policy.                           For example,


school bans on soda lead to increases in soda purchased for the home (Lichtman-Sadot, 2016), state


bans on payday loans decrease payday loan use, but increase the use of pawn shops (Bhutta, Goldin


and Homono, 2016), and a Mexican policy that banned drivers from using their car one day per


week led to the unintended consequence of increasing the number of cars in circulation (Davis,


2008). In the context of disposable bag regulations, partial regulation may generate environmental


leakage.
               8 For example, Taylor (2019) nds that plastic bag bans coupled with paper bag fees lead to


increases in sales of plastic trash bags, partially osetting the environmental benets of the policy.


Most closely related to our paper, Adda and Cornaglia (2010) compare the relative eectiveness


of taxes and bans on tobacco use at reducing second-hand smoking and nd that excise taxes on


cigarettes decrease exposure to second-hand smoke, while restaurant and workplace smoking bans


increase second-hand smoking by increasing smoking in the home. Our ndings complement these

      6
          Additionally, several studies outside of the US nd signicant decreases in disposable bag use after the implemen-
tation of policies that charge for disposable bags (Poortinga, Whitmarsh and Suolk, 2013; Jakovcevic et al., 2014;
Rivers, Shenstone-Harris and Young, 2017; Cabrera, Caera and Cid, 2020).
      7
          Several developing countries have also implemented plastic bag bans (see Nielsen, Holmberg and Stripple (2019)
for a review); however, these studies highlight that one of the key failures of these policies is the lack of enforcement
(Gupta, 2011; Bharadwaj, Baland and Nepal, 2020), suggesting that the ndings may not be informative in the US
context where enforcement levels are higher.
      8
          Environmental leakage occurs when partial regulation of environmentally harmful products directly results in
increased consumption of the products in unregulated parts of the economy (Fowlie, 2009).




                                                               5
various results on regulation-avoidant behavior on the part of the consumer, by demonstrating


similar behavior on the side of the producer: the introduction of free thick plastic bags.


       This paper is organized as follows. Section II provides an overview of disposable bag ordinances


in the US as well as specic details on the policies in the city of Chicago.                  Section III describes


the data used in our analyses.          Section IV presents estimates of the eect of the two policies on


disposable bag use. Section V concludes.




II. Institutional Background

A. History of Disposable Bag Ordinances in the United States

Each year, Americans consume an estimated one hundred billion plastic bags (Clapp and Swanston,


2009; Wagner, 2017). While plastic bags are recyclable, only 10 percent of single-use plastic (which


includes plastic bags, sacks, and wraps) is ultimately recovered (USEPA, 2018). Unrecycled bags


frequently end up in landlls, clog storm drains, or nd their way into local waterways or trees


costing local US governments between 3 and 8 billion dollars per year to clean up (Taylor and


Villas-Boas, 2016) and leading to urban ooding in developing countries (Pervin et al., 2020). Over


the past decade, many state and local governments throughout the United States have passed


laws or ordinances regulating the use of single-use disposable bags in an attempt to curb these


environmental costs. As of September 2017, one out of every six individuals in the US lived in a


jurisdiction with a disposable bag ordinance (Wagner, 2017).


       Disposable bag legislation has largely been driven by local governments  as of August 2019,


over 450 local ordinances restricting the use of plastic bags were in place in 28 states throughout the


country. Seven states have passed statewide legislation as well including California, Connecticut,


Delaware, Maine, New York, Oregon, and Vermont. Additionally, Hawaii has a de facto statewide


law since all counties in the state have implemented a disposable bag regulation.
                                                                                                 9 These policies


commonly take one of three forms: (i) a stand-alone plastic bag ban, (ii) a disposable bag fee, or


(iii) a hybrid ban plus fee.
                                 10

   9
       Details on the number of regulations are based on the authors' calculations from data collected from databases
of state regulations, such as the National Conference of State Legislatures and plasticbaglaws.org, as well as local
news articles.
  10
       Additionally, as of August 2019, seventeen states had passed a preemptive ban on bans which prohibited laws




                                                           6
       The rst plastic bag regulation in the United States was implemented in San Francisco in


2007.
        11 Importantly, San Francisco was restricted in its choice of policy design by California's State


Assembly Bill 2449 which banned the use of fees on single-use plastic bags, making a ban San


Francisco's only option for regulating the use of plastic bags (Romer and Tamminen, 2014). The


ban applied to thin, single-use plastic bags less than 2.25 mils thick (roughly the thickness of a


commercial garbage bag and the denition of single-use plastic bags used in the California law),


but left the use of all other bags, such as paper bags, unregulated. Most states do not pose similar


restrictions on plastic bag fees. Nevertheless, bans like the one in San Francisco are currently the


most common disposable bag regulation in the US: almost all existing state and local ordinances


include a ban on single-use plastic bags, with many policies using the same 2.25 mils cuto to


dene single-use. Stand-alone plastic bag bans can be found in 26 states and comprise over half


of all local ordinances.
                            12 Additionally, by the middle of 2021, stand-alone bans will be the eective


statewide bag regulation in New York, Delaware, and Connecticut.


       An alternative policy places a tax or fee on each disposable bag a customer uses rather than


prohibiting the use of plastic bags. Washington, DC became the rst US city to implement a policy


of this type with the passage of the Anacostia River Cleanup and Protection Act in 2010.                       This


ordinance required that grocery stores must charge a ve-cent tax on all plastic and paper bags.


Policies with this incentive-based design are much less common  fewer than 30 local ordinances


charge for plastic bags instead of banning them altogether.


       A third policy design, often referred to as a hybrid ban or a second generation ban (Romer and


Tamminen, 2014), couples a plastic bag ban with a paper bag fee, typically in the range of ve to


fteen cents per bag. Originally designed in response to a California supreme court ruling requiring


all plastic bag regulations to be coupled with regulations on paper bags, this policy has also become


a popular design outside of California. Plastic bag bans with paper bag fees currently exist in fteen


states and are the statewide policy choice of California, Maine, Oregon, and Vermont.

banning the use of plastic bags.
  11
       One exception was a soft ban on plastic bags initiated in Maine in 1989 in which retailers were to required to
oer only paper bags unless a customer specically requested a plastic bag (Wagner, 2017). The policy was repealed
three years later.
  12
       To compute this estimate, we identied the number of ordinances by type in each state that has a disposable
bag legislation. This estimate includes all ordinances that are passed before or after statewide policy but does not
consider the size of the population aected by each local ordinance, only the number of ordinances of each regulation
design that have been successfully passed.




                                                           7
B. Chicago Disposable Bag Ordinances

In August 2015, the city of Chicago introduced its rst policy regulating the use of disposable


shopping bags: a stand-alone ban on single-use plastic bags.                    Like many other plastic bag bans


throughout the country, the ban applied to thin, single-use plastic bags dened as plastic bags less


than 2.25 mils thick. The policy rst applied only to large stores (dened as over 10,000 square


feet), but was expanded to include all chains and franchises in August 2016.
                                                                                             13 Stores that provided


plastic bags prior to the ban were required to provide reusable bags, recyclable paper bags, or


commercially compostable plastic bags once the ban was implemented.


       Importantly, the ban did not apply to other types of disposable bags including plastic bags


thicker than 2.25 mils or paper bags.             As a result, stores that previously oered free paper bags


continued to do so.         Additionally, several of the larger retailers that had previously oered thin


plastic bags instead began oering customers free                 thick   plastic bags with a thickness roughly just


over the threshold designated by the ban.
                                                     14


       Recognizing this unintended response by the retailers, in November 2016, the Chicago City


Council repealed the ban eective January 1, 2017. In its place, the council implemented a new


regulation, the Chicago Checkout Bag Tax,
                                                      15 which levied a 7-cent tax on all disposable bags. Five


cents from each taxed unit was paid to the city while the remaining two cents remained with the


retailer. Customers purchasing groceries with benets from the Supplemental Nutritional Assistance


Program or a similar governmental food assistance program were not subject to the tax.
                                                                                                            16 The tax


did not apply to plastic bags used to carry loose bulk items (such as fruits and vegetables) or used


to segregate food that could contaminate other merchandise (such as meat). Reusable bags with a


price of 50 cents or more were exempt from the tax. This tax was originally scheduled to go into


eect the same date of the ban repeal, but was postponed until February 1, 2017, leaving one month


(January 2017) without any disposable bag regulation.

  13
       The ban applied to all retail establishments selling perishable or non-perishable goods, including but not limited
to clothing, food and personal items, but not to restaurants or any store that is not a chain store or franchise with
chain dened as three or more stores with common ownership.
  14
       Similar behavior among retailers was reported after a plastic bag ban in Honolulu County, Hawaii in 2015
(Solomon, 2016) and in response to a hybrid ban in California (Gardinier, 2019). Taylor and Villas-Boas (2016) nd
that dierent retailers make dierent decisions in response to a hybrid ban in Richmond, CA  one retailer provided
only paper bags, while a discount store oered both paper and thicker plastic. Unlike in Richmond, we found more
uniformity in retailer behavior across the largest chains in Chicago.
  15
       Chicago, Illinois, Municipal Code ch. 3-50.
  16
       Chicago, Illinois, Amendment of Municipal Code ch. 11-4 by adding Article XXIII.




                                                             8
C. Prior Research on Eectiveness of Disposable Bag Ordinances

There is an ongoing policy debate about whether and how to implement disposable bag regulations


in the US. However, there is limited rigorous research investigating how policies to reduce disposable


bag use aect consumer behavior. Most empirical studies report simple dierences, i.e., outcomes


before and after a policy change, failing to account for confounding factors such as changes in social


norms about the acceptability of using disposable bags that may have motivated policy interventions


in the rst place.        As a result, reported reductions in disposable bag use may be upward biased


(Rivers, Shenstone-Harris and Young, 2017).


       There are two notable exceptions in the US context.              Taylor and Villas-Boas (2016) estimate


the eect of a hybrid plastic bag ban plus ve-cent minimum paper bag fee and Homono (2018)


estimates the eect of a ve-cent tax on all disposable bags (both paper and plastic).
                                                                                                     17 Both studies


collect data on individual-level bag use observed at stores in regulated and unregulated cities before


and after the policy was implemented. Though these studies evaluate policies with dierent designs


that were implemented in dierent locations, both nd that the policy in question led to a very


large decrease in disposable bag use  the hybrid ban led to a 35 percentage point decrease in the


proportion of customers using a disposable bag, while the tax on all disposable bags led to a 42


percentage point decrease.          Though the eects of the two policies on the likelihood of using any


disposable bags were quite similar, the policy choice did impact the type of bag that a customer


used. Under the tax policy, most customers who continued to use a disposable bag used a thin plastic


bag when available. In contrast (and by construction), customers who continued to use disposable


bags during the hybrid ban primarily used paper bags.
                                                                   18 If plastic bags are more environmentally


harmful than paper bags, this evidence suggests that hybrid bans are more eective at reducing these


costs; however, paper bags have their own environmental impact making the relative eectiveness


of the two policies unclear.
                                  19


       There are also several studies outside of the US that estimate the eect of disposable bag charges


on bag use using causal inference methods. Jakovcevic et al. (2014) use a dierence-in-dierences

  17
       The policy evaluated in Taylor and Villas-Boas (2016) was implemented in Richmond, California in 2014, while
the policy evaluated in Homono (2018) was implemented in Montgomery County, Maryland in 2012.
  18
       One exception was at a discount chain that oered a popular alternative, a 15-cent thick-plastic reusable bags
(Taylor and Villas-Boas, 2016).
  19
       For example, production of paper bags requires more energy and creates more air and water pollution than plastic
bag production; additionally, paper bags require more energy to recycle and transport (Taylor and Villas-Boas, 2016).




                                                            9
research design to study the eect of a charge for disposable bags in Argentina using observational


data.   Poortinga, Whitmarsh and Suolk (2013) and Rivers, Shenstone-Harris and Young (2017)


use a similar research design to study the eect of a 5p/[5 cent] tax on disposable bags in England


and Toronto, respectively, but rely on survey data on typical bag use rather than observational


data from grocery stores. All three studies nd signicant decreases in disposable bag use, though


the decreases are somewhat smaller than the US studies.       In contrast, recent work by Cabrera,


Caera and Cid (2020) uses data provided by national supermarket chain in Uruguay to evaluate


the staggered roll-out of a policy that charged roughly 7 cents for disposable bags and nds that


the policy led to a 70 to 85 percent decrease in disposable bag use.


   In spite of the prevalence of stand-alone bans, to our knowledge, our study provides the rst


evaluation of this policy design. An important distinction between stand-alone bans versus hybrid


bans or stand-alone taxes is that under the latter two policies, all disposable bags  thin plastic,


thicker plastic, and paper bags  fall under the regulation. In contrast, stand-alone bans on plastic


bags leave potential close substitutes, i.e., other types of disposable bags, unregulated. Therefore,


it may be inappropriate to extrapolate the eects of disposable bag regulations of these dierent


designs to stand-alone bans. Additionally, Chicago is one of the few cities that has experimented


with two types of bag regulations: a stand-alone ban and a stand-alone tax.       This allows us to


compare the two types of policies in the same city (in fact, the exact same stores) rather than


relying on a cross-state comparison.




III. Data

To evaluate the eectiveness of the two disposable bag regulations implemented in Chicago, we


collect individual-level data on bag use among customers at grocery stores in the City of Chicago


who were subject to the disposable bag regulations, as well as customers shopping in a set of


grocery stores located in the same county as Chicago but just outside the city limits who were


not subject to any disposable bag regulations during the period of analysis.      Our primary data


set is comprised of data collected during three time periods: November-December 2016 (the nal


months of the plastic bag ban), January 2017 (the month in which stores were not subject to any


disposable bag regulation), and February-March 2017 (the rst months of the tax). We supplement




                                                 10
our main data set with follow-up collection periods roughly once per quarter for the rst year of


the tax's implementation to estimate the persistence of any estimated eect over time. Specically,


we collect data in three additional waves: May 2017 (quarter 2), October-November 2017 (quarter


3), and January-March 2018 (quarter 4).


       The sample includes data on bag use from twelve grocery stores: eight stores in Chicago and four


stores located in the surrounding suburbs within Cook County, Illinois which did not implement


any disposable bag regulations.
                                        20   The stores in the sample were limited to large chain grocery


stores for ease of comparison across locations. Comparison stores in the suburbs were chosen for


similarity with the Chicago stores on ZIP code-level demographic characteristics; for example, all


stores were located near a public bus stop and also had a parking lot. Half of the stores in each


group (treatment and control) were selected from ZIP codes with a median income below that of


Cook County ($61,405 in 2017) and half were selected from ZIP codes with median incomes above


the countywide median. The average census tract median income was roughly $63,000 in control


stores and $75,000 in treatment stores (ACS, 2017).


       Researchers were hired and trained by sta at the University of Chicago to collect the data


used in this study.        Data collectors were instructed to stand by the exit of a sample store and


record individual-level data on the number and type of bags each customer used (thin plastic, thick


plastic, paper, or reusable), as well as visually assessable demographic characteristics, such as sex


and race, of all customers exiting the store.            These researchers were trained not to interact with


customers so as to minimize any Hawthorne eects.
                                                                21 They were also given instructions on how to


collect data (e.g., how to classify bags as reusable, how to identify and record double-bagging, that


they should exclude plastic bags used for produce or meat that are not regulated by the policies)


to ensure uniformity of data collection across researchers.
                                                                       22 Researchers visited a given store for


either 40 minutes, or for the observation of 100 consumers, whichever came rst. The visits took


place during either a daytime (ten in the morning to four thirty in the afternoon) or evening (four


thirty in the afternoon to eight at night) shift during weekdays only. Each of the 12 sample stores


received an average of 12 visits during the main sample period (November 2016 to March 2017) and

  20
       Suburban sample stores were located in the cities of Evergreen Park, Melrose Park, North Riverside, and Oaklawn.
See Figure 1 for a map of store locations.
  21
       For example, they were encouraged to wear ear buds or bring a book so as not to appear out of place.
  22
       Additionally, our main specications include individual data collector xed eects to control for any remaining
dierences across researchers.




                                                           11
an additional 12 visits during the follow-up period (May 2017 to March 2018). Our nal sample


includes data on roughly 1,000 customers per store in each sample period for a total of 24,002


individual customers.


       Table 1 presents store-level statistics on the race and sex of customers in our sample as well as the


median income in the ZIP code in which the store is located. In Chicago, the racial composition of


the customers in our sample closely tracked neighborhood income with higher-income stores serving


predominantly white customers, while customers in lower-income stores were almost exclusively


non-white.       Customers shopping in a given suburban store were not as racially homogeneous as


those in Chicago, nor did racial composition correlate as closely with neighborhood income. Most


sample stores had a higher proportion of female customers ranging from one half to two thirds of


all customers.




IV. Results

As mentioned in the previous section, our data spans three dierent policy regimes in Chicago: a


stand-alone ban on thin plastic bags, a tax on all disposable bags, and a period in between with no


regulation. This section empirically estimates the relative eectiveness of the two policy designs.


       Table 2 presents summary statistics on bag use separately for sample stores in Chicago and the


surrounding suburbs in each of the three policy regimes. Stores located in Cook County but outside


of Chicago were not subject to any disposable bag regulation. Column 1 shows that during our rst


sample period (the last months of the Chicago ban) 90 percent of customers in unregulated stores


in the suburbs used at least one disposable bag during the observed shopping trips with the average


customer using three disposable bags per trip.
                                                         23 Eight percent of customers used a reusable bag


and ve percent used no bags at all. Notably, columns 2 and 3 show that these statistics change


very little across policy regimes: the proportion of customers using a reusable bag remains between


90 and 92 percent throughout the sample period.


       Columns 4 through 6 present the same statistics for sample stores in Chicago.                  Here we nd


a slightly lower, but still large fraction of customers using disposable bags during the ban  82


percent of Chicago customers used at least one disposable bag with the average customer using two

  23
       As previously mentioned, we dene disposable bags as any bag (paper or plastic) that is distributed for free by
the store. We dene reusable bags as heavier-weight bags sold by the store or tote bags brought from home.




                                                          12
disposable bags per trip.         Correspondingly, we observe a slightly higher proportion of customers


using a reusable bag (13 percent) or no bag at all (9 percent). Unlike in the suburban stores, we


do observe changes in bag use in Chicago over time. While the rate of disposable bag use remains


constant during the month after the ban is repealed, we observe a large decrease in disposable bag


use once the tax was implemented.




A. Eects on Disposable Bag Use

To estimate the eect of each policy on various measures of bag use, we employ a dierence-in-


dierences specication. We begin by estimating the following regression:




 Yisht =  + 1 ChicagoxBanst + 1 Bant + 2 ChicagoxT axst + 2 T axt + Zs + Xi + Dh +                           isht (1)



       Yist   is a measure of bag use for individual     i   shopping in store   s   during time period   t. Chicago

is an indicator for shopping in a store in Chicago,            Ban   is an indicator for shopping during the ban


(November-December 2016), and            T ax is an indicator for shopping during the rst quarter of the tax

(February-March 2017). The model also controls for store xed eects (Zs ), customer demographic


characteristics (Xi ), and an indicator for shopping during daytime versus evening hours (Dh ).
                                                                                                                   24


The coecient on         ChicagoxBan (1 )        is the dierence-in-dierences estimate measuring the eect


of the ban compared to the period immediately after the ban was repealed during which there was


no disposable bag regulation in Chicago (January 2017). Similarly, the coecient on                   ChicagoxT ax

(2 ) estimates the eect of the implementation of the tax relative the the no regulation period.


       The key identifying assumption in our empirical strategy is that the trends in bag use would


have been the same in treatment and control stores were it not for the policy change, i.e., the


parallel trends assumption. One common approach used to assess the validity of this assumption


is to demonstrate that there are no dierential pre-trends in the time periods leading up to the


policy change.        A separate, but related violation of our identifying assumption occurs if there


are anticipation eects (Malani and Reif, 2015), for example, if shoppers in Chicago begin using

  24
       We present standard errors clustered at the store level (as they are more conservative), though our results are
robust to using wild-bootstrap p-values to obtain t-statistics from pseudo standard errors (Cameron, Gelbach and
Miller, 2008) to account for the fact that we only have 12 clusters in the data.



                                                             13
reusable bags in advance of the tax's implementation. Unfortunately, our data collection spanned


only a few weeks in the ban period and the no regulation period, so we are unable to test for


pre-trends or anticipation eects. Nevertheless, prior research in the US and Latin America show


no evidence of dierential pre-trends in advance of similar disposable bag regulations (Taylor and


Villas-Boas, 2016; Cabrera, Caera and Cid, 2020), though the latter study does show some evidence


of anticipation eects. We believe that anticipation eects are less likely in our setting since Chicago


had implemented the ban over a year before the tax's implementation (the policy change we study);


however, if there are anticipation eects, our estimates of the relative eect of the tax should be


viewed as an underestimate of the eect of the policy.


   Panel A of Table 3 presents the results of this analysis for the four bag use variables in Table 2.


We rst consider the estimates of the eect of the ban repeal (1 ). Column 1 shows that repealing


the ban had no eect on the likelihood of using a disposable bag  the point estimate is less than


one percentage point and is not statistically signicant.       Column 2 shows a similarly small and


not statistically signicant decrease in the number of disposable bags as a result of the ban repeal.


Somewhat unsurprisingly given these null eects on disposable bag use, columns 3 and 4 show no


evidence of a statistically signicant change in the likelihood of using a reusable bag or using no


bags at all.


   Turning to the estimates of the eect of the implementation of the tax (2 ), we observe a very


dierent pattern. Column 1 shows that during the rst quarter of the tax's implementation, the


likelihood of a customer using a disposable bag decreases by 33 percentage points relative to the no


regulation period. This corresponds to a decrease in just over one bag per shopping trip (column 2).


The tax led to an increase of 17 percentage points in the likelihood of using a reusable bag (column


3) and an increase of 16 percentage points in the likelihood of using no bags at all (column 4).


   When comparing estimates of     1   and   2 ,   it is important to note that we estimate the impact


of the initial implementation of the tax but the repeal of the ban, and that the change in behavior


resulting from the introduction versus the repeal of the ban need not be symmetric. For example, if


the behavioral change induced by the ban changed customer habits, eects of the ban might persist


after its repeal. Rivers, Shenstone-Harris and Young (2017) nd evidence against this behavior after


the repeal of the Toronto bag tax: reusable bag use increased following the implementation of a


ve-cent tax in Toronto, but this eect did not persist after the tax was repealed. However, given



                                                     14
that in Chicago the tax was announced at the same time as the repeal of the ban, this announcement


may have mitigated a rebound in disposable bag use during the period between the two policies.


By the same argument, if the ban did indeed lead to a decrease in disposable bag use that persisted


after the repeal, the estimate of the eect of the tax is likely to be underestimated: customers who


developed a habit of avoiding disposable bags in response to the ban may also have been customers


who would have responded to the tax.


   Nonetheless, the high rate of disposable bag use observed in Chicago during the ban (82 percent)


provides us with a useful upper bound of the eect of the ban: if all customers used a disposable


bag in the absence of the ban and every customer that stopped using disposable bags as a result


of the ban continued to do so after the ban was repealed, the introduction of the ban led to at


most a decrease of 18 percentage points in the proportion of customers using a disposable bag. This


suggests that even with extreme assumptions about the asymmetry of the introduction and repeal


of the ban, the tax was almost twice as eective as the ban at reducing the proportion of customers


using a disposable bag.


   To avoid concerns about behavior in the no regulation period, Panel B of Table 3 compares the


relative eectiveness of the ban and the tax by estimating the following model:




                Yisht =  + ChicagoxT axst + T axt + Zs + Xi + Dh +               isht             (2)



   In this regression, we exclude data from January 2017 so that the reference group consists of


customers observed during the last months of the ban rather than the period with no regulation,


allowing us to compare bag use during the ban directly to bag use during the tax. All variables are


dened as those in equation (1). As a result,      measures the eectiveness of the tax relative to the


ban.


   Column 1 shows that the proportion of customers using a disposable bag was 33 percentage


points lower during the tax than during the ban.       On average, customers used roughly one less


disposable bag during the tax relative to during the ban (column 2). The decrease in disposable


bag use was driven roughly equally by a switch to reusable bags and the choice to forgo bags


altogether (columns 3 and 4). Taken together, these results suggest that the tax was substantially


more eective at reducing disposable bag use than the ban.




                                                  15
B. Composition of Disposable Bags

The previous section shows large dierences in the relative eectiveness of the ban and the tax


on the proportion of customers using a disposable bag and the number of bags used.          However,


these outcomes group all types of disposable bags (paper versus plastic, thin versus thick) together,


potentially masking important dierences in the composition of disposable bags used under dierent


policies.


    Figure 2 presents the proportion of customers in our sample that used a disposable bag during


each of the three policy regimes  ban, no regulation, and tax  separately for sample stores in


Chicago and the surrounding suburbs. The height of each bar represents the proportion of customers


using at least one disposable bag, while the shading describes the type of disposable bag used: thin


plastic, thick plastic, paper, or a combination of two or more.


    The rst bar, for example, shows that during the last months of the Chicago ban, 90 percent of


customers in unregulated stores in the suburbs used at least one disposable bag during the observed


shopping trips. The vast majority of customers (81 percent) used only thin plastic bags, 4 percent


used only paper bags, and 5 percent used both paper and plastic bags. No customers in suburban


stores used a thick plastic bag, suggesting that these stores did not oer that option.      The next


two bars show that bag use  both the fraction of customers using any disposable bags and the


composition of types of bags  is largely unchanged across the three policy regimes for stores in the


suburbs.


    The following three bars repeat the analysis for stores in Chicago. As shown in Table 2, stores


in Chicago experience a slightly lower, but still large fraction of customers using disposable bags in


Chicago during the ban  82 percent of customers used at least one disposable bag. However, the


composition of disposable bags used during the ban diered greatly across locations. In Chicago, no


customers used a thin plastic bag, suggesting that the ban was implemented as intended. However,


unlike in the suburbs, a substantial fraction of Chicago customers used a thick plastic bag (41


percent) and a much higher proportion used paper bags (also 41 percent). Once the ban was lifted,


the proportion of customers using thick plastic or paper bags decreased and thin plastic bags were


reintroduced, though the proportion of customers using any disposable bag remained unchanged




                                                 16
until the implementation of the tax.
                                              25


       Table 4 compares bag use by type during the ban to bag use during the tax as in equation (2).
                                                                                                                      26


Each column estimates the relative eects of the two policies on the likelihood of using a specic


type of disposable bag: thick plastic bags, thin plastic bags, paper bags, or a mix of types. Under


the tax policy, customers were 33 percentage points less likely to use only thick plastic bags and


27 percentage points less likely to use only paper bags relative to the bag use under the ban. This


was partially oset by a 23 percentage point increase in the proportion of customers using only thin


plastic bags and a 3 percentage point increase in the proportion of customers using multiple types


of disposable bags. These results suggest that the policy choice aects not only the prevalence of


disposable bag use, but the composition of bags used and that ignoring the unintended consequence


of the introduction of thicker plastic bags during the ban would underestimate the costs associated


with the policy. We address this question directly in the following section.




C. Environmental Footprint

As mentioned in Section II, plastic bags and paper bags each come with their own set of envi-


ronmental costs  for example, plastic bags generate more litter and are more dicult to recycle,


while paper bags require more energy to produce and that production creates more air and water


pollutants. Therefore, to assess the eectiveness of the policies in question on overall environmental


costs, we must understand the relative costs of the dierent types of bags used.


       In this section, we estimate the relative amount of plastic and paper used under the dierent


policies.     Additionally, we use estimates of the relative impact of the three types of disposable


bags on global warming potential as measured by the UK's Environment Agency (Edwards and


Fry, 2011). This report assesses the life-cycle environmental impacts of the production, use, and


disposal of dierent types of shopping bags. The report nds that the environmental costs of paper


bags are four times that of thin plastic bags and that the costs of thick plastic bags are ve times

  25
       While the use of thick plastic bags decreased after the repeal of ban, 28 percent of customers shopping in Chicago
used a thick plastic bag in the month after the repeal. This number decreased to only 7 percent during the tax. In
fact, no customers in our data used a thick plastic bag after March of 2017. This is consistent with a scenario in
which stores continued to oer thicker bags after the repeal so as to deplete their stores, but that this type of bag
was no longer available once the original supply ran out.
  26
       Importantly, this specication excludes the period in which stores were beginning to phase out the use of thick
plastic bags (the no regulation period), but had not yet completed the process.




                                                            17
that of thin plastic bags.


   An important limitation of this analysis is that life-cycle assessments are based on a specic


locale.   For example, costs associated with the transportation of bags are a key contributor to


the overall environmental impact of a bag and these costs may dier across locations, biasing our


estimate of the relative environmental impact of paper versus plastic bags. A second limitation is


that the analyses in Edwards and Fry (2011) do not provide estimates of absolute costs of each


type of bag, only relative costs of one type of bag versus another. As a result, we are only able to


estimate the relative environmental costs of the bags used under the dierent policy regimes, rather


than absolute costs.


   Table 5 estimates the eect of the tax relative to the ban on environmental costs.         We rst


consider the relative eect of the tax on the amount of plastic and paper used. We use estimates


from Edwards and Fry (2011) to create a measure of total plastic used per shopping trip where


the units are in numbers of thin plastic bags (column 1). Specically, we assume that thick plastic


bags generate ve times as much plastic as thin plastic bags  this assumption is equivalent to


assuming that thick plastic bags have a thickness just over the 2.25 mil threshold and that thin


plastic bags have a thickness of 0.5 mils, a common estimate of the thickness of standard thin plastic


bags. Column 2 estimates the relative eectiveness of the policies on the amount of paper used per


shopping trip where units are in number of paper bags.       The results show that during the tax,


customers used signicantly less paper   and   plastic: the average customer used 0.7 fewer paper bags


and an equivalent of almost four fewer thin plastic bags per trip during the tax relative to during


the ban.


   Column 3 combines these estimates to create an overall measure of the environmental footprint


generated by the composition of disposable bags used using the estimates from Edwards and Fry


(2011).    Specically, the outcome variable is measured in units of cost generated from one thin


plastic bag. For example, a customer who uses ve thin plastic bags generates ve units of cost;


similarly, a customer who uses one thin plastic bag and one paper bag also creates ve units of cost


since the environmental cost of one paper bag is four times that on one thin plastic bag. We nd


that, relative the ban, the tax led to a reduction in environmental costs equivalent to the use of 6.5


thin plastic bags per shopping trip. As noted above, if the relative environmental impact of paper


versus plastic bags estimated in (Edwards and Fry, 2011) in the UK context are not representative



                                                  18
of relative costs in Chicago, this will bias our estimate of the relative eect of the tax versus the ban


on the overall environmental footprint. However, given that columns 1 and 2 show a reduction in


both the amount of plastic used and the amount of paper used, any bias will aect the magnitude


of our estimate  which could be an over- or underestimate  but not the direction of the estimate.




D. Eect of Tax over Time

This section uses additional data collected quarterly over the following year to assess whether the


initial eect of the tax persisted over time. It is worth noting that the ban had been in eect for


over a year before we began data collection; therefore, to the extent that the eect of the policies


change as shoppers become accustomed to them, a potentially more appropriate comparison of the


two policies would focus on data collected roughly a year after the tax's implementation.


   Figure 3a plots the proportion of customers using a disposable bag during the six data collection


periods: the ban, the no regulation period, and the rst four quarters of the tax separately for


shoppers in Chicago and the surrounding unregulated suburbs. The gure shows that disposable


bag use in the suburbs was relatively at throughout the entire data collection period with a range


of 87 to 92 percent of customers using at least one disposable bag per trip. In contrast, there was


a large decrease in disposable bag use in Chicago in the rst quarter of the tax. The dierence in


disposable bag use between Chicago and the suburbs, however, appears to decrease slightly starting


in the third quarter. Figure 3b presents the same analysis for the average number of bags used per


trip and exhibits a similar trajectory: disposable bag use was substantially lower in Chicago after


the tax was implemented, but the number of disposable bags used appears to rebound somewhat


over time.


   Table 6 presents estimates from a regression that provides separate dierence-in-dierence es-


timates for the eect of the tax relative to the ban for each of the rst four quarters of the tax's


implementation. Specically, the regression modies the analysis in Panel B of Table 3 by includ-


ing data from the follow-up period, adding separate main and interaction eects for each of the


additional quarters.


   Column 1 corresponds to Figure 3a, presenting results of the eects of the tax on the likelihood


of using any disposable bags in a given trip.      As in Table 3, we nd that the tax led to a 33




                                                  19
percentage point decrease in the proportion of customers using a disposable bag relative to the ban.


This eect decreased slightly to a 31 percentage point change in the second quarter, though the


dierence between the two quarters is not statistically signicant. However, by the end of the rst


year of the tax, we estimate that the tax led to a decrease in the proportion of customers using a


disposable bag of 25 percentage points relative to the ban, an eect that is statistically signicantly


smaller than the eect measured in the rst quarter of the tax's implementation.


   This rebound eect is consistent with a model in which the salience of the tax decreases over


time, potentially through a reduction in media coverage.      Alternatively, prior literature suggests


that the large observed behavioral response to disposable bag taxes may be due in part to loss


aversion (Homono, 2018)  if a customer's reference price for a disposable bag is initially zero, a


tax would feel like a loss. Our ndings suggest that while customers may originally perceive a tax


on disposable bags as a loss, their reference price may change over time as they acclimate to the tax,


consistent with a model of expectations-based reference dependence (K®szegi and Rabin, 2006). In


other words, if customers come to expect that bags cost seven cents, the tax no longer feels like a


loss and, as a result, the behavior change driven by their desire to avoid a loss fades.


   Column 2 shows a similar pattern for the number of disposable bags used per trip: the tax led


to a decrease of just under one disposable bag used per trip in the rst quarter of the tax relative


to the ban, but the eect is smaller and not statistically signicant by the end of the rst year.


However, this estimate is somewhat misleading since customers who use thick plastic bags need to


use fewer bags to carry the same amount of groceries. Columns 3 and 4 consider the eects of the


tax on the amount of plastic used (measured in units of thin plastic bags as in Table 5) and the


number of paper bags used, respectively. Here we nd that the amount of plastic or paper used at


the end of the rst year of the tax was statistically signicantly lower that the amount used during


the ban.   Additionally, we nd no statistically signicant dierences in the amount of plastic or


paper used during the rst quarter of the tax compared to one year after the tax's implementation.




                                                 20
E. Robustness Checks

i. Bag Reuse

One concern with the estimates in Table 5 is that customers may be more or less likely to reuse


a disposable bag based on the type of bag.                For example, Prendergast, Wai Ng and Lee Leung


(2001) nd that paper bags are reused almost twice as many times as plastic bags. If customers


are more likely to reuse paper or thick plastic bags than thin plastic bags, the analysis in Table 5


will overstate the relative eectiveness of the tax in terms of environmental cost reduction. This


also highlights a limitation of our data collection  while our researchers attempted to determine


if a disposable bag was a new disposable bag, they could not always perfectly determine that the


disposable bag had not been brought from home to be reused.
                                                                             27


       Table 7 repeats the analyses in Table 5 allowing for reuse of paper and thick plastic bags.


Specically, we assume that thin plastic bags are used only once, while paper and thick plastic


bags are used two times each (i.e., reused once).                    Even after this adjustment, we still observe


signicant dierences in the amount of plastic and paper used under the two policies: customers use


an equivalent of three fewer thin plastic bags and 0.5 fewer paper bags during the tax relative to the


ban. Taken together, estimates in column 3 suggest that the tax led to a reduction in environmental


costs equivalent to the use of 5 single-use thin plastic bags per shopping trip relative to the ban.


Repeating the analysis in column 3 for additional reuses (see Appendix Table 1) shows that paper


and thick plastic bags must be used a minimum of six times as often as thin plastic bags in order to


no longer detect a signicantly larger eect of the tax relative to the ban on overall environmental


footprint  more than three times as often as suggested in Prendergast, Wai Ng and Lee Leung


(2001).      This suggests that our conclusions about the relative eectiveness of the two policies is


robust to accounting for dierences in reuse of dierent types of bags.

  27
       Similarly, in our calculations in Table 5, we are only considering the environmental costs of disposable bags and
not reusable bags.     However, Edwards and Fry (2011) estimate that standard reusable bags must be reused more
than 10 times in order to generate lower environmental costs than a single-use plastic bag. By ignoring the costs of
reusable bags, our calculations implicitly assume that reusable bags are reused a sucient number of times such that
their costs (relative to those of disposable bags) are negligible.




                                                            21
ii. Spillover Eects

One of the key benets of our setting is that we are able to compare two policy designs within the


same city using stores in the same county, which are subject to the same state and county level


regulations and which may draw similar customers, as a control. Conversely, a concern with this


study design is that there may be spillover eects if policies in Chicago have an eect on the behavior


of customers or retailers in neighboring cities. For example, if a customer shops at both Chicago


and suburban stores, they may respond to the tax by switching to reusable bags in both stores,


thereby biasing our estimate of the policy. Importantly, in this example, this would, if anything,


attenuate the magnitude of the eect we estimate toward zero. However, if instead the policy leads


customers who prefer disposable bags to shift their shopping to suburban stores instead of Chicago


stores, this bias could potentially drive our results.


   Table 8 tests the sensitivity of our results to spillover eects by replicating our main results


excluding the four stores in our sample located in ZIP codes that border the Chicago city line. We


nd that our results are qualitatively unchanged as a result of this restriction. While we cannot


completely rule out the possibility of spillover eects with our data, these nding suggest that our


results are unlikely to be driven by this bias.




V. Conclusion

This paper evaluates the relative eectiveness of two policies in Chicago aimed at reducing the use


of disposable shopping bags: a ban on thin plastic bags and a tax on all disposable bags. We do so


by comparing changes in disposable bag use in response to the repeal of a plastic bag ban and the


subsequent introduction of a disposable bag tax in the city of Chicago. We nd that the ban repeal


had no eect on the proportion of customers using a disposable bag, while the implementation of


the tax led to a large decrease. Additionally, the ban led to the introduction of free thick plastic


bags, a product that was eliminated after the ban was repealed. This suggests that all disposable


bag regulations do not appear to be equally eective: the tax was signicantly more successful than


the ban at reducing the proportion of customers using a disposable bag as well as the amount of


paper and plastic used.


   It is worth noting several key data limitations to estimating the overall environmental benets



                                                   22
(or costs) of the policies.       First, we do not have data on purchases of plastic trash bags which


may oset the decreases in overall plastic used (Taylor, 2019).                Second, we do not have data on


reuse of dierent types of bags.           For example, if customers reuse thick plastic bags many more


times than thin plastic bags (by our estimates, roughly 20 times as many), then a switch from thin


to thick bags could actually reduce environmental costs (Edwards and Fry, 2011).                     Similarly, we


do not calculate environmental costs associated with reusable bags; therefore, if the tax increases


purchases of reusable bags (rather than use of existing reusable bags), our estimates would overstate


the environmental benets of the tax.
                                              28 Finally, our data was collected during weekdays only; to


the extent that customers shopping on the weekends respond dierently to the policies, we may


misrepresent the overall eect of the policies on bag use.


       Additionally, our paper focuses only on the relative eect of these policies on environmental


costs. A full welfare analysis is beyond the scope of this paper, however, it is worth highlighting a


few factors that contribute to potential dierences across the two policies. First, a plastic bag ban


creates a larger direct nancial cost for retailers in the form of providing higher cost bags (paper


or thicker plastic),
                        29 while the tax creates a direct cost for consumers; however, it is necessary to


determine the incidence of those respective costs in order to assess the welfare implications. Second,


the two policies have dierent revenue implications for the government: the tax raised an average


of $6 million dollars in each of the rst two years (Giangreco, 2019), while the ban generates no


revenue at all. Finally, there may be other potential unintended consequences associated with the


                                                                                              b
disposable bag regulations, such as increases in checkout wait times (Taylor, 2020 ) or losses in sales


(Cabrera, Caera and Cid, 2020; Taylor, 2020 ).         a
       Nonetheless, given the rapid expansion of regulations restricting the use of disposable bags, our


results have important implications for policymakers considering regulations of dierent designs.


One potential implication of our ndings is that increasing the thickness of plastic bags regulated


by plastic bag bans may discourage retailers from providing alternative free plastic bags. However,


this policy change may simply lead to a larger shift toward disposable paper bags which have their


own environmental costs. Our ndings also have implications for policymakers choosing between

  28
       Edwards and Fry (2011) estimates that non-woven polypropylene reusable bags must be reused at least 11 times
more than a thin plastic bag in order to have a smaller environmental footprint.
  29
       For example, a thin plastic grocery bag costs about one cent to produce while a paper bag costs between 4 and
5 cents (Conway, 2007).




                                                           23
market-based policies and stand-alone bans. For example, Connecticut is transitioning from a 10-


cent disposable bag fee to a plastic bag ban in 2021. Similarly, New York City passed a ve-cent fee


on all disposable bags in 2016 which was overturned and replaced with a statewide policy banning


the use of thin plastic bags in 2020. The New York State policy gives individual counties the option


of implementing a ve-cent fee on paper bags  our results suggest that the success of the New York


policy rests heavily on the choice that the individual counties make.




                                                24
References
ACS. 2017. American Community Survey 5-Year Estimates.

Adda, Jérôme, and Francesca Cornaglia.             2010. The eect of bans and taxes on passive


  smoking.   American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2(1): 132.

Allcott, Hunt, Benjamin B. Lockwood, and Dmitry Taubinsky.                  2019. Should We Tax


  Sugar-Sweetened Beverages? An Overview of Theory and Evidence.          Journal of Economic Per-
  spectives, 33(3): 20227.

Bharadwaj, Bishal, Jean Marie Baland, and Mani Nepal.                2020. What makes a ban on


  plastic bags eective? The case of Nepal.   Environment and Development Economics, 25(2): 95
  114.



Bhutta, Neil, Jacob Goldin, and Tatiana Homono. 2016. Consumer borrowing after payday
  loan bans.   The Journal of Law and Economics, 59(1): 225259.

Brescoll, Victoria L., Rogan Kersh, and Kelly D. Brownell. 2008. Assessing the Feasibility
  and Impact of Federal Childhood Obesity Policies.      The Annals of the American Academy of
  Political and Social Science, 615(1): 178194.

Britschgi, Christian.   2018. Media, Legislators, Activists Stick By Straw Stats Produced By


  9-Year-Old.



Cabrera, José María, Marcelo Caera, and Alejandro Cid. 2020. Modest and Incomplete
  Incentives May Have Very Large Eects: The Impact of Prices on the Demand for Plastic Bags.


  Mimeo.

Cameron, A Colin, Jonah B Gelbach, and Douglas L Miller.                    2008. Bootstrap-Based


  Improvements for Inference with Clustered Errors.      The Review of Economics and Statistics,
  90(3): 414427.



Cawley, John, Anne Marie Thow, Katherine Wen, and David Frisvold. 2019. The eco-
  nomics of taxes on sugar-sweetened beverages: a review of the eects on prices, sales, cross-border


  shopping, and consumption.    Annual review of nutrition, 39: 317338.

                                                  25
Clapp, Jennifer, and Linda Swanston.        2009. Doing Away with Plastic Shopping Bags: In-


  ternational Patterns of Norm Emergence and Policy Implementation.     Environmental Politics,
  18(3): 315332.



Conway, Chris. 2007. Taking Aim at All Those Plastic Bags. New York Times.

Davis, Lucas W. 2008. The eect of driving restrictions on air quality in Mexico City. Journal
  of Political Economy, 116(1): 3881.

Edwards, Chris, and Jonna Meyho Fry. 2011. Life cycle assessment of supermarket carrier
  bags.   Environment Agency, Horizon House, Deanery Road, Bristol, BS1 5AH.

Fowlie, Meredith L. 2009. Incomplete Environmental Regulation, Imperfect Competition, and
  Emissions Leakage.   American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 1(2): 72112.

Gardinier, Dustin. 2019. California Banned Plastic Bags. So Why Do Stores Keep Using Them?
  San Francisco Chronicle.

Giangreco, Leigh. 2019. How Behavioral Science Solved Chicago's Plastic Bag Problem. Politico.

Grynbaum, Michael M. 2014. New Yorks Ban on Big Sodas Is Rejected by Final Court. New
  York Times.

Gupta, Kanupriya. 2011. Consumer responses to incentives to reduce plastic bag use: Evidence
  from a eld experiment in urban India. SAMDEE.

Homono, Tatiana A. 2018. Can small incentives have large eects?      The impact of taxes versus


  bonuses on disposable bag use.   American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 10(4): 177210.

Jakovcevic, Adriana, Linda Steg, Nadia Mazzeo, Romina Caballero, Paul Franco, Na-
  talia Putrino, and Jesica Favara. 2014. Charges for plastic bags: Motivational and behavioral
  eects.   Journal of Environmental Psychology, 40: 372380.

K®szegi, Botond, and Matthew Rabin. 2006. A Model of Reference-Dependent Preferences.
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(4): 11331165.

Lichtman-Sadot, Shirlee. 2016. Does banning carbonated beverages in schools decrease student
  consumption?     Journal of Public Economics, 140: 3050.

                                               26
Malani, Anup, and Julian Reif. 2015. Interpreting pre-trends as anticipation:        Impact on esti-


  mated treatment eects from tort reform.    Journal of Public Economics, 124: 117.

Nielsen, Tobias Dan, Karl Holmberg, and Johannes Stripple. 2019. Need a bag?               A review


  of public policies on plastic carrier bagsWhere, how and to what eect?        Waste management,
  87: 428440.



Pervin, Ismat Ara, Sheikh Mohammad Mahbubur Rahman, Mani Nepal, Abdul
  Kalam Enamul Haque, Humayun Karim, and Ganesh Dhakal. 2020. Adapting to urban
  ooding: a case of two cities in South Asia.   Water Policy, 22(S1): 162188.

Poortinga, Wouter, Lorraine Whitmarsh, and Christine Suolk. 2013. The introduction
  of a single-use carrier bag charge in Wales: Attitude change and behavioural spillover eects.


  Journal of Environmental Psychology, 36: 240247.

Prendergast, Gerard, Shuk Wai Ng, and Lee Lee Leung. 2001. Consumer perceptions of
  shopping bags.   Marketing Intelligence & Planning, 19(7): 475482.

Rivers, Nicholas, Sarah Shenstone-Harris, and Nathan Young.                2017. Using nudges to


  reduce waste? The case of Toronto's plastic bag levy.    Journal of environmental management,
  188: 153162.



Rochman, Bonnie. 2018. Straws are out, lids are in:      Starbucks announces environmental mile-


  stone.



Romer, Jennie R, and Leslie Mintz Tamminen. 2014. Plastic bag reduction ordinances:            New


  York city's proposed charge on all carryout bags as a model for US cities.   Tulane Environmental
  Law Journal, 27(2): 237275.

Solomon, Molly. 2016. One Year After The Ban, Plastic Bags Still An Issue On Oahu.

Taylor, Rebecca. 2020a. Its in the Bag?    The Eect of Plastic Carryout Bag Bans on Where and


  What People Purchase to Eat.    Mimeo.

Taylor, Rebecca L, and Soa B Villas-Boas. 2016. Bans vs. Fees:           Disposable Carryout Bag


  Policies and Bag Usage.   Applied Economic Perspectives and Policy, 38(2): 351372.

                                                27
Taylor, Rebecca LC. 2019. Bag leakage:       The eect of disposable carryout bag regulations on


  unregulated bags.   Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 93: 254271.

Taylor, Rebecca LC.          b
                         2020 . A Mixed Bag: The Hidden Time Costs of Regulating Consumer


  Behavior.   Journal of the Association of Environmental and Resource Economists, 7(2): 345378.

USEPA, United States Environmental Protection Agency. 2018. Municipal Solid Waste in
  the United States: Facts and Figures.



Wagner, Travis P. 2017. Reducing single-use plastic shopping bags in the USA. Waste Manage-
  ment, 70: 312.

White, Jeremy. 2019. When Lawmakers Try to Ban Assault Weapons, Gunmakers Adapt. New
  York Times.

Wilson, Brent M, Stephanie Stolarz-Fantino, and Edmund Fantino. 2013. Regulating the
  way to obesity: unintended consequences of limiting sugary drink sizes.   PloS one, 8(4): e61081.




                                               28
                             Figure 1: Map of ZIP Codes Included in Sample




Green areas represent the ZIP codes of Chicago stores included in our study sample. Orange areas represent the ZIP
codes of suburban stores included in our study sample. The black boundary is the border of the city of Chicago.




                                                       29
                                 Figure 2: Disposable Bag Use by Bag Type




The height of each bar represents the proportion of customers using a disposable bag separately for Chicago and
the surrounding suburbs during the three main study periods: the Chicago plastic bag ban (November-December
2016), the one month of no regulation following the ban's repeal (January 2017), and the rst months of the Chicago
disposable bag tax (February-March 2017).     Shading represents the proportion of customers who used only thick
plastic bags, only thin plastic bags, only paper bags, or a mix of disposable bag types.




                                                         30
                                                                                     Figure 3: Disposable Bag Use Over Time

                  (a) Proportion of Customers Using a Disposable Bag                                                          (b) Average Number of Disposable Bags Used per Trip
                                            1




                                                                                                                                    5
  Percent of Customers Using a Disposable Bag
                                      .9




                                                                                                                                    4
                                  .8




                                                                                                                             Number of Bags
                            .7




                                                                                                                                        3
                       .6




                                                                                                                               2
             .4   .5




                                                                                                                                    1
 .2   .3




                                                                                                                                    0
                                                Ban   No Regulation   Tax: Q1            Tax: Q2         Tax: Q3   Tax: Q4                    Ban   No Regulation   Tax: Q1            Tax: Q2         Tax: Q3   Tax: Q4
                                                                                Period                                                                                        Period

                                                                      Chicago                      Suburbs                                                          Chicago                      Suburbs




Figure reports the proportion of customers using a disposable bag (Panel A) and the average number of disposable
bags used per trip (Panel B) separately for Chicago and the surrounding suburbs during the six study periods: the
Chicago plastic bag ban (November-December 2016), the one month of no regulation following the ban's repeal
(January 2017), and the rst four quarters of the Chicago disposable bag tax (February 2017 - March 2018).




                                                                                                                      31
                                     Table 1: Sample Store Characteristics


              Store    Observations        Chicago        % White     % Male            Median ZIP Income
              1             2,005                          43.4            42.7              45,548
              2             1,801                          46.9            39.7              70,270
              3             2,190                          30.1            36.0              65,744
              4             2,401                          68.7            40.1              57,410
              5             1,646             x             1.3            40.9              32,557
              6             2,039             x            74.8            44.3              78,796
              7             2,101             x            80.1            45.9              88,256
              8             1,910             x             7.6            36.9              25,343
              9             2,095             x            62.4            50.5              71,019
              10            2,185             x            72.5            49.1              71,019
              11            1,971             x             1.0            39.5              32,557
              12            1,658             x             7.7            40.2              35,112


Table reports the number of observations per store, store location, the fraction of sample members who were white
and male, respectively, and the median household income in the store's ZIP code. Each observation refers to one
shopping trip. Sample sizes reported include observations from the full study period (November 2016-March 2018).




                                    Table 2: Bag Use by Location and Policy


                                                  Suburbs                                    Chicago
                                    Ban     No Regulation           Tax           Ban     No Regulation      Tax
                                     (1)            (2)             (3)           (4)          (5)           (6)
      Any Disposable Bag            0.90           0.92             0.91          0.82         0.82         0.49
                                  (0.30)          (0.28)          (0.28)      (0.39)          (0.38)        (0.50)
      Any Reusable Bag              0.08           0.04             0.06          0.13         0.14         0.33
                                  (0.27)          (0.19)          (0.24)      (0.33)          (0.34)        (0.47)
      No Bags                       0.05           0.05             0.04          0.09         0.07         0.21
                                  (0.21)          (0.22)          (0.20)      (0.28)          (0.26)        (0.41)
      # Total Bags                  3.39           3.53             3.20          2.28         2.72         1.64
                                  (2.99)          (2.96)          (2.66)      (2.03)          (2.58)        (1.70)
      # Disposable Bags             3.27           3.45             3.07          2.07         2.49         1.04
                                  (3.02)          (3.00)          (2.70)      (2.10)          (2.66)        (1.60)

      Observations                1,454            1,370          1,406       2,694           2,568         2,724


Table reports the fraction of customers using any disposable bags, any reusable bags, and no bags at all along with the
average number of disposable bags used per trip separately for customers shopping in Chicago and the surrounding
suburbs under dierent policy regimes. The Ban period refers to the nal months of the Chicago plastic bag ban
(November-December 2016), Tax refers to the rst two months of the Chicago disposable bag tax (February-March
2017), and No Regulation refers to the one-month period after the repeal of the ban and before the implementation
of the tax (January 2017). Standard deviations in parentheses.




                                                            32
                        Table 3: Eect of Disposable Bag Regulation on Bag Use


                        Any Disposable Bag         # Disposable Bags         Any Reusable Bag         No Bag
                                   (1)                         (2)                    (3)                (4)
    A. Eect of Ban and Tax vs. No Regulation
    ChicagoxBan                  -0.004                    -0.232                   -0.037              0.024
                                (0.033)                   (0.165)                   (0.028)            (0.018)
    Ban                          -0.005                    -0.166                    0.027             -0.006
                                (0.030)                   (0.113)                   (0.028)            (0.013)
    ChicagoxTax                -0.332***                 -1.087***                 0.168***           0.160***
                                (0.030)                   (0.270)                   (0.022)            (0.028)
    Tax                          -0.000                  -0.348***                 0.022***            -0.014
                                (0.013)                   (0.109)                   (0.006)            (0.009)
    Observations                 12,216                    12,216                   12,216             12,216


    B. Relative Eect of Tax vs. Ban
    ChicagoxTax                -0.330***                 -0.860***                 0.204***           0.138***
                                (0.037)                   (0.221)                   (0.033)            (0.020)
    Tax                          0.006                     -0.172                   -0.004             -0.010
                                (0.021)                   (0.168)                   (0.022)            (0.007)

    Observations                 8,278                        8,278                  8,278              8,278
    Dep Var Mean                 0.918                        3.454                  0.039              0.053


Standard errors clustered at the store level in parentheses. Outcome variables are indicators for whether a customer
used any disposable bags (column 1), the number of disposable bags used per trip (column 2), whether the customer
used any reusable bags (column 3), and if the customer used no bags at all (column 4). Chicago is an indicator
for shopping in Chicago (versus the surrounding suburbs), Ban is an indicator for shopping during the Chicago
plastic bag ban (versus during the period with no disposable bag regulation), and Tax is an indicator for shopping
during the Chicago disposable bag tax (versus during the period with no disposable bag regulation). Panel A includes
customers shopping in either the ban, the no regulation, or the tax period (reference group = no regulation); Panel B
includes only customers shopping in either the tax or the ban period (reference group = ban). All regressions control
for customer sex and race as well as store, time of day, and data collector xed eects. Dependent variable mean
evaluated for customers in the suburbs during the no regulation period. *p<.05; **p<.01; ***p<.001.




                                                         33
         Table 4: Eect of Disposable Bag Tax vs. Plastic Bag Ban on Disposable Bag Use


                                         Only Thick      Only Thin            Only Paper   Mix Disposable
                                              (1)               (2)              (3)             (4)
         ChicagoxTax (vs. Ban)            -0.325**        0.234***             -0.267**        0.029**
                                           (0.115)         (0.046)             (0.099)         (0.012)
         Tax                                0.003              0.024            0.006         -0.027**
                                           (0.018)         (0.030)             (0.012)         (0.011)

         Observations                       8,278              8,278            8,278           8,278
         Dep Var Mean                       0.001              0.813            0.036           0.054


Standard errors clustered at the store level in parentheses.    Outcome variables are indicators for using only thick
plastic bags (column 1), only thin plastic bags (column 2), only paper bags (column 3), or using a mix of disposable
bag types (column 4).    Chicago is an indicator for shopping in Chicago (versus the surrounding suburbs) and
Tax is an indicator for shopping during the Chicago disposable bag tax (versus during the the Chicago plastic bag
ban). Analyses exclude the one month period of no disposable bag regulation between the plastic bag ban and the
disposable bag tax. All regressions control for customer sex and race as well as store, time of day, and data collector
xed eects. Dependent variable mean evaluated for customers in the suburbs during the Chicago bag ban. *p<.05;
**p<.01; ***p<.001.




        Table 5: Eect of Disposable Bag Tax vs. Plastic Bag Ban on Environmental Costs


                                      Amount Plastic        Amount Paper           Environmental Footprint
                                              (1)                      (2)                    (3)
       ChicagoxTax (vs. Ban)               -3.771**               -0.684*                  -6.473***
                                           (1.523)                (0.339)                   (0.886)
       Tax                                  -0.118                -0.011                    -0.260
                                           (0.126)                (0.050)                   (0.237)

       Observations                         8,278                     8,278                  8,278
       Dep Var Mean                         3.093                     0.186                  4.018


Standard errors clustered at the store level in parentheses. Outcome variables are indicators for total plastic used
per shopping trip where the units are in numbers of thin plastic bags (column 1), total paper used per shopping
trip where the units are in numbers of paper bags (column 2) and the environmental cost generated from the use of
both plastic and paper bags measured in units of cost generated from one thin plastic bag (column 3). Calculations
assume that environmental costs of paper bags and thick plastic bags are four and ve times that of thin plastic bags,
respectively, and that all disposable bags are reused the same number of times. Chicago is an indicator for shopping
in Chicago (versus the surrounding suburbs) and Tax is an indicator for shopping during the Chicago disposable
bag tax (versus during the the Chicago plastic bag ban). Analyses exclude the one month period of no disposable
bag regulation between the plastic bag ban and the disposable bag tax. All regressions control for customer sex and
race as well as store, time of day, and data collector xed eects. Dependent variable mean evaluated for customers
in the suburbs during the Chicago bag ban. *p<.05; **p<.01; ***p<.001.




                                                          34
     Table 6: Eect of Disposable Bag Tax vs. Plastic Bag Ban by Quarter of Implementation


                          Any Disposable Bag         # Disposable Bags        Amount of Plastic        Amount of Paper
                                    (1)                         (2)                    (3)                     (4)
 Chicago x Tax Q1               -0.330***                 -0.879***                 -3.886**                 -0.680*
                                 (0.036)                      (0.236)                (1.512)                 (0.329)
 Chicago x Tax Q2               -0.314***                  -0.559**                 -4.117**                -0.617**
                                 (0.034)                      (0.186)                (1.779)                 (0.277)
 Chicago x Tax Q3               -0.252***                     -0.227                -4.041**                  -0.469
                                 (0.033)                      (0.347)                (1.676)                 (0.276)
 Chicago x Tax Q4               -0.248***                     -0.319                -3.970**                 -0.495*
                                 (0.028)                      (0.244)                (1.634)                 (0.248)
 Tax: Q1                           0.007                      -0.159                 -0.142                   -0.004
                                 (0.020)                      (0.187)                (0.138)                 (0.052)
 Tax: Q2                          -0.021                  -0.471***                  -0.370                   -0.117
                                 (0.028)                      (0.118)                (0.485)                 (0.160)
 Tax: Q3                          -0.023                      -0.502                 -0.171                   0.033
                                 (0.024)                      (0.399)                (0.722)                 (0.124)
 Tax: Q4                          -0.026                      -0.195                  0.137                   0.092
                                 (0.026)                      (0.302)                (0.763)                 (0.119)

 Observations                     20,064                      20,064                 20,064                  20,064
 Dep Var Mean                      0.904                      3.273                   3.093                   0.186


Standard errors clustered at the store level in parentheses. Outcome variables are indicators for whether a customer
used any disposable bag (column 1), the number of disposable bags used per trip (column 2), total plastic used per
shopping trip where the units are in numbers of thin plastic bags (column 3) and total paper used per shopping trip
where the units are in numbers of paper bags (column 4). Chicago is an indicator for shopping in Chicago (versus
the surrounding suburbs).   Tax: Q1 through Tax: Q4 are indicators for shopping during each of the rst four
quarters of the Chicago disposable bag tax, respectively, with an omitted category of the period during the Chicago
plastic bag ban. Analyses exclude the one month period of no disposable bag regulation between the plastic bag ban
and the disposable bag tax. All regressions control for customer sex and race as well as store, time of day, and data
collector xed eects. Dependent variable mean evaluated for customers in the suburbs during the Chicago bag ban.
*p<.05; **p<.01; ***p<.001.




                                                         35
Table 7: Eect of Disposable Bag Tax vs. Plastic Bag Ban on Environmental Costs - Robustness
to Bag Reuse


                                      Amount Plastic        Amount Paper         Environmental Footprint
                                              (1)                  (2)                        (3)
       ChicagoxTax (vs. Ban)               -2.872**              -0.513*                  -4.873***
                                           (1.209)               (0.254)                    (0.694)
       Tax                                  -0.129               -0.009                     -0.263
                                           (0.105)               (0.037)                    (0.204)

       Observations                         8,278                 8,278                      8,278
       Dep Var Mean                         4.018                 0.139                      3.831


Standard errors clustered at the store level in parentheses. Outcome variables are indicators for total plastic used
per shopping trip where the units are in numbers of thin plastic bags (column 1), total paper used per shopping
trip where the units are in numbers of paper bags (column 2) and the environmental cost generated from the use of
both plastic and paper bags measured in units of cost generated from one thin plastic bag (column 3). Calculations
assume that environmental costs of paper bags and thick plastic bags are four and ve times that of thin plastic
bags, respectively, and that thin plastic bags are used only once, while paper and thick plastic bags are used two
times each (i.e. reused once). Chicago is an indicator for shopping in Chicago (versus the surrounding suburbs) and
Tax is an indicator for shopping during the Chicago disposable bag tax (versus during the the Chicago plastic bag
ban). Analyses exclude the one month period of no disposable bag regulation between the plastic bag ban and the
disposable bag tax. All regressions control for customer sex and race as well as store, time of day, and data collector
xed eects. Dependent variable mean evaluated for customers in the suburbs during the Chicago bag ban. *p<.05;
**p<.01; ***p<.001.




   Table 8: Eect of Disposable Bag Tax vs. Plastic Bag Ban - Robustness to Spillover Eects


                                Any Disposable Bag          # Disposable Bags         Any Reusable Bag          No Bag
                                           (1)                       (2)                       (3)                (4)
 ChicagoxTax (vs. Ban)                 -0.305***                  -1.069**                  0.173***           0.127***
                                        (0.035)                    (0.337)                   (0.025)            (0.025)
 Tax                                     -0.008                     0.099                   0.034***             -0.022
                                        (0.011)                    (0.275)                   (0.007)            (0.013)

 Observations                            5,459                      5,459                     5,459              5,459
 Dep Var Mean                            0.914                      2.643                     0.038              0.061


Standard errors clustered at the store level in parentheses. Outcome variables are indicators for whether a customer
used any disposable bags (column 1), the number of disposable bags used per trip (column 2), whether the customer
used any reusable bags (column 3), and if the customer used no bags at all (column 4). Chicago is an indicator
for shopping in Chicago (versus the surrounding suburbs) and Tax is an indicator for shopping during the Chicago
disposable bag tax (versus during the the Chicago plastic bag ban). Analyses exclude the one month period of no
disposable bag regulation between the plastic bag ban and the disposable bag tax and stores located in ZIP codes
that border the Chicago city line. All regressions control for customer sex and race as well as store, time of day, and
data collector xed eects. Dependent variable mean evaluated for customers in the suburbs during the Chicago bag
ban. *p<.05; **p<.01; ***p<.001.




                                                          36
                    Appendix Table 1: Eect on Environmental Footprint by Reuse
                                         1 Reuse       2 Reuses      3 Reuses      4 Reuses     5 Reuses
                                            (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)
          ChicagoxTax (vs. Ban)         -4.873***     -3.273***      -1.672***     -0.627**       -0.383
                                          (0.694)       (0.518)       (0.380)       (0.237)      (0.229)
          Tax                             -0.263         -0.266        -0.268       -0.278        -0.278
                                          (0.204)       (0.183)       (0.179)       (0.208)      (0.211)

          Observations                     8,278         8,278         8,278         8,278        8,278
          Dep Var Mean                     3.831         3.644         3.457         3.418        3.393


Standard errors clustered at the store level in parentheses. The outcome variable in all columns is the
environmental cost generated from the use of one single-use plastic bag. Calculations assume that the
environmental costs of paper bags and thick plastic bags are four and ve times that of thin plastic bags,
respectively. Each column makes a dierent assumption about the number of reuses of paper and thick plastic bags
relative to thin plastic bags: columns 1 through 5 assume that thin plastic bags are used only once but paper and
thick plastic bags are reused one to ve times, respectively. Chicago is an indicator for shopping in Chicago
(versus the surrounding suburbs) and Tax is an indicator for shopping during the Chicago disposable bag tax
(versus during the the Chicago plastic bag ban). Analyses exclude the one month period of no disposable bag
regulation between the plastic bag ban and the disposable bag tax. All regressions control for customer sex and race
as well as store, time of day, and data collector xed eects. Dependent variable mean evaluated for customers in
the suburbs during the Chicago bag ban. *p<.05; **p<.01; ***p<.001.




                                                         37
