                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

                           PREPARING FOR A PANDEMIC:
                       ACCELERATING VACCINE AVAILABILITY

                                        Amrita Ahuja
                                         Susan Athey
                                         Arthur Baker
                                         Eric Budish
                                     Juan Camilo Castillo
                                      Rachel Glennerster
                                    Scott Duke Kominers
                                       Michael Kremer
                                       Jean Nahrae Lee
                                      Canice Prendergast
                                    Christopher M. Snyder
                                        Alex Tabarrok
                                       Brandon Joel Tan
                                        Witold Wicek

                                      Working Paper 28492
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28492

                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   February 2021

Athey acknowledges a generous gift from Schmidt Futures. Ahuja and Kremer acknowledge
generous funding from the Wellspring Philanthropic Fund. Baker and Wicek acknowledge
generous funding from Emergent Ventures. Kominers acknowledges generous funding from the
Washington Center for Equitable Growth. Kremer is a Senior Advisor to the World Bank on
vaccines; he is also a co-founder and scientific director of USAID's Development Innovation
Ventures. Lee is a senior economist at the World Bank and has some involvement in vaccine
financing. Athey, Kremer, and Snyder served on a pro-bono advisory group on the design of
COVAX. Budish, Kominers, and Prendergast serve on a pro-bono expert group advising on the
design of the COVAX exchange mechanism. For contributing input and expertise, we are
indebted to numerous experts in vaccine procurement from international organizations and
governments. Whit Athey, Owen Barder, Tasneem Chipty, Lisa Danzig, Greg Larson, Jonathan
Levin, Jessica Picket, and Duc Tran provided invaluable advice. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Amrita Ahuja, Susan Athey, Arthur Baker, Eric Budish, Juan Camilo Castillo, Rachel
Glennerster, Scott Duke Kominers, Michael Kremer, Jean Nahrae Lee, Canice Prendergast,
Christopher M. Snyder, Alex Tabarrok, Brandon Joel Tan, and Witold Wicek. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Preparing for a Pandemic: Accelerating Vaccine Availability
Amrita Ahuja, Susan Athey, Arthur Baker, Eric Budish, Juan Camilo Castillo, Rachel Glennerster,
Scott Duke Kominers, Michael Kremer, Jean Nahrae Lee, Canice Prendergast, Christopher
M. Snyder, Alex Tabarrok, Brandon Joel Tan, and Witold Wicek
NBER Working Paper No. 28492
February 2021
JEL No. D02,H12,I11,I18,O19,O31

                                            ABSTRACT

Vaccinating the world's population quickly in a pandemic has enormous health and economic
benefits. We analyze the problem faced by governments in determining the scale and structure of
procurement for vaccines. We analyze alternative approaches to procurement. We find that if the
goal is to accelerate the vaccine delivery timetable, buyers should directly fund manufacturing
capacity and shoulder most of the risk of failure, while maintaining some direct incentives for
speed. We analyzed the optimal portfolio of vaccine investments for countries with different
characteristics as well as the implications for international cooperation. Our analysis, considered in
light of the experience of 2020, suggests lessons for future pandemics.

Amrita Ahuja                                         Juan Camilo Castillo
Douglas B. Marshall Jr. Family Foundation            Department of Economics
600 Jefferson Street, Suite 310                      University of Pennsylvania
Houston, Texas 77002                                 jccast@sas.upenn.edu
amrita.b.ahuja@gmail.com
                                                     Rachel Glennerster
Susan Athey                                          Foreign, Commonwealth and
Graduate School of Business                          Development Office
Stanford University                                  22 Whitehall
655 Knight Way                                       London, SW1A 2EG
Stanford, CA 94305                                   United Kingdom
and NBER                                             rachel.glennerster@fcdo.gov.uk
athey@stanford.edu
                                                     Scott Duke Kominers
Arthur Baker                                         Harvard Business School &
Harvard University                                   Department of Economics
arthur.w.baker@gmail.com                             Rock Center 219
                                                     Soldiers Field
Eric Budish                                          Boston, MA 02163
Booth School of Business                             kominers@fas.harvard.edu
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue                           Michael Kremer
Chicago, IL 60637                                    University of Chicago
and NBER                                             Kenneth C. Griffin Department of Economics
eric.budish@chicagobooth.edu                         1126 E. 59th St.
                                                     Chicago, IL 60637
                                                     and NBER
                                                     kremermr@uchicago.edu
Jean Nahrae Lee
World Bank
1818 H St NW
Washington, DC 20433
Jlee20@worldbank.org

Canice Prendergast
Graduate School of Business
The University of Chicago
1101 E. 58th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
canice.prendergast@ChicagoBooth.edu

Christopher M. Snyder
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
301 Rockefeller Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
chris.snyder@dartmouth.edu

Alex Tabarrok
Department of Economics
George Mason University
Tabarrok@gmu.edu

Brandon Joel Tan
Harvard University
btan@g.harvard.edu

Witold Wicek
WAW Statistical Consulting Ltd.
witold.wiecek@gmail.com
I. Introduction
Each month, the COVID pandemic kills 300,000 people (as of January 2021) and reduces global
GDP by approximately $500 billion. The full cost, including losses to health and human capital is
likely much larger. Cutler and Summers (2020) estimate total losses of $16 trillion (around $800
billion per month of the pandemic) for the US alone.
        Beyond the epidemiological externalities that motivate governments to play a central role
in vaccination programs, new issues arise in a pandemic. Vaccine candidates face substantial risk
of failure or delay in proving safety and efficacy. Normally firms wait to resolve this uncertainty
before scaling up manufacturing, a risky and time-consuming process requiring specialized
facilities and specific investments. However, in a pandemic the benefit of speed makes it socially
valuable to invest in manufacturing capacity in parallel with testing.
       Social and political limits on vaccine prices during pandemics mean the social value far
exceeds the commercial returns to vaccine manufacturers from installing capacity. In a companion
piece (Castillo et. al 2020), we estimate that increasing the total supply of vaccine capacity
available in January 2021 from 2 billion to 3 billion courses per year generated $1.75 trillion in
social value, while additional firm revenue was closer to $30 billion assuming a price of $15 per
dose. Additional profits would be smaller still. Since unprecedented acceleration of manufacturing
involves substantial, risky investment, carefully crafted public intervention is needed to align
social and private benefits. What magnitude and structure of public intervention is best?
       Early in the pandemic, we analyzed alternative approaches to procurement, arguing that
buyers should directly fund manufacturing capacity and shoulder most of the risk of failure in
exchange for the right to buy doses at close to marginal cost should the vaccine candidate be
successful, while maintaining some direct incentives for speed. We analyzed the optimal portfolio
of vaccine investments for countries with different characteristics as well as the implications for
international cooperation. Our analysis, considered in light of the experience of 2020, suggests
lessons for future pandemics.


II. Design of Procurement Contracts
Since many aspects of the vaccine development process are beyond the full control of vaccine
developers (e.g., the rate at which trial participants will be infected or the occurrence of adverse


                                                     1
events that pause trials), bonus/penalty clauses for speed large enough to reflect its value would
involve unacceptable levels of risk for firms and could have unintended consequences. Capacity
installation is more predictable and contractible.
         Buyers can incentivize early installation of capacity by reimbursing firms for the cost of
installation (before testing and regulatory approval are complete), thus transferring risk of failure
from firms to themselves (push contracts); or they might commit to purchase vaccines on specified
terms, but only if regulatory approval is completed successfully, leaving the risk with firms (pull
contracts). We analyze the costs and benefits of these alternatives in Appendix A.4. We consider
a stylized environment in which firms have private information on their chance of success, buyers
want many firms to invest--including those with only a modest chance of success--and the cost of
capacity is observable.
         When pull contracts are used, a large pull payment is required to induce at-risk capacity
construction for candidates with a low chance of success. When it is not possible to observe and
condition payments on the probability of success, governments wishing to induce a diverse set of
firms to make at-risk investments must design pull contracts to offer all firms a price high enough
to induce the marginal firms to invest. This price structure generates substantial rents for firms
with a high probability of success and is therefore expensive compared to cost reimbursement. Our
analysis implies that buyers should contract directly on capacity, relying primarily on at-risk cost
reimbursement (push funding). However, in practice, buyers have some information on probability
of success, do not perfectly observe costs, and--critically--want to incentivize speed. We
therefore recommend that push payments cover less than the full cost, giving firms "skin in the
game" and deterring those with no realistic chance of success from accepting push funding. A pull
component can be calibrated to induce the marginal firm to participate and structured to incentivize
speed.
         We contrast the situation we study with the classic case for an advance market
commitment, in which resources are severely limited and intended to address a substantial research
and development challenge. It is harder to estimate the cost of research and development than
capacity installation, and more difficult to judge which activities or firms should be funded to give
the best chance of success. In the classic case, pull funding induces investment only from firms
that are likely to succeed, thus aligning incentives.
       How do our recommendations compare with what happened in 2020? While full contracts
are not public, many deals in 2020 incorporated push payments by governments, covering the costs
of late-stage trials and scaling up of vaccine production, including investments in inputs such as
syringes and vials. In exchange, firms committed to deliver a specified number of doses within a
certain time frame. In contrast, Pfizer's contract included only pull funding. Buyers committed to
purchase a given quantity by a given date. Pfizer built capacity in advance of clinical approval at
its own risk, but not enough to serve the world in 2021.


III. Selecting a Portfolio
How should a buyer decide how many vaccine candidates to support and how much capacity to
procure prior to regulatory approval? We consider a model in which the buyer accelerates delivery
of a successful candidate by 3 to 6 months by choosing the capacity for each candidate (courses
per month) that will be installed at the buyer's risk.
       Based on expert opinions, historical data, and a database of the vaccine pipeline (WHO,
2020), we constructed estimates of the probability of success for each vaccine, updated throughout
2020; Appendix A.1 presents the base case probabilities as of August 2020. We made assumptions
about the correlation of success among vaccines using similar technologies and calculated the
expected number of successful courses across vaccines. Diversification across candidates and
platforms increases the probability of success. Using country-specific estimates of mortality and
GDP loss, we estimate the total health and economic benefits a country can expect from investing
in different vaccine portfolios. One critical and uncertain parameter is the elasticity of supply of
vaccine capacity. Many experts in industry and in international organizations believed there were
hard limits on how much supply could be created in the relevant time. A standard economic
analysis would suggest that prices would reflect the value of obtaining early doses of vaccine for
the marginal country, which would be immense, and that if supply is inelastic and prices are subject
to a ceiling, shortages ensue. To illustrate this, Appendix A.2 considers a range of assumptions
about supply elasticity.
       Across scenarios, we find early at-risk investments in vaccine manufacturing capacity
would have had, in expectation, large net benefits for countries for all levels of income (Appendix
Table A.1). However, with elastic supply, global net benefits are roughly two times larger. The
portfolio that maximizes net benefits varies substantially across countries. Higher income

                                                         3
countries (HICs) find it worthwhile to purchase more courses per capita and a larger portfolio of
candidates, while lower-income candidates invest only in candidates most likely to succeed.
       How does this model compare with actual deals made during 2020? Many countries made
bilateral deals. HICs, especially the U.S. and U.K., invested billions of dollars at risk, contracting
for large numbers of courses across multiple candidates. These investments will accelerate the end
of the pandemic. Upper middle-income countries made deals for a smaller number of doses and
candidates (Duke Global Health Innovation Center, 2020). While most lower income countries
(LICs) did not purchase doses, they anticipated receiving them from donors through COVAX. The
unprecedented investments that countries made were still smaller than our model suggested.
       Because our model assumed a relatively low chance of success for each vaccine candidate
and only a modest correlation between these probabilities, it suggested that it was optimal to invest
in significant capacity for each of many candidates, including some early-stage candidates. Ex
post, multiple candidates turned out to be successful, including the never-before used mRNA
platforms. Perhaps this was a lucky realization, or perhaps we underestimated the chance of
success or correlation. However, investing in the amount of capacity recommended by our model
(as of August 2020) would have allowed the U.S. to complete vaccination by March 2021 rather
than waiting until summer as is currently expected, and the world to complete vaccination by
October 2021 rather than June 2022. Using a more conservative approach to computing economic
harm from the pandemic than Cutler and Summers (2020), and also accounting for diminishing
returns from vaccination in a conservative way, we estimate that this acceleration would have had
benefits of $167 billion for the U.S. and $1.14 trillion for the world (Table 1), substantially higher
than likely costs.
Table 1: Advance capacity expansion effects

    Advance capacity    At-Risk Capacity of Approved       Benefits relative to
      investment            Vaccines (bn courses)          Zero At-Risk ($bn)     Vaccination complete by

Panel A, U.S.

     Recommended                    1.05                          556.9                  Mar 2021

         Actual                     0.45                          389.9                  Jul 2021

          Zero                       --                            --                    Oct 2021

Panel B, World

     Recommended                    7.12                         2748.7                  Oct 2021

         Actual                     3.75                         1606.4                  Jun 2022

          Zero                       --                            --                    Sep 2022

See Appendix A.3 for full calculation.

       In a companion piece (Castillo et. al), we estimate that even at this late stage, investment
to expand manufacturing capacity would have large benefits. This could mean repurposing
facilities, adding lines to existing ones or increasing throughput along the supply chain. There have
also been interesting proposals to wring more output out of existing factories, for example by
producing lower-dose vaccines. Governments could elicit bids from firms to identify ways to
produce more doses.


IV. International Considerations
Many observers voiced concern about "vaccine nationalism" during 2020. This included fears that
countries would prevent export of vaccines, and some producer countries such as India reportedly
considered the idea, according to the CEO of Serum Institute, the largest vaccine producer in India.
As a result of the risk, countries have distorted investment disproportionately towards domestic
vaccine candidates. To date, most international export contracts have been honored. This fact has
allowed countries to diversify their portfolios, which our analysis suggests is extremely valuable.
Given that many vaccine candidates have proved successful, diversification has so far not been
critical, but this could not have been predicted and may not be the case in future pandemics.
Reinforcing norms of honoring contracts and not banning exports would be valuable.


                                                       5
       Vaccines delivered earlier are more valuable than those delivered later. This distinction
creates challenges if countries sign contracts believing that they are entitled to doses soon after a
vaccine is approved but are in fact placed in a "queue" behind other countries for the output of the
same capacity. International norms that encourage firms to commit to construct sufficient
manufacturing capacity to meet promised delivery timelines might increase capacity creation while
reducing uncertainty.
       Many commentators have emphasized that there may be negative externalities on other
countries from ordering vaccines if the supply of manufacturing capacity is inelastic, leading to
high prices or, if there are constraints on pricing, shortages. However, our analysis suggests that,
to the extent that supply is elastic, there will also be positive externalities by expanding global
capacity, allowing manufacturers to serve other countries faster than they would have otherwise.
If supply is perfectly elastic, the negative externality is eliminated, while the world as a whole
benefits from faster vaccination. The fact that actual capacity available at the end of 2020 exceeds
initial forecasts suggests substantial elasticity even in the short run. Indeed, Pfizer argued that
earlier investments in its supply chain could have accelerated capacity expansion (LaFraniere and
Thomas, 2020).
       For future pandemics, elasticity of supply of vaccine capacity is a policy variable. It can be
increased through investment in supply chains, either by stockpiling or by building extra
manufacturing capacity for key intermediate inputs, such as bioreactors, delivery devices, or
adjuvants. These actions would not only be directly valuable, they would reduce incentives for
governments to use emergency authority to prohibit exports, or race to secure supplies in ways that
could create negative externalities for other countries. If we anticipate social constraints on pricing
during a pandemic, reaching the efficient level of input capacity or stockpiling will require public
subsidy.
       There have been some attempts to centralize global vaccine procurement. This is not
necessary to diversify vaccine portfolios, since this can be achieved through trade, but it may have
other benefits. First, monopsony power can be used to hold down prices. However, during the
current pandemic, prices have not skyrocketed. Second, a central procurement vehicle can be used
to coordinate donations to lower income countries, which is desirable on humanitarian grounds
and to prevent disease spread from these countries. In 2020, the COVAX facility played this role.
Third, there can be economies of scale in contracting, planning and supply chain investment.
Finally, centralization can facilitate efficient prioritization. From a global health perspective, the
allocation should respond to local conditions as well as target individuals by vulnerability or their
externalities.
        International agreements require agreement about size, scope, and allocation. In Appendix
A.3, we analyze the incentives of countries to participate in agreements with alternative
configurations of countries as well as allocation schemes. Our analysis shows that if a centralized
arrangement allocates vaccines to countries in proportion to population, then HICs prefer to
purchase bilaterally instead. Linking allocation to contributions more closely strengthens
incentives for HICs to invest. Moreover, as the optimal portfolio differs across countries,
centralized agreements could allow flexibility in how much to invest and in what candidates.
        How does this reasoning match the events of 2020? Most deals have been bilateral. Early
in 2020, attempts at enlisting HIC countries in international cooperation faltered, other than
through the E.U., which invested conservatively and serves a group of countries with similar
incomes and similar needs. COVAX now allows countries to buy different quantities of vaccine,
and most self-financing countries opted for an "optional purchase agreement", giving them
flexibility about which vaccine to purchase.


V. Conclusions
During a pandemic, expanding manufacturing capacity for a wide portfolio of vaccine candidates
has large benefits. It is efficient to contract on capacity rather than doses and to primarily use push
funding. Investing in capacity for or stockpiles of intermediate inputs used in vaccine production
could enable faster and cheaper capacity installation during future pandemics, yielding significant
benefits for the global economy and global health.




                                                      7
References
Castillo, Juan C, Susan Athey, Arthur Baker, Eric Budish, Rachel Glennerster, Scott Duke
 Kominers, Michael Kremer et al. 2020. Accelerating Broad Availability of a COVID-19
 Vaccine. Unpublished.

Cutler, David M., and Lawrence H. Summers. 2020. The COVID-19 pandemic and the $16
 trillion virus. Jama 324, no. 15 (2020): 1495-1496.

Duke Global Health Innovation Center. 2020. "Launch and Scale Speedometer." Accessed Dec.
 29, 2020. https://launchandscalefaster.org/covid-19.

LaFraniere, Sharon, and Katie Thomas. 2020. "Pfizer Nears Deal with Trump Administration to
  Provide More Vaccine Doses." The New York Times, December 22, 2020, sec. U.S.

WHO. 2020. "Draft Landscape of COVID-19 Candidate Vaccines." July 31, 2020.
Appendix
This appendix outlines our methodology. We focus on COVID-19, but a similar approach can be
applied to future pandemics. We made various assumptions and abstractions based on available
data and information, and we encourage future work to refine and extend our framework. 1 Section
A.1 considers the selection of an optimal portfolio of vaccine candidates in partial equilibrium.
Section A.2 considers global demand and supply for vaccine manufacturing capacity in general
equilibrium. Section A.3 analyzes the incentives for international cooperation. Section A.4
discusses the structuring of procurement contracts.


A.1 Optimal Portfolio of Vaccine Candidates

This section considers the problem facing a country of selecting the optimal portfolio of vaccine
candidates, taking as given the price of installing capacity for those candidates. In our baseline
analysis, we took the optimum to be the portfolio that maximizes social welfare (social benefit
from vaccine consumption net of capacity and production costs). The focus of this analysis was
not to guide specific vaccine purchases where the characteristics of each individual candidate must
be carefully considered, but to provide a framework for making decisions on the size and scope of
a vaccine portfolio.
        In Section A.1.1, we set up the model. Section A.1.2 describes the benefits calculation, and
Section A.1.3 outlines the portfolio maximization problem. We present baseline results in Section
A.1.4, and results for alternative parameters in Section A.1.5.


A.1.1 Setup

In the model, the country invests in vaccine candidates in its portfolio "at risk," that is, in parallel
with clinical trials. While this strategy carries the risk of delivering no return on investment for
candidates that do not succeed in clinical trials, it has the advantage of accelerating the delivery of
successful vaccines to the buyer.
        We modeled the probability that each vaccine "succeeds," where that probability is
considered from the perspective of a buyer investing in advance--i.e., while clinical trials are


        1
          The model described in this appendix is part of our on-going effort to study vaccine policy, which we have
updated throughout 2020, to provide guidance to decision-makers based on the latest available information.

                                                             9
ongoing. Success from the perspective of our model includes not just successful clinical trials and
regulatory approval, but also being able to establish vaccine manufacturing capacity 2 and
associated supply chains as well as meet approval for manufacturing. For vaccines, manufacturing
is typically a multi-step process. Each step of the process (e.g. the step where bioreactors are used
to grow cells) must be tested, and there can be setbacks if processes do not perform as intended,
as occurred in practice for Johnson and Johnson (Zimmer et al. 2021). In addition, each facility
must be separately approved, and changes in suppliers lead to a requirement to recertify the
production process (Plotkin et al. 2017). Different production processes have different bottlenecks
or stress points. Pfizer's mRNA vaccine, for example, is technically easier to manufacture than
traditional vaccines, but as the technology is new, Pfizer had to build new production facilities
entirely under its own management. The AstraZeneca vaccine is easier to manufacture, and
AstraZeneca wrote licenses for production in several facilities around the world. However,
differences between facilities resulted in errors in the clinical trials which delayed approvals
(Walsh 2020).
         We first considered the question of how much acceleration can be gained if an investment
is made at a point in time. Suppose that it takes M months to scale up manufacturing and that
approval of the vaccine is M' months away. Then if M'>M, early investment will speed up
availability by M' months. On the other hand, if M'<M, then early investment will speed up
availability by M months. Let T denote the number of months availability is accelerated. Our
calibrations considered cases  = 3 or  = 6. Early in 2020, approval was projected to be more
than 6 months away for all candidates, and industry estimates suggested that 6 months was an
aggressive timeline (indeed, it was unprecedented), so 6 months of acceleration was a reasonable
estimate of acceleration (corresponding to repurposing existing facilities, certifying at-scale
manufacturing processes, and solving distribution problems specific to the candidate). Later in
2020, approval was near for several candidates, and so 3 months of acceleration was a more
reasonable assumption for leading candidates.                      In practice, during 2020, firms began
manufacturing doses prior to approval while they were in the process of scaling up capacity,
creating a stockpile of millions of doses at the time of approval. 3 Given slippages in manufacturing


         2
           In capacity we included the factory, securing a reliable supply of inputs, and establishing necessary quality
control procedures.
         3
           We abstract away from stockpiling.
and the huge orders to fulfill, however, most manufacturing for the COVID-19 pandemic will take
place after approvals (Goldhill 2020), in line with the model.
        Figure A.1 illustrates the timeline of capacity investment with and without advance
investment. Without the investment program, firms will proceed sequentially from trials to
installing and certifying capacity and then to production (for reasons described in the paper). With
the program, firms install and certify capacity at risk in parallel with clinical trials which allows
for production to begin T months earlier which is immediately after approval. As illustrated in
Figure A.1, additional capacity may be constructed after approval as well. 4


              Figure A.1: Illustration of Accelerating Vaccine Manufacturing Capacity




        There are J vaccine candidates. Country i purchases a portfolio of manufacturing capacities
(courses / month) from different candidates. Our goal was to compute the optimal portfolio for the
country.
        We assumed that besides paying for installing vaccine capacity, countries must also pay a
price for each manufactured course. We assumed that eventually the same fraction of the
population is vaccinated with and without investment, but to the extent the portfolio chosen by the


        4
           We abstract away from differential timing of vaccines. A richer model might take into account learning
from earlier vaccine candidates before choosing to invest in later candidates.

                                                           11
government is successful, a higher fraction of the population will be vaccinated earlier than
otherwise. Additionally, we assumed that investing early does not affect the price per vaccine
course. These two assumptions allowed us to abstract away from the price per vaccine course and
focus only on the price of capacity installation, since the total price paid for vaccines is the same
regardless of the portfolio chosen by the country.
        Note that in deals that were actually signed in 2020, terms were typically described in
news reports as relating to a number of doses delivered by a particular date at a particular price per
dose. Some deals relate to particular manufacturing facilities, e.g. deals signed by European
manufacturers were in some cases associated with European facilities. Although cost details are
not publicly available, prices appeared to be relatively close to public estimates of average cost,
with some profit margin. The details of signed contracts are more complex than in our model. We
study contracting in more detail in Online Appendix Section A.4; here we focus on the capacity
investment problem.


A.1.2 Benefits

We model the benefits for the country in two steps. First, we model the distribution of total
effective capacity  for each country i, given the country purchases a portfolio  , a list of courses
from each candidate j. By total effective capacity we mean the number of vaccine courses with
regulatory approval that the portfolio delivers per month. This is the ex-post quantity measured
after clinical trials finish, at which point it is clear which candidates are successful. Second, we
translate the effective capacity  into health and economic benefits from vaccination.


Effective capacity
The effective capacity for country  depends, first, on the success of individual candidates. Let
 be a dummy variable for whether candidate  is successful. For each candidate , we assign a
platform  and subcategory  following public sources (WHO 2020 and updates, Le et al. 2020).
For example, the Moderna vaccine was an RNA vaccine under subcategory LNP-encapsulated
mRNA. We assumed that the candidate is successful if all the following events happen:
       No overall problem prevents feasibility of a vaccine (denoted by  = 1, with prob. qo)
       No problem prevents success at the platform level (denoted by  = 1, with prob. qp)
       No problem prevents success at the subcategory level (denoted by  = 1 , with prob.
          qs)
       No problem prevents success at the individual vaccine level (denoted by  = 1 , with
          prob. qj)
Candidate  is successful if  =     = 1, and Pr(yj=1) = qo qp qs qj.
        This structure implicitly introduces correlations between different candidates. There is an
overall correlation across all vaccines through  (overall vaccine feasibility). There is a stronger
correlation between vaccines that belong to the same platform--through  --and an even stronger
correlation between candidates in the same subcategory--through  .
        In order to use the model to estimate the social benefits of vaccination, it was necessary to
assign values to success probabilities, recalling that success means reaching a substantial
manufacturing scale in a short period of time. Early in the pandemic we made initial assessments
of these probabilities, and then we updated them over time as information became available. Our
assessments of appropriate values of  ,  ,  , and  were based on discussions with experts as
well as historical data (DiMasi et al. 2010, Pronker et al. 2013, WHO 2020 and updates, Le et al.
2020, Hodgson 2020, Kalorama Information 2020, Lurie et al. 2020). We assigned higher
probabilities of success to candidates using vaccine technologies that had been used before, where
processes were better established for both the science and manufacturing, and where supply chains
were better established; we assigned a lower probability of success to mRNA candidates than to
inactivated virus candidates. We further assigned higher probabilities of success as candidates
successfully moved through clinical trial phases. We allowed for correlations across platforms and
also for the virus, i.e. there was some probability that properties of the virus would make it difficult
for any vaccine to work successfully. The upshot of our modelling was that in summer 2020 no
single vaccine candidate had a greater than 50% chance of success. It followed that a large,
diversified portfolio was valuable.
        In our model as of August, 2020, we assumed that  = 0.9 and  = 0.8. We assumed
that  varies by the past record of each platform. Viral vector, inactivated, attenuated, and protein
subunit vaccines, which had been extensively used in the past, were assigned  = 0.8. RNA
vaccines, a promising technology that had never been approved for human use before the COVID-




                                                      13
19 pandemic, was assigned  = 0.6. For DNA vaccines, a more experimental technology, we set
 = 0.4.
        Finally,  varies by stage, or how advanced trials are. We assigned these probabilities as
a function of the clinical phase a candidate was currently in (preclinical, phase 1, phase 2, phase
3). These probabilities took into account that there was still uncertainty even for a candidate in
phase 3. There might be challenges with finding an effective dosing regime that does not induce
too many side effects, as well as problems in scaling manufacturing or procuring the inputs needed
for manufacturing or distribution. We set  at 0.5 for vaccines in phase 3 clinical trials, at 0.32
for vaccines in phase 2 clinical trials, at 0.23 for vaccines in phase 1 clinical trials, and at 0.14 for
vaccines in preclinical trials.
        Our code (available for download at https://github.com/jc-castillo/vaccineEarlyInvest)
allows users to input alternative parameters for the success probabilities.
        If country  chooses some portfolio  , the total effective capacity it obtains is the sum of
the installed capacities over all successful candidates:



Benefits as a function of capacity
Benefits come both from economic and health benefits, taking into account country-specific
characteristics: GDP losses and mortality due to COVID-19, as well as the fraction of the
population that is high-risk--i.e., the elderly and healthcare workers. We discounted benefits to
take into account that an effective treatment might be developed, that non-pharmaceutical
interventions may stop the pandemic or that herd immunity might be achieved before any capacity
becomes available.
        Benefits vary as a function of the number of people who are vaccinated at any point in
time. Let    
                () be the fraction of the population of country  that has been vaccinated at a time
. Suppose the country does not obtain any vaccines from early capacity. In this scenario, we
assumed that no people were vaccinated before  = 0 , the time when vaccine production starts if
there was no early capacity investment. At time , country  starts receiving  courses of vaccine
per month. The fraction of its population that is vaccinated is
        If, instead, country  obtains an effective capacity of  , it starts vaccinating  people per
month at time  =  - .  measures how much earlier capacity is available with early capacity
investment. At time 0 capacity ramps up to  . Thus, the fraction of the population that is
vaccinated is




        We then translated the fraction vaccinated  () into benefits per unit of time. Let  be
the monthly health and economic harm due to COVID-19 for country  . It is the sum of total
economic and health (mortality) harm. We based our estimates of economic harm on estimates
from the World Bank (5%-20% of GDP, World Banks Global Economic Prospects 2020). 5 Our
estimate of health benefits was based on estimates of the mortality rate, statistical value of a life,
and years lost per COVID-19 death. Health harm is the product of (a) mortality, which we assumed
was 200,000 per month distributed across the world in proportion to population, (b) the value of a
statistical life, which is proportional to GDP per capita and is $7 million for the US, and (c) the
                                                                                  10
fraction of one life that is lost on average due to COVID-19 deaths, 71, which assumes that each

death implies a loss of 10 years and that there is a life expectancy of 71 years.
        We assumed that the health and economic benefits of vaccination at time , relative to no
vaccination, are given by   ( ()).   [0,1] is a factor by which we discounted benefits
because of the possibility of improved treatments, mitigation strategies such as effective contact
tracing, etc. that would preclude an important share of the benefits from vaccination. In our model
as of August 2020, we assumed that by the time the vaccine arrived, 50% harm would have been
mitigated due to these other factors. In retrospect, that estimate was too optimistic for the situation
as it stood in late 2020 when the first vaccines received approval; 6 as such our results understate

          5
            These estimates are more conservative than in Cutler and Summers (2020), which calculated that the costs
of the COVID-19 pandemic in the US alone may reach $16 trillion, which represents about 18% of world GDP in US
dollars in 2019 (World Bank Data, 2020).
          6
            As of July 2020, it appeared that many areas had "flattened the curve," economic re-opening had occurred
in many parts of the world, and treatment protocols had improved, improving patient outcomes. But by December
2020, when mass vaccinations began in multiple high-income countries, infection rates were at an all-time high, many

                                                            15
the benefits of investments to accelerate vaccine success. The function  () measures the fraction
of harm that is avoided. It is a continuous function satisfying (a) no benefit is obtained if no one is
vaccinated and (b) all economic harms are relieved if all are successfully immunized.
        Countries generally first distribute doses to high-priority populations (especially the
elderly) since this results in the greatest reduction in mortality for a limited vaccine supply, as can
be shown by using simple epidemiological models (Bubar et al. 2021). The same models predict
that the reductions in infections are roughly linear in the proportion vaccinated between 0 and the
point where fraction vaccinated approaches herd immunity. If the vaccinations are prioritized
according to age only, the reductions in infections are slightly convex (Bubar et al. 2021, Fig 3B);
however, since high-risk populations also include individuals at high risk of transmission (such as
health care workers), we hypothesize that the reductions in infections will be linear. It was
unknown whether reductions in economic losses from COVID-19 will more closely track
reductions in mortality or reductions in infections. It was also unknown whether the efficacy in
preventing severe infection shown by vaccines that were in development would translate into
efficacy in preventing transmission. To accommodate this uncertainty, we specified
                                          () =  () + (1 - ) (),
a weighted mean of two functions:  (), which is a simple linear function of  (), and  (),
which is a nonlinear function capturing averted mortality. Weight  can take on any value in the
unit interval, but for simplicity we set  = 0.5.
        A country uses its initial vaccines for its high-priority population, providing  times the
benefit of vaccinating a non-priority person, where   [5,10] is a parameter that is linear in the
per-capita GDP in country  , varying between 5 for the lowest-income country (Burundi) and 10
for the highest-income country (Monaco). We based these values on epidemiological models of
mortality reduction, which suggest that over 80% of mortality reductions are obtained from
vaccinating the first 20% of the population (Bubar et al. 2021), consistent with empirical data on
age-specific mortality rates in developed countries. The lower value for lower-income countries
reflects the fact that relative mortality risk for older vs younger individuals is less steep in these
countries, by as much as a factor of three (Demombynes 2020). However, the situation in January
2021 in many low-income countries, with lower overall prevalence levels, may lead the optimal


countries and US states imposed new restrictions, and hospital systems became overwhelmed. Debate remained about
the effectiveness of antibody treatments, and these were not in widespread use.
policy to reduce mortality to depart from vaccinating the elderly first to perhaps vaccinating
working-age adults first (Hogan et al. 2020).
       We assumed that the benefit function has a kink at the threshold  at which all high-priority
people have been vaccinated and the vaccine begins to be distributed to others. We defined two
higher kink points in the benefit function:  = 0.4, and  = 0.7. We assumed that at , the
slope of the benefit function falls in half. Between  and , benefits increase linearly at the
lower rate until the threshold for herd immunity, , is reached. Finally, we assumed that all harm
is averted at this threshold and higher levels of vaccination:  () = 1 for all  > . Of course,
the slope of the benefit function equals zero above threshold .To understand the rationale for
incorporating the additional kink points, note that a simple epidemiological model puts the
threshold for herd immunity at 60%. However, a number of factors suggest that full benefits may
be obtained above or below this theoretical threshold. Factors pushing the threshold down include
(a) preexisting immunity or lower susceptibility in younger individuals, obviating a need for them
to be vaccinated (Davies et al. 2020); (b) high levels of acquired immunity, especially in high-
income countries; (c) heterogeneity in spread, leading herd immunity to be reached earlier than a
simple epidemiological model with homogeneous agents would predict (Britton et al. 2020).
       The net benefit from effective capacity  is given by



       Figure A.2 illustrates our assumptions about flow benefits as a fraction of the population
vaccinated, where  is the fraction vaccinated and fi() is the flow benefit. We assumed that the
function increases steeply as the initial priority groups are vaccinated (e.g. health care workers,
since health system capacity is a limiting factor for opening economies) and then increases more
slowly thereafter. Figure A.3 illustrates the vaccination schedule with and without advance
capacity investment. Without it, vaccination starts at rate  at time 0 . With advance investment,
vaccination starts at time 0 - . The initial vaccination rate is  , the total effective capacity from
the portfolio, and ramps up to rate  at time 0 . Figure A.4 illustrates how these two vaccination
schedules translate into flow benefits. The net benefits from advance capacity investment are
shown as the area between both curves, which is shaded in yellow.




                                                     17
                                       Figure A.2 Flow Benefits to Vaccination




Note: This plot shows the function that measures the fraction of benefits as a function of the fraction of the population
that has been vaccinated, for a country with GDP per capita of $17,000 and 15% high-risk population. The slope is
highest before  because the country vaccinates the high-priority population, obtaining large benefits per person.
Benefits increase more slowly as the rest of the population is vaccinated.


                         Figure A.3 Vaccination schedules with and without acceleration




        Note: The green line shows the fraction of the population vaccinated as a function of time if vaccination is
        not accelerated. Vaccination starts at a constant rate at time 0 . The red line shows what happens with
        acceleration. Vaccination starts at an earlier time, 0 -  , at a rate determined by the outcome of the
        vaccine portfolio. Then vaccination ramps up at time 0 to the same rate that would take place without
        acceleration.
               Figure A.4 Vaccination benefits over time with and without acceleration




      Note: This figure shows the benefits per unit time that are obtained from the vaccination schedules in Figure
      A.3 above. The net benefits from the portfolio are equal to the shaded area between the green and red
      curves.


A.1.3 Countries' optimal portfolio problem

The benefits country  gets if it chooses a portfolio  are given by


The benefit  () that arises if the effective capacity is  is integrated over the distribution of
effective capacity that is generated by portfolio  .
       On the cost side, there are a variety of potential cost functions for capacity.



For simplicity in our base case, we assumed there was a single price p per unit of capacity across
all candidates; 7 in Online Appendix A.3 we consider convex capacity costs. Then, the country's
problem is



        We make available our code for portfolio optimization given inputs so that the
computation can be updated over time, and so that the code could be used as a starting point in a
future pandemic. Our results below illustrate optimal investments using the assumptions we made
as of August 2020.

       7
           This assumption is likely applicable to the problem for a small open economy.

                                                            19
A.1.3 Main Results

We compute the optimal portfolios for each country in the world for a constant price of $10 per
vaccine course per year. 8,9 We found that early investments in vaccine manufacturing capacity
would have large net benefits for high-, middle-, and even low-income countries (Table A.1).
Summing over individual countries, the optimal portfolio for the world consisted of a total
investment of sufficient capacity for 2.3 billion courses per month, of which in expectation, 0.5
billion would have been successful. The expected benefit for the world was $137 per capita, while
the cost was $37 per capita. The portfolio which maximized net benefits varied substantially
between countries. It was optimal for higher-income countries to purchase more doses per capita
and invest in a larger portfolio of candidates. This result is explained by the fact that a large portion
of the estimated benefits of a vaccine come from averting losses to GDP. For example, the optimal
portfolio for the US included investment in 27 candidates at a total of 462 million courses per
month, while Chile's optimal portfolio included investment in 12 candidates at a three-times lower
level of capacity investment per capita. It was optimal for each country to invest in differing
amounts across candidates to maximize expected successful capacity by investing more in
candidates with higher probabilities of success and by diversifying across platforms.


                                         Table A.1: Baseline Optimal Portfolio
                       Mean        Total Capacity   Expected Effective Total Capacity      Expected
                                                                                                          Total Cost
Country              Number of     (mn. courses /     Capacity (mn. (courses / mth per      Benefits
                                                                                                          (per cap.)
                     Candidates         mth)          courses / mth)    1000 pop.)         (per cap.)
World                  8.82           2290.05            538.87           304.40            137.41          36.53
High Income            18.26          1418.03            307.97           1196.54           699.25          143.58
Middle Income          6.73           906.88             239.27           170.21             40.71          20.43
Low Income              1.26            2.33              0.61              2.18             0.58            0.26
United States          27.00          462.30              97.97           1415.06           923.36          169.81
E.U.                   17.00          477.58             105.12           1093.85           603.46          131.26


          8
           The AstraZeneca deal with the US was for 300 million doses for a total price of $1.2 billion. Suppose that
capacity costs are 75% of the price and zero profit. We can calculate that the marginal cost of production is $1 per
dose and the cost of production is $3 per dose per year assuming that all doses will be produced over 2021. Then the
cost of production for AstraZeneca would be ($1 per dose)*(300 m doses) + ($3 per dose/year)*(300 m doses/year) =
$1.2 bn, consistent with the deal they signed. At 2 doses per course, that calculation implies a total cost of production
of $6 per course / year. Some part of the $1.2 bn actually went to fund the clinical trials, so the cost of production
could be even lower. If we take AstraZeneca to be one of the cheapest vaccines (by a factor of three) to produce, then
it seems reasonable to assume that the cost of production for other vaccine candidates likely ranges between $4-$20
per course per year.
         9
           Kis et al. (2021) estimate that building production capacity for enough doses to vaccinate the entire world
within a year for an mRNA vaccine would cost less than $4 billion.
Germany                21.00          113.30            24.22            1366.61          855.50         163.99
U.K.                   21.00          85.30             18.41            1283.47          763.14         154.02
Canada                 21.00          45.90             9.93             1238.61          719.27         148.63
New Zealand            18.00           5.80             1.27             1198.10          670.71         143.77
Australia              21.00          34.50             7.37             1380.96          879.99         165.71
Chile                  12.00          10.90             2.67             581.98           183.03         69.84
Israel                 19.00          10.20             2.24             1148.29          633.38         137.79
Hong Kong              20.00           9.40             2.02             1261.58          740.41         151.39
Japan                  18.00          129.50            28.96            1023.72          494.81         122.85
Note: This table presents the optimal investment portfolio of various countries/coalitions. We assumed $10 per
vaccine course per year, vaccine availability is accelerated by 3 months, and baseline vaccine success probabilities.


                               Figure A.5: Distribution of investment across candidates




                                                                21
Note: This figure presents the optimal investment by candidate for the World, the United States and Chile. We
assumed $10 per vaccine course per year, vaccine availability is accelerated by 3 months, and baseline vaccine
success probabilities.


          A large portion of the gains to a country come from the first candidates and doses; we
estimated that spending half the ideal budget would have produced about three quarters of the
benefits (Table A.2). Specifically, the expected benefits for the world were $109 per capita with
half the budget versus $137 per capita with the full budget. There are two reasons behind this
result. First, effective capacity has diminishing marginal returns. The time to vaccinate the whole
population is  =  / . Doubling capacity reduces the time to vaccinate
the whole population by one half. Doubling it again reduces the time to vaccinate only by one
fourth of the original time. Second, the likelihood of at least one successful vaccine increases much
more with the first few candidates than later candidates (Figure A.6). Diminishing returns in the
capacity of each successful vaccine implies that countries should have invested in more than
candidates, instead of greater capacity for a given candidate. Because the returns to the first
candidates and doses were so high, even poorer countries would benefit from purchasing at least
some.


                              Table A.2: Portfolio spending half the optimal budget
                      Mean        Total Capacity   Expected Effective Total Capacity    Expected
                                                                                                     Total Cost
Country             Number of     (mn. courses /     Capacity (mn. (courses / mth per    Benefits
                                                                                                     (per cap.)
                    Candidates         mth)          courses / mth)    1000 pop.)       (per cap.)
World                 5.41           1145.02            267.94           145.43          109.27        18.27
High Income           11.15          709.01             172.53           602.49          579.38        71.79
Middle Income         4.40           453.44             130.40            85.10           28.52        10.22
Low Income            1.19             1.16              0.30              1.09           0.42         0.13
United States         18.00          231.15              54.74           707.53          774.92        84.91
E.U.                  10.00          238.79              57.53           546.92          491.08        65.63
Germany                13.00           56.65            13.47             683.31          710.96          82.00
U.K.                   12.00           42.65            10.10             641.74          625.85          77.01
Canada                 12.00           22.95            5.42              619.30          585.21          74.32
New Zealand            11.00           2.90             0.69              599.05          541.87          71.89
Australia              14.00           17.25            4.08              684.47          734.65          82.86
Chile                  11.00           5.45             1.71              290.99          154.48          34.92
Israel                 11.00           5.10             1.25              574.14          515.48          68.90
Hong Kong              12.00           4.70             1.16              644.21          615.90          75.70
Japan                  11.00           64.75            15.74             498.02          389.15          61.43
Note: This table presents the investment portfolios spending half the optimal budget for various countries/coalitions.
We assumed $10 per vaccine course per year, vaccine availability is accelerated by 3 months, and baseline vaccine
success probabilities.


                               Figure A.6: Probability of at least one successful vaccine




Note: This figure presents the probability of at least one successful vaccine by the number of candidates a
country/coalition chooses to invest in.


A.1.5 Comparative Statics

We now consider how our results change under alternative assumptions.


Number of Months of Acceleration
We first considered variation in the number of months the early investment program saves. Our
baseline analysis considers a three-month acceleration in vaccine production capacity. Early in
the pandemic, experts expressed substantial skepticism and uncertainty about how quickly
manufacturing could be brought to scale (Dunn 2020; Khamsi 2020; Thompson 2020).
Accelerating by six months was unprecedented, even though some vaccines used relatively

                                                                23
standard processes and had access to contract manufacturing facilities, and there was expected to
be at least a six-month wait for approval. In addition, our model suggested investments in
acceleration on a world scale of hundreds of billions of dollars, more than had ever been
considered. Thus, we estimated that early investment might result in a six-month acceleration. In
Table A.3, we show how the optimal portfolio at a price of $10 per vaccine course per year changes
when the acceleration is six months rather than three. We found that all countries invest in a
greater number of candidates and a larger total amount of capacity. This is because the expected
benefits per unit of capacity were much greater.


                              Table A.3: Optimal Portfolio - 6 months Acceleration
                      Mean        Total Capacity   Expected Effective Total Capacity    Expected
                                                                                                       Total Cost
Country             Number of     (mn. courses /     Capacity (mn. (courses / mth per    Benefits
                                                                                                       (per cap.)
                    Candidates         mth)          courses / mth)    1000 pop.)       (per cap.)
World                 12.85          2742.96            610.87            364.6          224.96          43.75
High Income           23.54          1464.53            295.41           1235.77         1071.64         148.29
Middle Income         11.18          1288.95            316.16           241.92           82.07          29.03
Low Income            3.25            28.47              7.94             26.76           5.18            3.21
United States         30.00          476.00              93.69           1456.99         1407.00         174.84
E.U.                  22.19          495.71             101.26           1135.35         928.17          136.24
Germany               30.00          117.00              23.19           1411.24         1298.85         169.35
U.K.                  30.00           87.90              17.57           1322.59         1167.3          158.71
Canada                28.00           47.30              9.49            1276.39         1105.31         153.17
New Zealand           25.00            6.10              1.23            1260.07         1034.79         151.21
Australia             30.00           35.50              7.00            1420.98         1343.33         170.52
Chile                 18.00           11.80              2.64            630.03          305.95          75.60
Israel                28.00           10.60              2.13            1193.32         981.86          143.20
Hong Kong             28.00            9.60              1.92            1288.42         1134.87         154.61
Japan                 28.00          133.80              27.84           1057.71         764.60          126.92
Note: This table presents the optimal investment portfolio of various countries/coalitions. We assumed $10 per
vaccine course per year, vaccine availability is accelerated by 6 months, and baseline vaccine success probabilities.




Higher Success Probabilities
We next consider how optimal portfolios change with assumptions about success probabilities.
Evaluating the success probabilities with the benefit of hindsight in January, 2021, the model looks
modestly pessimistic on the probabilities of success. For example, our model predicted multiple
failures were likely, but only one vaccine that received substantial investment has definitely failed.
The Australian government had contracted (at government risk) $1 billion dollars for 51 million
doses of the University of Queensland vaccine (Johnson and Whitley 2020). The Queensland
vaccine was abandoned after entering clinical trials because a side-effect of the vaccine was the
production of antibodies that looked like HIV antibodies, leading to incorrectly signaling on
standard tests that people inoculated with the vaccine had HIV. We expected multiple failures of
this kind. On the other hand, most vaccines will not be scaled up to be worthwhile in the pandemic
and thus can be said to have failed. Even the vaccines that have been successful at establishing
safety and efficacy have had to scale back planned deliveries. For example, Pfizer originally
projected that it could deliver 40 million doses in 2020 but only delivered half that, and it shut
down a European manufacturing facility for several weeks in order to prepare for a capacity
expansion, delaying deliveries it had promised to European countries (Peel, Milne and Mancini,
2021). Johnson and Johnson's vaccine is yet to be approved, but if approved was contracted to
deliver 12 million doses by the end of February. However, manufacturing problems will make
scaling up slower (Zimmer et al. 2021). Our model predicted failure even with very substantial
advance investment, but what we observed was failure with less advance investment. It is hard to
assess what difference investment would have made for some of these candidates, and in particular,
whether the lack of investment was due to poor prospects of efficacy, or whether additional
investment, e.g. in supporting clinical trials, would have led to more viable candidates succeeding
and scaling. It is difficult to believe, however, that additional funding of substantial magnitude,
say $10 billion, would not have made a difference. Moreover, it is clear that funding in
complementary infrastructure such as vaccination clinics would have been very valuable.
Although we focus on manufacturing capacity, the high value we estimated for vaccines suggests
the value of investing everywhere along the supply chain. Only successfully delivered and
vaccinated doses produce social value.
       In Table A.4, we analyzed the optimal portfolio for the case where success probabilities
were higher. Specifically we considered the case where the vaccines were half as likely to fail at
the candidate-level. We found that all countries should have invested in more candidates, and that
middle- and lower-income countries invest in more capacity (because of higher expected capacity
from investing), while high-income countries invest less (because of diminishing returns to
successful capacity). Specifically, the high-income countries invest in 1066 mn. courses per
month, down from 1418 mn. courses per month. On the other hand, middle income countries invest
in 1061 mn. courses per month, up from 907 mn. courses per month. It is clear that the relationship
between total vaccine capacity investment and probability of success is non-monotonic. At a
probability of success of zero for all vaccines, countries would invest nothing. At a probability of
success of one for all vaccines, countries at most would invest exactly enough to vaccinate their

                                                    25
whole population in the first month. At probabilities between zero and one, countries (for example
the US in Table A.4) may invest in more capacity than enough to vaccinate their whole population
in the first month because expected effective capacity is much lower. The expected benefits were
higher across countries from high success probabilities regardless of income level.


                 Table A.4: Optimal Portfolio - High Probability of Success for all candidates
                       Mean        Total Capacity   Expected Effective Total Capacity     Expected
                                                                                                        Total Cost
Country              Number of     (mn. courses /     Capacity (mn. (courses / mth per     Benefits
                                                                                                        (per cap.)
                     Candidates         mth)          courses / mth)    1000 pop.)        (per cap.)
World                  12.84          2107.36            803.72           280.12           162.08         33.61
High Income            22.24          1066.33            394.71           899.77           778.45         107.97
Middle Income          13.01          1061.10            415.84           199.15            58.14         23.90
Low Income             2.35            12.59              5.34             11.83            2.10           1.42
United States          25.00          336.50             124.25           1030.00          1015.81        123.60
E.U.                   21.42          366.26             135.78           838.87           676.75         100.66
Germany                25.00           83.10              30.71           1002.34          944.90         120.28
U.K.                   25.00           63.10              23.33           949.44           846.95         113.93
Canada                 25.00           34.30              12.69           925.58           801.07         111.07
New Zealand            24.00            4.40              1.64            908.90           750.53         109.07
Australia              25.00           25.20              9.30            1008.70          970.01         121.04
Chile                  24.00           10.00              3.75            533.93           227.47         64.07
Israel                 24.00            7.80              2.90            878.10           711.52         105.37
Hong Kong              24.00            7.00              2.59            939.47           823.23         112.74
Japan                  24.00          100.50              37.29           794.47           562.85         95.34
Note: This table presents the optimal investment portfolio of various countries/coalitions with higher vaccine
success probabilities. We assumed that vaccines are half as likely to fail at the candidate-level than according to our
baseline probabilities. We assumed $10 per vaccine course per year and that vaccine availability is accelerated by 3
months.


          By fall or winter 2020, the uncertainty had diminished on safety and efficacy for leading
candidates, but risks remained on manufacturing, particularly for the mRNA candidates. One
leading candidate, the Oxford/AstraZeneca vaccine, was also showing promising results, but still
significant risks in timing; in particular, it faced setbacks in its trial and uncertainty about the
timing of approval (Robbins and Mueller 2020). We now know that the mRNA platform was
successful with safety and efficacy and partially successful with scaling manufacturing. Here, we
considered a scenario where we assumed a 0.8 probability of RNA platform success instead of 0.6
in our base case. We found very similar results, with more investment into mRNA vaccines and
slightly higher expected benefits (Table A.5).


                      Table A.5: Optimal Portfolio - High Probability of Success for RNA
                       Mean        Total Capacity   Expected Effective Total Capacity     Expected
                                                                                                        Total Cost
Country              Number of     (mn. courses /     Capacity (mn. (courses / mth per     Benefits
                                                                                                        (per cap.)
                     Candidates         mth)          courses / mth)    1000 pop.)        (per cap.)
World                  9.00           2287.77            576.87           304.10           141.34          36.49
High Income            18.51          1375.50            321.55           1160.65          711.87         139.28
Middle Income          6.79           946.12             264.13           177.57           43.52          21.31
Low Income             1.53            2.53               0.69             2.37             0.62           0.28
United States          24.00          447.50             102.04           1369.76          938.61         164.37
E.U.                   16.85          464.31             110.03           1063.45          615.07         127.61
Germany                24.00          109.70             25.20            1323.19          870.02         158.78
U.K.                   21.00           82.60             19.13            1242.85          776.52         149.14
Canada                 21.00           44.50             10.34            1200.83          732.28         144.10
New Zealand            21.00           5.60               1.31            1156.79          682.64         138.81
Australia              24.00           33.30              7.63            1332.92          894.26         159.95
Chile                  11.00           10.70              2.83            571.30           189.06         68.56
Israel                 21.00           10.00              2.37            1125.77          646.75         135.09
Hong Kong              21.00           9.10               2.11            1221.31          753.42         146.56
Japan                  21.00          125.90             30.27            995.26           505.13         119.43
Note: This table presents the optimal investment portfolio of various countries/coalitions with higher vaccine
success probabilities for RNA candidates. We assumed a 0.8 probability of RNA platform success instead of 0.6 in
our baseline. We assumed $10 per vaccine course per year and that vaccine availability is accelerated by 3 months.


Higher Correlation
Another important parameter for our portfolio optimization problem is the correlation among
outcomes for different candidates. In Table A.6, we analyze how the portfolio choices change
when we increase the correlations within sub-platform by doubling the sub-platform probability
of failure at the candidate level, while halving the probability of failure at the candidate level to
keep overall probabilities constant. We found that countries increase the number of candidates
they invest in to diversify their portfolios.


                         Table A.6: Optimal Portfolio - High Sub-Platform Correlation
                       Mean        Total Capacity   Expected Effective Total Capacity    Expected
                                                                                                        Total Cost
Country              Number of     (mn. courses /     Capacity (mn. (courses / mth per    Benefits
                                                                                                        (per cap.)
                     Candidates         mth)          courses / mth)    1000 pop.)       (per cap.)
World                  13.57          2292.76            636.43           304.76          151.37          36.57
High Income            24.78          1278.61            344.03           1078.90         750.71          129.47
Middle Income          13.14          1049.27            301.99           196.93           49.28          23.63
Low Income             1.89             2.77              0.82              2.60           0.69            0.31
United States          30.00          406.50             108.74           1244.26         983.97          149.31
E.U.                   23.88          437.22             118.02           1001.40         650.90          120.17
Germany                30.00          100.20              26.86           1208.60         913.93          145.03
U.K.                   27.00           76.00              20.44           1143.54         817.76          137.22
Canada                 27.00           41.20              11.09           1111.78         772.53          133.41
New Zealand            26.00            5.30              1.42            1094.82         723.35          131.38
Australia              29.00           30.40              8.13            1216.84         938.80          146.02
Chile                  23.00           11.40              3.17            608.68          210.37          73.04
Israel                 27.00            9.40              2.53            1058.22         685.34          126.99
Hong Kong              27.00            8.40              2.25            1127.37         794.00          135.28
Japan                  27.00          119.90              32.45           947.83          538.66          113.74
Note: This table presents the optimal investment portfolio of various countries/coalitions with higher vaccine
success correlation within sub-platform. We double the sub-platform probability of failure at the candidate level,
and half the probability of failure at the candidate level to keep overall probabilities constant. We assumed $10 per
vaccine course per year and that vaccine availability is accelerated by 3 months.



                                                               27
Different Price Levels
Finally, we tested the sensitivity of our results to the assumed price level. In our base case, we
assumed a constant price of $10 per course/year. In Table A.7, we present our results for prices
between $4 and $40. As prices increase, all countries would have invested in fewer candidates and
in less capacity. However, it still made sense to invest in capacity at-risk for most countries even
at much higher prices, especially high- and middle-income countries. Low-income countries would
have invested much less at higher prices.


                         Table A.7: Optimal Portfolio - Different Price Levels
                         Mean       Total Capacity Expected Effective Total Capacity    Expected
                                                                                                     Total Cost
Country                Number of    (mn. courses /   Capacity (mn. (courses / mth per    Benefits
                                                                                                     (per cap.)
                       Candidates        mth)        courses / mth)    1000 pop.)       (per cap.)
Panel A: Price = $4
World                    13.91        4771.07          1055.71           634.19          162.10       30.44
High Income              25.19        2447.74          484.35            2065.41         765.21       99.14
Middle Income            12.31        2334.47          570.45            438.15          60.65        21.03
Low Income               3.77          55.78            15.53             52.42           4.04         2.52
United States            30.00        790.30           152.82            2419.04         999.83       116.11
E.U.                     23.88        830.38           166.39            1901.87         664.80       91.29
Germany                  30.00        194.30            37.76            2343.62         929.75       112.49
U.K.                     30.00        146.80            28.77            2208.84         833.14       106.02
Canada                   30.00         79.10            15.57            2134.51         787.26       102.46
New Zealand              28.00         10.00            1.97             2065.69         736.45       99.15
Australia                30.00         58.90            11.43            2357.63         954.32       113.17
Chile                    18.00         20.30            4.52             1083.87         221.27       52.03
Israel                   28.00         17.80            3.52             2003.87         698.64       96.19
Hong Kong                28.00         16.30            3.20             2187.63         810.02       105.01
Japan                    28.00        225.50            45.79            1782.61         551.98       85.57
Panel B: Price = $10
World                    8.82         2290.05           538.87           304.40          137.41       36.53
High Income              18.26        1418.03           307.97           1196.54         699.25       143.58
Middle Income            6.73         906.88            239.27           170.21          40.71        20.43
Low Income               1.26          2.33              0.61             2.18            0.58         0.26
United States            27.00        462.30            97.97            1415.06         923.36       169.81
E.U.                     17.00        477.58            105.12           1093.85         603.46       131.26
Germany                  21.00        113.30            24.22            1366.61         855.50       163.99
U.K.                     21.00         85.30            18.41            1283.47         763.14       154.02
Canada                   21.00         45.90             9.93            1238.61         719.27       148.63
New Zealand              18.00         5.80              1.27            1198.10         670.71       143.77
Australia                21.00         34.50             7.37            1380.96         879.99       165.71
Chile                    12.00         10.90             2.67            581.98          183.03       69.84
Israel                   19.00         10.20             2.24            1148.29         633.38       137.79
Hong Kong                20.00         9.40              2.02            1261.58         740.41       151.39
Japan                    18.00        129.50            28.96            1023.72         494.81       122.85
Panel C: Price = $20
World                    5.73         1212.82           295.95           161.21          113.24       38.69
High Income              13.56        910.41            211.76           768.20          626.47       184.37
Middle Income            3.40         322.99            89.58            60.62           22.32        14.55
Low Income               0.39          0.64              0.16             0.60            0.33         0.14
United States            18.00        303.50            68.67            928.99          840.96       222.96
E.U.                     12.85        302.67            71.36            693.22          535.26       166.37
Germany                  18.00         74.20            16.93            894.99          775.51       214.80
U.K.                      18.00          55.40             12.76            833.58          686.78        200.06
Canada                    18.00          29.80             6.91             804.15          645.43        193.00
New Zealand               12.00          3.70              0.87             764.30          596.52        183.43
Australia                 18.00          22.50             5.11             900.62          798.41        216.15
Chile                     9.00           5.90              1.56             315.02          137.27        75.60
Israel                    14.00          6.60              1.55             743.01          563.71        178.32
Hong Kong                 17.00          6.10              1.39             818.68          665.34        196.48
Japan                     12.00          81.00             19.64            640.32          429.55        153.68
Panel D: Price = $40
World                     3.40           589.33           149.82            78.34           85.93         37.60
High Income               8.97           536.70           134.71            452.87          519.25        217.38
Middle Income             1.27           60.79            17.46             11.41            6.82          5.48
Low Income                0.21            0.30             0.08              0.29            0.22          0.14
United States             12.00          186.90           45.86             572.08          719.74        274.60
E.U.                      7.73           173.33           43.95             396.99          434.55        190.55
Germany                   11.00          45.40            11.21             547.61          657.92        262.85
U.K.                      11.00          33.50             8.35             504.06          575.20        241.95
Canada                    11.00          18.00             4.50             485.73          538.17        233.15
New Zealand               9.00            2.20             0.56             454.45          489.64        218.14
Australia                 11.00          13.70             3.38             548.38          677.86        263.22
Chile                     4.00            2.10             0.60             112.12          69.12         53.82
Israel                    11.00           3.90             0.99             439.05          460.58        210.74
Hong Kong                 11.00           3.70             0.93             496.58          557.00        238.36
Japan                     9.00           45.60            11.95             360.47          333.63        173.03
Note: This table presents the optimal investment portfolio of various countries/coalitions for various prices: $4, $10,
$20 and $40. We assumed vaccine availability is accelerated by 3 months, and baseline vaccine success
probabilities.


A.1.6 Benefits of Actual Versus Recommended Investments

Overall, we can compare the investments recommended by our baseline model as of August 2020
with the investment that had been undertaken by 2021, as well as to a counterfactual scenario
where capacity was only created after regulatory approval. For the latter scenario, we assumed
capacity would have been delayed three months, which is a very ambitious timeline for scaling
capacity after approval (it would be consistent with a scenario where only the most expensive
investments were delayed until after approval, or where investments began while a company had
access to early trial data prior to approval).
  We report results comparing these scenarios in Table 1 of the main paper, reproduced here for
easy reference. Specifically, we compute the benefits of vaccination schedules for the US and for
the world under three different scenarios:
    1. Actual advanced capacity investment: The US gets 37.5 million vaccine courses per month,
         which is the total capacity it has contracted with Oxford/AstraZeneca, Pfizer/BioNTech,
         and Moderna (Duke Global Health Innovation Center, 2020), assuming those vaccines will
         be distributed over the course of one year. The world gets 312.5 million courses doses per
         month, which is roughly the sum of the capacity announced by Oxford/AstraZeneca

                                                              29
         (AstraZeneca 2020), Pfizer/BioNTech (Pfizer 2020), Moderna (2020), Sinovac (Reuters
         2021), and Sputnik V (Mullard 2020) for 2021, assuming it will be distributed evenly over
         12 months. In both cases, vaccines start being delivered on January 1, 2021.
    2. Zero advanced capacity investment: The US and the world get the same number of
         vaccines as in the actual capacity investment scenario, but vaccines start being delivered
         on April 1, 2021.
    3. Recommended advanced capacity investment: Vaccines start being delivered on January 1,
         2021, but the number of vaccines per month are based on the recommended portfolios from
         our model at a price of $20 per vaccine course per year. 10 For the US, we add the capacities
         our model recommends for Oxford/AstraZeneca, Pfizer/BioNTech and Moderna. For the
         world, we add the capacities our model recommends for Oxford/AstraZeneca,
         Pfizer/BioNTech, Moderna, Sinovac, and Sputnik V for every country in the world.
For each of the scenarios above, we compute the time when the US and the world will finish
vaccinating 70% of the population. As described above, that assumes vaccination would have
started on April 1, 2021 without at-risk investment, and on January 1, 2021 with at-risk investment.



Table 1: Advance capacity expansion effects

                                                                                                     70% of
     Advance capacity          At-Risk Capacity of Approved        Benefits relative to Zero       Vaccination
       investment                  Vaccines (bn courses)               At-Risk ($bn)               complete by

Panel A, US
       Recommended                           1.05                            556.9                   Mar 2021
              Actual                         0.45                            389.9                   Jul 2021

              Zero                            --                              --                     Oct 2021
Panel B, World
       Recommended                           7.12                           2748.7                   Oct 2021
              Actual                         3.75                           1606.4                   Jun 2022
              Zero                            --                              --                     Sep 2022



         10
            This price is higher than the price of $10 per course per year from our baseline calculations from Section
A.1.3, which give recommendations to individual countries facing an external price. If all countries in the world
followed the recommendations from our model, marginal costs are likely to increase and prices rise (see the discussion
in Section A.2). Thus, we use a higher price of $20 per course per year.
We compute benefits generated in each scenario using the benefits function described in Section
A.1.2 for each country. When computing benefits for the world, we assumed that in the "actual"
and "zero" capacity investment scenarios 40% of capacity goes to high-income countries, 25%
goes to upper-middle-income countries, and 25% goes to lower-middle-income countries. Within
each income group, capacity is distributed by population, meaning that the largest country within
the income group is the first to receive vaccines sufficient to serve 70% of its population, the
remainder then goes to the next largest country, and so on. The remaining 10% is distributed evenly
by population throughout the world (by COVAX, for instance). As soon as high-income countries
vaccinate 70% of their population, their capacity is distributed by population across the world.
Then, as soon as upper-middle-income countries vaccinate 70% of their population, their capacity
is distributed by population throughout countries that have not vaccinated 70% of their population,
and so forth. For the "recommended" capacity investment scenario, we assumed that 90% of the
capacity is distributed across the four income groups (high, upper-middle, lower-middle, and low)
according to the total demand for vaccines by group. Within each group, vaccines are distributed
by population. The remaining 10% is distributed evenly by population throughout the world. As
income groups finish vaccinating their population, their capacity is distributed to the rest of the
world as described above for the "actual" and "zero" capacity investment scenarios.
 The benefits shown in the table are measured relative to the "zero" capacity investment scenario.
The "actual" capacity investment scenario has the same vaccination schedule, but it is shifted by
three months. Thus, benefits are equal to the monthly harm from the pandemic multiplied by three.
Relative to the "zero" scenario, the "recommended" scenario has greater benefits both because
vaccination starts three months earlier and because capacity is larger, so people are vaccinated
earlier relative to the time vaccination starts.


A.2 Global Supply and Demand
Assuming that countries invest in the optimal portfolio according to our model, we can calculate
a global demand curve for vaccine capacity. For any given price, the demand curve gives the total
monthly capacity demanded by all countries across all vaccine candidates. We can also compute a
global supply curve, which specifies the amount of monthly capacity that would have been


                                                    31
supplied if firms were reimbursed at a given capacity cost. The global capacity for pandemic
vaccine doses is large as considerable capacity can be repurposed from flu vaccines (McLean et
al. 2016) but given the large upfront costs and challenges of installing capacity, we would expect
the marginal cost to rise sharply above a certain level. As such, we modeled the global short-run
vaccine supply as constant cost up to 200m doses a month, but relatively inelastic after that point
(with elasticity of 1/3, meaning that to induce a 1% increase in monthly capacity, the
reimbursement must rise by 3%).
       Under this approach, the market clearing price for capacity would have been around $40
per vaccine course per year (Figure A.7). At prices of this magnitude, a large share of low-income
countries would be priced out of the market (Table A.7) and low-cost firms would have accrued
large rents. However, during 2020, vaccine deals were signed at prices substantially lower than
this amount. So far, prices have remained lower than what our model indicates they would be in a
market equilibrium. There may be political or ethical constraints which are holding prices down.
In the presence of a price ceiling, there would be a large shortage in supply, and capacity would
be allocated by speed of contracting or political influence, such as having manufacturing capability
located in a particular country (Figure A.8). We also note that a price ceiling for vaccines will
further translate into lower prices paid to suppliers, which in turn leads to shortages in the supply
chain, unless countries use emergency powers to compel suppliers to produce critical inputs.
                              Figure A.7: Global Demand and Supply




Notes: This figure presents the global marginal benefits and costs curves for vaccine capacity. We assumed a
marginal cost curve with constant cost up to 200m doses a month at $2 per course/year then increasing after
that point with an elasticity of 1/3 (red), 2/3 (blue), and 4/3 (green).




                                                     33
                                             Figure A.8: Price Ceiling




      Notes: This figure presents the global marginal benefits and costs curves for vaccine capacity with a price
      ceiling at $20 per course per year. We assumed a marginal cost curve with constant cost up to 200m doses a
      month at $2 per course/year then increasing after that point with an elasticity of 1/3.


       This analysis implies that it would be valuable to establish capacity for supply chains for
vaccines or a stockpile of vaccine manufacturing inputs (bioreactors, glass vials, adjuvants, etc.)
going into the next pandemic to ensure that supply is elastic. At an elasticity of  (meaning that
to induce a 1% increase in monthly capacity, the reimbursement must rise by 1.5%), the market
clearing price would be around $20 per vaccine course per year. Under this elasticity, Table A.7
shows that global net benefits are approximately a third larger than in the inelastic supply scenario.
At an elasticity of 4/3 (meaning that to induce a 1% increase in monthly capacity, the
reimbursement must rise by 0.75%), the market clearing price would be around $10 per vaccine
course per year with global net benefits approximately double that in the inelastic supply scenario.
A.3 International Aspects

  In this section, we analyze the incentives countries or coalitions of countries have to participate
in centralized vaccine procurement programs. As shown in Section A.1, nationally optimal
investment differed dramatically across countries. Richer countries would have invested much
more than poorer countries. Thus, centralized systems with vaccine allocation proportional to
population or health need would not have been individually rational: rich countries would have
been better off designing their own procurement strategies, all else equal, than joining a coalition
characterized by redistribution, or where the portfolio size and scale did not align with their
interest. To be individually rational, countries would have to set their own investment levels.
 To understand better the incentives of countries to join coalitions, we analyzed six potential
coalitions of countries: the whole world, the US, the EU, all high-income countries (those with
GDP per capita above $17,000 or in the EU), BRIC (Brazil, Russia, India, and China, which are
lower-income countries with significant vaccine production capacity), and the rest of the world
(i.e., all countries outside BRIC that are not high-income).
 For each coalition, we analyzed six different scenarios. The first four correspond to global
procurement programs in which countries contribute in proportion to their GDP. In scenario (1),
vaccination capacity is distributed by population. In scenario (2), capacity was distributed by high
priority population, which shifted distribution towards high-income countries relative to scenario
(1). In scenario (3), capacity was distributed according to contribution (i.e., GDP), and was likely
to resemble the contributions that would result if countries decided contributions voluntarily. In
these three scenarios the global program could procure vaccine production capacity at a price of
$10 per course/year. Scenario (4) is the same as scenario (3), except that we assumed that the
global program was able to exploit its larger bargaining power to obtain a price of production
capacity of $8 per course/year. In all these scenarios, the global problem chose the portfolio that
maximizes net benefits to the world.
 In the final two scenarios, we assumed each coalition set up its own vaccine procurement
program. In scenario (5), coalitions are only able to procure vaccines from 5 candidates. This
stylized assumption is meant to illustrate what could happen if there is autarky, and coalitions were
not able to procure vaccines from candidates produced in countries outside the coalition (for
example, because countries use emergency powers to prevent export of vaccines). In scenario (6),


                                                     35
coalitions set up their own procurement contracts under free trade, which means they would be
able to procure from all candidates. In both scenarios (5) and (6), each country chooses the
portfolio that maximizes net benefits at a price of $10 per course/year.
        Table A.8 shows the net benefits of procurement programs to different coalitions in every
scenario. Comparing columns (1) and (5), it is clear that high-income coalitions would have been
much worse off with a global program that allocates vaccines by population, even if setting their
own program implies autarky: having to share vaccines with lower-income countries means giving
away a substantial fraction of benefits. Column (2) shows that that is also true if the global program
gives priority to high-risk populations, which benefits high-income countries (more elderly). In
column (3), high-income countries only get slightly higher benefits than in column (5). That means
that in order to make the global program incentive compatible (relative to autarky), most of the
vaccine production must be distributed according to contributions to the program.
        Column (6) shows what happens if coalitions set up their own programs with free trade,
which is the optimal scenario (at a price of $10 per course/year) in terms of total welfare. Relative
to this scenario, it is hard to justify a worldwide program unless it is able to get lower prices, as
shown in column (4). However, even a substantial decrease in prices only results in minor gains
for high-income countries relative to the net benefits from the program, since benefits are an order
of magnitude higher than costs. Thus, even if joining a global program leads to lower prices, those
countries might prefer their own program if that better allows them to obtain a more appropriate
portfolio.


                                         Table A.8: International Incentives
                                 Net benefits of the procurement program under different scenarios ($ bn)
                           Worl         Worl                                                               Own
                                                        Worl          Worldw            Own
                    dwide, by   dwide, with                                                      program, free
                                                 dwide, by       ide, high   program, autarky
                    population    priority                                                            trade
                                               contribution bargaining power
                                                         (3)             (4)              (5)
                            (1)          (2)                                                                (6)
           World            490          642            725              781              --                725
             US             114          173            243              256             217                247
             EU             123          180            210              219             186                211
            High
      Income                 341             499          648            682                573              651
           BRIC               72              82           43             56                 46               49
            Rest              77              61           35             43                 38               41
Notes: This table presents the net benefits of procurement programs to different coalitions under various scenarios
outlined in Section A.2.
       There are some potential benefits to international cooperation. First, centralized
procurement can use monopsony power to hold down vaccine prices. However, we have not
observed prohibitively high prices in the COVID-19 pandemic as of January 2021. Second,
cooperation could help address the needs of lower-income countries for humanitarian reasons or
to manage infectious disease externalities. There may also be benefits from insurance, economies
of scale in planning, and supply chain investment.


A.4 Structuring Procurement Contracts
       In this section, we further develop our analysis of the structure of procurement contracts
for vaccines. Advance contracts can be structured in two broad ways.


               Push funding: Upfront payments directly reimbursing manufacturers' costs
associated with installing capacity in parallel with clinical trials. Under this structure, the firm's
costs are reimbursed whether or not its product is successful.


               Pull funding: Payments to firms for successful vaccine production, where the
government commits to a price per course, typically a premium over production cost, often
specifying quantity guarantees for suppliers and/or options for buyers. Under this structure, a firm
only gets paid if the vaccine is approved and delivered.
       Pull contracts can come in a variety of forms. They may take the form of a simple, bilateral
deal between the buyer and a specified firm, committing the buyer to buy a specified quantity
(perhaps to be delivered at a specified date) at a specified price if the product meets a set of
conditions (e.g., regulatory approval). Unlike typical contracts for future delivery of existing
products, contracts for vaccines still under development are typically not considered breached if
the product is never produced or does not meet the conditions.
       As an alternative to a bilateral deal, the pull contract can be a broader commitment to a
minimum purchase quantity aggregated across all qualified candidates, with the buyer reserving
the right to allocate purchases among candidates. This is part of the design of advance market
commitments (AMCs), proposed by Kremer and Glennerster (2004). As originally proposed,
AMCs had other features of importance for endemic diseases, for example, specifying a tail price,
capping prices after the committed subsidy fund runs out, keeping long-run prices near production

                                                     37
cost, mitigating deadweight loss. In a pandemic crisis, short-run considerations dominate, so long-
run features such as tail prices may be of less relevance.
        In the setting of COVID-19 vaccines, we will label any advance contract committing to
aggregate rather than bilateral purchases an AMC. While our usage is loose, usage by agencies
and in the popular press can be even looser, labeling any advance contract, even bilateral deals, as
AMCs. For example, the COVAX facility has provisions for subsidizing the participation by 92
middle- and lower-income countries; this part of the program is labeled the COVAX AMC,
perhaps echoing the pilot AMC used to incentivize distribution of pneumococcal vaccine targeted
to these same countries. The COVAX AMC does not share the other features of the pneumococcal
program, designed as it was to pilot Kremer and Glennerster's (2004) proposal.
        The fact that AMCs commit to an aggregate quantity rather than specified amounts from
individual firms can create incentives for firms to compete on quality or timeliness to be among
the selected products. Winners may be difficult to identify early on, so a broadcast approach, open
to any qualified firm, may be preferable (Jeppesen and Lakhani 2010). Some drawbacks of AMCs
may include that they are less familiar to lawyers and procurement bureaucracies, requiring
additional work that may be difficult to accomplish quickly in an emergency. With capacity
possibly scarce given high country demand in a pandemic setting, AMCs may be vulnerable to
having successful suppliers "poached" by countries offering bilateral deals involving slightly
higher prices than the AMC commitment. The problem may have been less relevant for the pilot
pneumococcal AMC because this was targeted to low- and middle-income countries with fewer
resources to strike bilateral deals. Furthermore, pneumococcus was not a pandemic; country
demand increased gradually rather than far outstripping available supply (Kremer, Levin and
Snyder 2020), providing less incentive for a country to jump the queue with a bilateral deal then.
Perhaps for these reasons, contracts used in the pandemic were primarily simple, bilateral advance
purchase agreements coupled with direct funding of development. Apart from the COVAX AMC,
which as explained is only nominally an AMC, there were no explicit AMCs for COVID-19. Some
implicit market incentives may have been provided by firms' expectation of a future market for
vaccines, after the pandemic subsides and COVID-19 possibly becomes endemic over the longer
term.
        Looking more closely at the bilateral deals signed during 2020, many of those advance
commitments specified prices that were relatively close to expected average cost; given the
uncertainty and risks that firms faced to accelerate manufacturing in an unprecedented way, profit
margins were most likely modest, although full cost information is not public (and may in any case
be difficult to compute, given that some costs are opportunity costs for firms of repurposing inputs
and human resources, and risks include intangible factors such as reputational considerations).
Thus, the bilateral deals probably did not substantially increase the incentives for firms to invest,
but they did reduce uncertainty. In the past, in response to potential pandemics governments
promised research funding and firms invested, but the funding later dried up as the virus dissipated,
leaving firms holding the bag. The cycle is so familiar it's been labelled the panic-neglect cycle
(Yong, 2017). A contract made firm investments more secure. The advance purchase agreements
may have had other benefits such as ensuring an orderly market, especially in an environment
where firms may have expected that in the absence of advance contracts, governments might be
tempted to use emergency powers to direct production to themselves or their allies. The contracts
may also have helped companies secure financing as well as cooperation of suppliers, and they
may have encouraged countries to assist in resolving supply chain challenges, consistent with a
variety of news reports. On the other hand, many of the bilateral deals signed also included funding
for scaling manufacturing and late-stage clinical trials (at the government's risk), in addition to
promises of support for supply chains, with Pfizer's deal with the United States a notable
exception. Although details of the deals are not publicly available, overall we would characterize
the deals that were signed as primarily push funding.
       We now turn to a more detailed analysis of pull funding versus push funding. Pull funding
can be more expensive than push funding in certain settings, including when firms' costs are
perfectly observable but their success prospects are not. This can be most easily seen in an
example. Consider two firms, one with a vaccine candidate having a 20% chance of success and
the other with a 5% chance of success. Suppose that either firm can build a factory for $4 per unit
of capacity. Thus, for example, $400 million would be sufficient push funding to induce a firm to
build a factory having capacity for 100 million doses. To incentivize the first firm to build the
same factory with pull funding, the government must guarantee a price of at least $20 per dose
($20 × 20% = $4). To incentivize the second firm, the government must guarantee a higher
price, $80 per dose ($80 × 5% = $4), to compensate for the firm's lower probability of success.
If the government could distinguish the firms and offer them different contracts, push and pull
funding would be equivalently expensive. However, if the government must offer the same price

                                                     39
to all qualified candidates, in order to induce both firms to invest, it must offer $80 per dose,
leaving the first firm with rents and raising total government expenditures above that of equivalent
push funding.
         While the example provides a simple illustration of why push funding can be cheaper, it
left out important incentive benefits from pull funding. Pull funding mitigates several forms of the
moral-hazard problem (providing incentives to avoid cost bloat, since firms are residual claimants
of their unreimbursed costs, and providing incentives for firms to stop when prospects become
unrealistic) and the adverse-selection problem (firms with unrealistic prospects are induced not to
participate). If structured like an AMC, as mentioned, pull funding can also incentivize quality and
speed.
         As a heuristic, in mid-2020, we suggested that governments use push funding for 85% of
total costs, while using a market-wide AMC to help align private and social incentives for speed.
The market-wide AMC was proposed to take the form of a bonus for the first courses to be
purchased by the government following approval, and only courses delivered in a specific time
frame would be eligible, so that firms would be incentivized to install capacity prior to approvals.
The size of the bonus and the number of courses subject to the AMC are design features of the
program. In order to induce firms to make the remaining 15% investment at risk, pull funding must
be sufficiently large.
         As an example, we now compute how large the investment should be in order to obtain the
optimal portfolio for the world in column (3) of Table A.8. That portfolio has a total capacity of
2.36 billion courses per month, with investment in 18 different candidates. Assuming a capacity
cost of  =$10 per course per year, the cost of installing that capacity is $280 billion. A program
that pays for 85% of this sum upfront would have to pay $238 billion in push funding. In addition
to that, pull funding is provided in the form of a price  per course delivered within the first  =3
months. In order to compute how high that price must be, consider a vaccine manufacturer  that
produces at a marginal cost of  =$1 per course, and whose vaccine is successful with probability
 . For simplicity, we assumed that all firms have the same costs  and  , but have different
success probabilities. The program buys a yearly capacity  from the firm, which ends up
                                                                
producing and selling   doses in expectation, where  = 12 years. Its total expected cost is

equal to 0.15 +   , and its expected revenue is equal to   .
         Suppose that, due to the risky nature of the investment, firms choose to participate if the
expected revenue is at least 1.5 times the expected cost, or, in other words, if  >
      0.15 +                                                                                0.15+
1.5               . All firms will then participate if the price is greater than  = 1.5               ,
                                                                                               

where  is the lowest success probability among all the candidates that are part of the optimal
portfolio. Using the success model described in section A.1.2, the lowest such probability is 0.132,
resulting in a price per course of  =$68.93. The expected pull funding is then     ,
which in this case is equal to $112 bn. Note that this is an average: total pull funding might be
higher if many successful candidates are realized. The total expected cost of the program is $350
bn.
         If, instead, the program only pays for 60% of the upfront costs, a similar accounting results
in push funding of $196, expected pull funding of $222, and a total expected cost of $418. Relative
to the previous funding structure, the advantage of shifting funding towards pull is that it could
result in greater incentives for success, both in development and in meeting the contracted time
frame.
         Pull funding is expensive due to the desire for a large portfolio of vaccines, and the fact
that the marginal candidates perceive a low probability of success. Required pull funding could be
reduced by increasing the share of funding given as push funding, perhaps targeted towards lower-
probability candidates; and reducing the size of the portfolio for which at-risk investments are
undertaken.
         Another alternative to market-wide AMCs that our analysis suggests would be substantially
cheaper is bilateral pull funding that directly incentivizes speed, but is targeted to individual firms
making use of information about their success probabilities. That of course requires such
information to be known by the buyer. Later in the development timeline, this information is more
likely to be available to governments. We did not provide a full quantitative analysis of bilateral
incentives for speed, and further exploring the tradeoffs and details of such contracts represents an
area for future research.
         As discussed above, actual contracts signed did not incorporate the type of market-wide
pull funding we recommended, and the firm-specific pull funding provided only modest incentives
given that firms should have rationally expected that they would be likely to be able to sell a safe
and effective vaccine at similar or higher prices without the agreements. It appears that despite


                                                      41
the lack of substantial incentives, a number of vaccine candidates advanced to regulatory approval.
However, it seems plausible that stronger incentives for speed might have incentivized firms to go
farther in expanding capacity and investing in alleviating supply chain bottlenecks sooner. The
delays experienced in manufacturing as of early 2021 highlight that substantial investment and
redundancy are required to meet the ambitious goals of vaccinating at a rate that comes close to
the socially beneficial one.
A.5 Table of Vaccine Candidates
Vaccine candidates in optimal selection order to maximize probability of at least one success
(August 2020)
                                                                      Cumulative    Marginal
 Platform                   Subcategory                Phase          Probability   Probability
 Inactivated                Inactivated                Phase 3        0.288         0.288
                            Adenovirus (non-
 Viral vector               replicating)               Phase 3        0.483         0.195
                            LNP-encapsulated
 RNA                        mRNA                       Phase 3        0.583         0.099
 Inactivated                Inactivated                Phase 3        0.658         0.074
 Protein subunit            Recombinant protein        Phase 2        0.707         0.049
 Protein subunit            S protein                  Phase 2        0.744         0.036
 Protein subunit            Recombinant protein        Phase 2        0.769         0.025
                            LNP-encapsulated
 RNA                        mRNA                       Phase 3        0.790         0.020
 Inactivated                Inactivated                Phase 3        0.807         0.016
                            Adenovirus (non-
 Viral vector               replicating)               Phase 2        0.821         0.013
 VLP                        VLP                        Phase 1        0.832         0.011
                            Adenovirus (non-
 Viral vector               replicating)               Phase 2        0.840         0.008
 Viral vector               Measles (replicating)      Phase 1        0.847         0.006
 Protein subunit            S protein                  Phase 1        0.852         0.005
 DNA                        Electroporation            Phase 2        0.857         0.004
 Protein subunit            S protein                  Phase 1        0.861         0.003
 Live attenuated virus      Live attenuated            Pre-clinical   0.865         0.003
 DNA                        Other DNA                  Phase 2        0.868         0.002
 Live attenuated virus      Live attenuated            Pre-clinical   0.870         0.002
 Protein subunit            Recombinant protein        Phase 1        0.873         0.002
 Live attenuated virus      Live attenuated            Pre-clinical   0.8752        0.002
 Live attenuated virus      Live attenuated            Pre-clinical   0.877         0.001
 Protein subunit            S protein                  Phase 1        0.878         0.001
 Live attenuated virus      Live attenuated            Pre-clinical   0.880         0.001
 DNA                        Plasmid + adjuvant         Phase 2        0.881         0.001
 RNA                        mRNA                       Phase 1        0.882         0.001
 Live attenuated virus      Live attenuated            Pre-clinical   0.883         0.001
 Protein subunit            Recombinant protein        Phase 1        0.884         0.001
 Viral vector               Horsepox (replicating)     Pre-clinical   0.885         0.001
 Viral vector               Influenza (replicating)    Pre-clinical   0.886         0.001




                                                      43
Appendix References
AstraZeneca. 2020. £AZD1222 vaccine met primary efficacy endpoint in preventing COVID-
       19". Press release.

Bubar, Kate M., Kyle Reinholt, Stephen M. Kissler, Marc Lipsitch, Sarah Cobey, Yonatan H.
       Grad, and Daniel B. Larremore. 2020. "Model-Informed COVID-19 Vaccine
       Prioritization Strategies by Age and Serostatus," MedRxiv, January 202009.08.20190629,
       accessed at https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.08.20190629.

Britton, Tom, Frank Ball, and Pieter Trapman. 2020. "A mathematical model reveals the
        influence of population heterogeneity on herd immunity to SARS-CoV-2." Science 369,
        no. 6505: 846-849.

Cutler, David M., and Lawrence H. Summers. 2020. "The COVID-19 pandemic and the $16
        trillion virus," Journal of the American Medical Association 324, no. 15 (2020): 1495-
        1496.

Davies, N. G., P. Klepac, Y. Liu, K. Prem, M. Jit, R. M. Eggo. 2020. "Age-Dependent Effects in
       the Transmission and Control of COVID-19 Epidemics," Nature Medicine 26: 1-7.

Demombynes, Gabriel. 2020. "COVID-19 Age-Mortality Curves are Flatter in Developing
     Countries," World Bank Policy Research Working Paper.

DiMasi, J. A., L. Feldman, A. Seckler, and A. Wilson. 2010. "Trends in Risks Associated With
      New Drug Development: Success Rates for Investigational Drugs," Clinical
      Pharmacology & Therapeutics 87 (3): 272­77, accessed at
      https://doi.org/10.1038/clpt.2009.295.

Duke Global Health Innovation Center. 2020. "Launch and Scale Speedometer," Accessed at
      https://launchandscalefaster.org/covid-19.

Dunn, Andrew. 2020. "Some Experts Are Deeply Skeptical We'll Have a Coronavirus Vaccine
      within 18 Months. Here's Why a Shot May Take Years, If We Can Succeed in Making
      One at All," Business Insider, April 25, 2020. accessed at
      https://www.businessinsider.com/coronavirus-vaccine-timeline-prospects-can-we-make-
      one-2020-4.

Goldhill, Olivia. 2020. "COVID-19 Vaccine-Distribution Timeline Will Keep Slipping, Experts
       Say," STAT+, December 11, 2020, accessed at
       https://www.statnews.com/2020/12/11/covid19-vaccine-timeline-keeps-slipping-experts-
       say-it-will-change-again/.

Hogan, A. B., P. Winskill, O. J. Watson, P. G. T. Walker, C. Whittaker, M. Baguelin, D. Haw,
      A. Løchen, K. A. M. Gaythorpe. 2020. Imperial College COVID-19 Response Team, F.
       Muhib, P. Smith, K. Hauck, N. M. Ferguson, A. C. Ghani. "Report 33: Modelling the
       Allocation and Impact of a COVID-19 Vaccine," Imperial College London.

Hodgson, John. 2020. "The Pandemic Pipeline," Nature Biotechnology 38 (5): 523­32, accessed
      at https://doi.org/10.1038/d41587-020-00005-z.

Jeppesen, Lars Bo, and Karim R. Lakhani. 2010. "Marginality and Problem-Solving
       Effectiveness in Broadcast Search," Organization Science, 1­18, accessed at
       https://doi.org/<p>10.1287/orsc.1090.0491</p>.

Johnson, Ed, and Angus Whitley. 2020. "Australia Cancels Order for CSL Vaccine as Trial
      Stumbles," Bloomberg.Com, December 10, 2020, accessed at
      https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2020-12-10/australia-cancels-order-for-csl-
      vaccine-as-trial-stumbles.

Kalorama Information. 2020. "Vaccine Development and Production Trends, COVID-19 and
      Other Vaccines Pipeline,", accessed at
      https://kaloramainformation.com/product/vaccine-development-and-production-trends-
      covid-19-and-other-vaccines-pipeline/.

Khamsi, Roxanne. 2020. "If a Coronavirus Vaccine Arrives, Can the World Make Enough?"
      Nature 580 (7805): 578­80, accessed at https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-020-01063-8.

Kis, Zoltan, Cleo Kontoravdi, Robin Shattock and Nilay Shah. 2021. "Resources, Production
       Scales and Time Required for Producing RNA Vaccines for the Global Pandemic
       Demand."

Kremer, Michael, Jonathan D Levin, and Christopher M Snyder. 2020. "Advance Market
      Commitments: Insights from Theory and Experience," Working Paper Series, No. 26775,
      National Bureau of Economic Research, accessed at . https://doi.org/10.3386/w26775.

Le, Tung Thanh, Zacharias Andreadakis, Arun Kumar, Raúl Gómez Román, Stig Tollefsen,
       Melanie Saville, and Stephen Mayhew. 2020. "The COVID-19 Vaccine Development
       Landscape," Nature Reviews Drug Discovery 19 (5): 305­6, accessed at
       https://doi.org/10.1038/d41573-020-00073-5.

Lurie, Nicole, Melanie Saville, Richard Hatchett, and Jane Halton. 2020. "Developing COVID-
       19 Vaccines at Pandemic Speed," New England Journal of Medicine 382 (21): 1969­73,
       accessed at https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMp2005630.

Mullard. 2020. "How COVID vaccines are being divvied up around the world," Nature,
       November 30, 2020, accessed at https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-020-03370-6.
Peel, Michael, Richard Milne, and Donato Mancini. 2021. "EU countries decry `very short
       notice' of delay in delivery of Pfizer vaccine," Financial Times, January 15, 2021,
       accessed at https://www.ft.com/content/e8177df6-04ae-4d20-8e62-ca76589c7653



                                                 45
Pfizer. 2020. "Pfizer and BioNTech to submit emergency use authorization request today to the
        US FDA for COVID-19 vaccine," Press release. Friday, November 20, 2020, accessed at
        https://www.pfizer.com/news/press-release/press-release-detail/pfizer-and-biontech-
        submit-emergency-use-authorization
Plotkin, Stanley, James M. Robinson, Gerard Cunningham, Robyn Iqbal, and Shannon Larsen.
        2017. "The Complexity and Cost of Vaccine Manufacturing ­ An Overview," Vaccine 35
        (33): 4064­71, accessed at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2017.06.003.

Pronker, Esther S., Tamar C. Weenen, Harry Commandeur, Eric H. J. H. M. Claassen, and
       Albertus D. M. E. Osterhaus. 2013. "Risk in Vaccine Research and Development
       Quantified," PLoS ONE 8 (3), accessed at. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0057755.

Reuters. 2020. "China's Sinovac to double annual COVID-19 vaccine capacity to 1 billion
       doses," January 13 2021, accessed at https://www.reuters.com/article/us-health-
       coronavirus-vaccine-sinovac/chinas-sinovac-to-double-annual-covid-19-vaccine-
       capacity-to-1-billion-doses-idUSKBN29I0YN

Robbins, Rebecca, and Benjamin Mueller. 2020. "After Admitting Mistake, AstraZeneca Faces
      Difficult Questions About Its Vaccine," The New York Times, November 25, 2020, sec.
      Business, accessed at https://www.nytimes.com/2020/11/25/business/coronavirus-
      vaccine-astrazeneca-oxford.html.

Thompson, Stuart A. 2020. "Opinion | How Long Will a Vaccine Really Take?" The New York
     Times, April 30, 2020, sec. Opinion, accessed at
     https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/04/30/opinion/coronavirus-covid-
     vaccine.html.

Walsh, Fergus. 2020. "Oxford-AstraZeneca Vaccine: Bogus Reports, Accidental Finds - the
       Story of the Jab," BBC News, December 14, 2020, sec. Health, accessed at
       https://www.bbc.com/news/health-55308216.

World Bank. 2020. "Global Economic Prospects, January 2020: Slow Growth, Policy
      Challenges," Washington, DC: World Bank. DOI: 10.1596/978-1-4648-1468-6.

World Health Organization. 2020. "Landscape of COVID-19 Candidate Vaccines," accessed at
      https://www.who.int/publications/m/item/draft-landscape-of-covid-19-candidate-
      vaccines.

Yong, Ed. 2017. "The Deadly Panic-Neglect Cycle in Pandemic Funding," The Atlantic. October
      24, 2017, accessed at https://www.theatlantic.com/science/archive/2017/10/panic-
      neglect-pandemic-funding/543696/.

Zimmer, Carl, Sharon LaFraniere, and Noah Weiland. 2021. "Johnson & Johnson Expects
     Vaccine Results Soon but Lags in Production," The New York Times, January 13, 2021,
     sec. Health, accessed at https://www.nytimes.com/2021/01/13/health/covid-vaccine-
     johnson-johnson.html.
