                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      WHAT EXPLAINS DIFFERENCES IN FINANCE RESEARCH PRODUCTIVITY
                         DURING THE PANDEMIC?

                                         Brad M. Barber
                                            Wei Jiang
                                          Adair Morse
                                           Manju Puri
                                         Heather Tookes
                                        Ingrid M. Werner

                                      Working Paper 28493
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28493


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2021




We are very grateful to Annette Clark, the Executive Committee of the American Finance
Association (AFA), and in particular AFA President Ken Singleton for his guidance and
encouragement throughout this project. We would like to thank Cam Harvey, Jennifer Koski, and
participants at the 2021 AFFECT reception for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Brad M. Barber, Wei Jiang, Adair Morse, Manju Puri, Heather Tookes, and Ingrid M.
Werner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
What Explains Differences in Finance Research Productivity During the Pandemic?
Brad M. Barber, Wei Jiang, Adair Morse, Manju Puri, Heather Tookes, and Ingrid M. Werner
NBER Working Paper No. 28493
February 2021
JEL No. G0,G01

                                         ABSTRACT

Using a survey of AFA members, we analyze how demographics, time allocation, production
mechanisms, and institutional factors affect research production during the pandemic. Consistent
with the literature, research productivity falls more for women and faculty with young children.
Independently and novel, extra time spent teaching (much more likely for women) negatively
affects research productivity. Also novel are the results that concerns about feedback, isolation,
and health have large negative research effects, disproportionately affecting junior faculty and
PhD students. Finally, faculty facing greater concerns about employers' finances report larger
negative research effects and more concerns about feedback, isolation and health.


Brad M. Barber                                  Manju Puri
Graduate School of Management                   Fuqua School of Business
One Shields Avenue                              Duke University
3218 Gallagher Hall                             100 Fuqua Drive
University of California                        Durham, NC 27708-0120
Davis, CA 95616                                 and NBER
bmbarber@ucdavis.edu                            mpuri@duke.edu

Wei Jiang                                       Heather Tookes
Graduate School of Business                     Yale School of Management
Columbia University                             New Haven, CT 06520-8200
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 803                    heather.tookes@yale.edu
New York, NY 10027
and NBER                                        Ingrid M. Werner
wj2006@columbia.edu                             Fisher College of Business
                                                Ohio State University
Adair Morse                                     2100 Neil Avenue
University of California, Berkeley              Columbus, OH 43210
545 Student Services Bldg, #1900                werner.47@osu.edu
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
morse@haas.berkeley.edu




An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28493
1. Introduction
    The COVID-19 pandemic has rapidly upended modern life, tested the infrastructure of higher education
globally, and pushed professors and administrators to their productive limits. While there is now hope that
effective vaccines will bring an end to the current state of chaos, there still may be long-term consequences
for higher education. In this paper, we explore three main channels that might disparately affect the research
productivity of faculty (and Ph.D. students) and hence their long-term career outcomes, which are primarily
dependent on successful research records. First, we consider disruptions to time allocations since the
pandemic resulted in sharp disruptions in time allocations and these disruptions are significantly associated
with faculty characteristics such as seniority, gender and family structure. Second, we consider production
mechanisms that affect research productivity beyond time allocation like the inability to obtain feedback,
concerns about isolation, or concerns about physical or mental health. These production mechanisms likely
affect productivity per unit of time input and thus can contribute to reductions in research independent of
time allocations. We expect these mechanisms to vary with faculty characteristics like seniority, gender and
family structure. Finally, we consider institutional factors, such as the perceived financial condition of the
institution and tenure clock extension policies, and examine their impact on research productivity. To
preview our results, we find all three factors (time, production, and institutional mechanisms) play an
important role in explaining variation in the effect of the pandemic on research productivity. Our results
raise concerns that the pandemic will have long-lasting and disparate impact on, and thus shift the
representation of, various groups in the faculty population.
    Our study builds exclusively on data from a voluntary survey that we sent to the membership of the
American Finance Association (AFA) on October 26, 2020. We asked members to evaluate the impact of
the pandemic on their own research productivity and on the time spent on research and related activities.
Because individuals with university-related positions comprise 85.4% of the 1,440 responses, we focus the
analysis solely on this group. Most of the survey responses are reported in Likert scales (from 1 to 5), which
is accommodated by the ordered logistic models. The empirical approach allows us to examine the impact
of predetermined variables (gender and family structure), rank (senior, junior, student), and mechanisms
(time, production, and institutional factors), holding other things constant and allows for formal analyses
of potentially important interactions. Because the pandemic hit everyone by complete surprise, and because
the regressors in our models represent mostly pre-existing characteristics, endogeneity should not be a
major concern in interpreting the regression results.
    During the pandemic, most faculty report a negative effect on research, but importantly for our analysis
there is considerable variation in this effect. While 78.1% of faculty respondents report decreases in
research productivity and 60% report spending less time on research, there are also 14.5% of faculty who
report increases in research productivity and 21.5% report spending more time on research. The variation


                                                                                                            1
in research effects relates to predetermined factors ­ family structure and gender. Research productivity of
women and faculty with children, especially very young ones (ages 0 to 5), is particularly harmed by the
pandemic, and the two factors seem to work independently without a significant interaction effect. That is,
presence of young children affects research production during the pandemic by similar degree for men and
for women, but women are still more negatively impacted for given family structure. The career and
professional implications of these effects are important. Women, in particular senior women, are already
an underrepresented group within the academic finance profession, and thus achievements attributed to
efforts to ameliorate the disparity in recent years could see a set-back post-pandemic. Also set back are
junior faculty of both genders, as they are more likely to have young children and experience professional
isolation. Junior faculty are the group for whom current research productivity will have the greatest impact
on future career outcomes. Thus, on both counts, the impact of the magnitudes of distortions may have
profound effects on research and on the profession as a whole.
    We then turn the main question we address in this paper: What mechanisms generate disparate effects
on research productivity? The pandemic and the resulting lockdowns and social distancing requirements
greatly affected how academics spend their time. Faculty need to devote more time to teaching, as they
work to adopt entirely new models of remote and hybrid teaching. Faculty with children may spend more
of their time navigating school and day care closures or they may have increased responsibilities when their
adult children return home. To shed light on the time allocation mechanisms driving the negative research
effects, we asked respondents to report the changes in time allocation to tasks other than research. The time
allocation questions are particularly telling, given the hard budget constraint of 24 hours a day. As expected,
we find that faculty with children spend more time on childcare and domestic chores while cutting back on
time spent on research, leisure, and sleep. In contrast, time spent on teaching is unaffected by the presence
of children, because teaching is a task with fixed deadlines which requires immediate attention.
    What is less expected is our finding that women spend more time teaching and less time on research
after controlling for family structure. While increased time spent on teaching should be expected for all
faculty given the rapid transition to online instruction, the fact that women report a bigger increase in their
teaching burden than men unfortunately further exacerbates the gender gap in research productivity. Given
the substantial evidence of bias against women (especially junior women) in teaching evaluations (e.g.,
Rivera and Tilcsk, 2019; Mengel, Sauermann, and Zolitz, 2019), the pressure to gain favorable teaching
ratings ­ an important component in tenure and promotion considerations ­ may elicit more effort from
women, compared to men, on teaching at the expense of time for research (e.g., Winslow, 2010). Moreover,
female professors tend to experience more demands and special requests from students as students continue
to perceive and expect female professors to be more nurturing than male professors (El-Alayli, Hensen-
Brown, and Ceynar, 2018). The pandemic, and ensuing major transition of mode of teaching, only



                                                                                                             2
exacerbated this gap, an important finding that has not be discovered in other survey and research.
Importantly, gender differences in the increased time spent teaching do not explain the gender effect that
we are observe in research productivity. In contrast, the productivity loss due to children is completely
explained by time being allocated to childcare, chores, and teaching, rather than potential unobserved
heterogeneity between faculty with and without children.
    Having sketched out the effects of the pandemic on time allocation, we then study the effect of these
time mechanisms on research productivity. Time spent on teaching, childcare, and chores are all important
determinants of research productivity. Of the potential time allocation mechanisms that we identify, time
spent on childcare and chores have a particularly strong compromising effect on research. These two
variables predictably and reassuringly absorb the effects of the predetermined family structure variables
(but not gender).
    In addition to the directional effects, the economic magnitude of these effects is equally interesting,
which prompt us to extract marginal effects from the estimated ordered logistic models. The magnitude of
effects of childcare and chores turn out to be enormous. Holding all other covariates constant at sample
means senior (junior) faculty who report spending "much more" time on childcare are 54.7 (47.2)
percentage points (ppts) more likely to report "much less," or the most significant negative effect on
research productivity. Though this finding is consistent with the mounting evidence from other fields that
young children are associated with significant reductions in productivity (e.g., Krukowski, 2020; Myers et
al., 2020; Deryungina et al. 2021), the magnitude we uncover is staggering. Moreover, these marginal
effects still understate the total expected effects on junior faculty because they are also more likely to have
young children then senior faculty, as 37.7% of junior faculty report spending "much more" time on
childcare versus 29.4% of senior faculty. We multiply the probability of exposure to the pandemic-related
childcare burden by the marginal effects of the burden on research productivity to obtain what we call the
"expected effect" for a member of the group. A junior faculty member has a 17.8 percentage point increased
probability of reporting the most extreme negative research outcome as a result of "much more" time spent
on childcare (47.2 percentage point marginal effect times the 37.7% probability of reporting "much more"
childcare). In comparison, the expected effect of childcare on research productivity for senior faculty is
16.1 percentage points, less than that for junior faculty due to lower exposure to a childcare burden.
    The marginal effect of teaching on research productivity is smaller, but still sizable. For example, senior
and junior faculty who report spending "much more" time on childcare are 39.0 and 26.5 percentage points,
respectively, more likely to report "much less," the most significant negative effect on research
productivity. Senior faculty are slightly more likely than junior faculty to report spending "much more"
time on teaching (23.6% versus 19.8%) and, as a result, the expected effect of a severe teaching burden is
much larger for senior faculty than junior faculty (9.2 versus 5.2 percentage points).



                                                                                                             3
    While time diverted from research is a major cause for drop in research productivity, the pandemic
effect could manifest itself in other ways. Professional conferences and traditional opportunities to
disseminate research and obtain feedback may no longer be feasible or may not be as effective in remote
formats. Like the general public, faculty may feel isolated or overwhelmed by concerns about their own
health and well-being. These mechanisms likely affect productivity even for fixed units of work time, and
thus can contribute to reductions in productivity independent of time allocations. As a result, we refer to
these mechanisms as production mechanisms.
    To capture the effect of production mechanisms on research productivity, we study wellbeing (concerns
about physical and mental health) and two characteristics essential to the development process of research
­ feedback and, its opposite, isolation. Specifically, we ask faculty whether they have concerns about lack
of feedback on research, worries about isolation, or worries about their physical or mental health with all
responses recorded on a 5-point Likert scale (with "3" being no concerns; and a higher value indicates a
more concerning condition).
    After controlling for time allocations, these production mechanisms (concerns about feedback,
isolation, and health) indeed have independent negative effects on research productivity. The economic
magnitudes of these effects rival those of the time allocation variables and also vary by rank. For example,
senior and junior faculty who report "much more" concern about feedback are 49.9 and 41.7 percentage
points, respectively, more likely to report the most significant negative effect on research productivity.
Though the marginal effect looks similar between the two groups, junior faculty are much more likely than
senior faculty to have the highest concern about lack of feedback (38.9% versus 22.6%). Hence, the
expected effect of the highest feedback concerns on junior faculty is more than 40% greater than that of
senior faculty (16.2 versus 11.3 percentage points). The marginal effects of health concerns on research
outcomes are also large, but somewhat less than those related to feedback concerns (46.9 and 30.3
percentage points for senior and junior faculty, respectively). Again, because junior faculty are much more
likely than senior faculty to have these concerns (30.7% versus 15.2%), the expected effect gap is larger
for junior rather than senior faculty (9.3 ppts versus 7.1 percentage points). The marginal effects of isolation
concerns are analogous to those associated with feedback and health concerns. There is already broad
evidence that mental health affects employment prospects and workplace productivity (Bubonya et al. 2017;
Frijters et al. 2014) and that the associated costs are large in magnitude (Greenberg et al. 2015). However,
we are the first (to our knowledge) to report direct links between research productivity in academia to
pandemic-related increases in concerns about isolation and mental health.
    When we examine students separately from faculty, we discover that factors affecting students are
different. While students report a negative research effect, it is less dramatic than that reported by junior
faculty, and the time students spend on research has not changed as dramatically. For students, the time



                                                                                                              4
mechanisms (teaching, childcare, and chores) remain important, but the marginal effects are small relative
to faculty. Moreover, students are less likely than faculty to report the most extreme time burdens from
teaching, childcare, or chores. As a result, the expected effects on students are less than 4% for all three
time variables.
    But the pandemic imposes a unique toll on the students mentally, as they are reporting greater concerns
about isolation and health than faculty. Like faculty, these wellbeing and social connective factors
negatively affect the research productivity of students independent of the time allocations. The marginal
effects of the most extreme concerns on the probability of a student reporting the most negative research
productivity impact are 23.4, 25.0, and 33.7 percentage points for isolation, health, and feedback,
respectively. But 41.9% of students express the most extreme concerns about health and 32.8% express the
most extreme concern about isolation. (Interestingly, they are less likely to report concerns about feedback
perhaps because students either have advisors who continue to provide feedback or lack a finished research
product at the stage for external feedback.) While we do not ask about overall mental health (we combine
physical and mental health and then separately ask about feelings of isolation), our findings are consistent
with mounting evidence of significant mental health challenges during the pandemic. For example,
Chirikov, Soria, Horgos, and Jone-White (2020), both report that, between May and July 2020, 39% of
graduate students screened positive for anxiety and 32% screened positive for depression. These are
increases from 26% and 15% (respectively) from 2019.1 To be sure, graduate students (and faculty) are
privileged in that they are generally able to enjoy intellectual freedom and work flexibility that can afford
a healthier work-life balance in normal times compared to those in other professions. However, the survey
reveals that, like the general population, those in the academic life are vulnerable to isolation and concerns
about health as a result of COVID-19, especially those earliest in the career trajectory. Moreover, we find
direct links between these factors and declines in research productivity.
    Finally, we turn to factors driving variation in research production coming from institutional factors.
We find that the negative research effects are larger for faculty employed by institutions with more serious
financial concerns, because teaching becomes more demanding as universities struggle to retain students
and support for research wanes with budgetary cuts and hiring freezes. We also find evidence that faculty
who are more concerned about the financial health of their employers express greater concerns about lack
of feedback, social isolation, and health.



1
  These data are in line with National Center for Health Statistics survey evidence that the proportion of young adults
(18-29 years old) reporting symptoms of depression has doubled from 2019 to December 2020
(https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/products/databriefs/db379.htm). In April 2020, three months into the global COVID-19
crisis,   the     percentage    rose    to     32.7%     and      reached    43.6%      in    December      of    2020
(https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/covid19/pulse/mental-health.htm).


                                                                                                                     5
    Institutions responded with a variety of pandemic-related policies, from which we focus on tenure clock
extensions, intended to compensate for loss of research time and access to data or lab, and additional time
required to adapt to new teaching models. The extension is also part of the effort to address career concerns
and to support the mental health of untenured faculty. Unfortunately, our finding suggests that such a one-
sized policy has unintended consequences. Junior faculty employed by institutions that have extended the
tenure clock report decreased research productivity, presumably due to a relaxation of the deadline imposed
by tenure review. More importantly, clock extensions may have unintended consequences to exacerbate
the dispersion of productivity within cohorts, rendering junior faculty who are most negatively impacted
by the pandemic in an even more disadvantageous position at tenure review which usually deploys
comparison within cohorts. Such an effect is analogous to what Antecol, Beddard, and Stearns (2018)
document as the unintended consequence of the gender-neutral policy on parental leave. Finally, these
policies do not appear to help alleviate pandemic-related stress: junior faculty at institutions with tenure
clock extensions are no less likely to report feelings of isolation, reduced ability to receive timely feedback,
or overall health concerns. We hope that our findings could raise awareness among institutions to expand
coverage of mental health support during this time and to provide clearer guidance on mental health issues.
    Our study contributes to multiple strands of literature and have direct policy implications. First and
foremost, we contribute to a quickly emerging new field the examines the impact of the pandemic on life
and productivity of academics, usually via survey methods. We echo some of the recent evidence that
women and women with children in the STEM fields (including economics) were particularly affected by
COVID-19 (e.g., Cui et al., 2020; Deryugina et al., 2020; Myers et al., 2020). In STEM, Frederickson
(2020), Sugimoto (2020), and Andersen (2020) all report significant declines in research by female authors
relative to men since the onset of the pandemic. Amano-Patino et al. (2020) report that women economists
are vastly underrepresented in the new and flourishing area of COVID research. We also reconcile with
Kruger, Maturana, and Nickerson (2020)'s finding that though the overall volume of working papers
increased during the pandemic there has been a gender gap in the posting of papers online. Although
evidence on the disparate impact of the pandemic on research for women and faculty with young children
is growing, we still know little about the underlying mechanisms driving these differences, which is the
focus of our study.
    An important incremental contribution of this study, relative to the existent survey-based research, lies
in our examination of three potential channels that might contribute to research productivity changes: time
allocation, physical and mental health concerns (production mechanisms), and institution-level effects. We
delve into not just the effect of gender and children, but we also ask how these pre-determined family
structure variables relate to time allocation decisions during the pandemic. The approach is in the spirit of
Myers et al. (2020) but we examine changes in time allocated to a richer set of activities (including



                                                                                                              6
childcare, chores, leisure and sleep) to help us understand the mechanisms driving changes in time allocated
to research. The time allocation measures that we examine are similar to contemporaneous work by
Deryungina et al. (2021); however, Deryungina et al. (2021) do not study the relationship between time
allocation and changes in research productivity (the main variable of interest in this paper). And, unlike
both Myers et al. (2020) and Deryungina et al. (2021), we examine respondents' concerns about their own
physical or mental health, isolation, and ability to obtain timely feedback on their work; these factors likely
hinder the exchange of ideas and feedback that is crucial to the production of impactful research. Thus, we
explore a rich set of potential drivers of changes in research productivity during the pandemic. Third, we
study the effect of the university's financial condition and decision to extend tenure clocks on research
productivity outcomes.
    We also enrich this new field by exploring variations across professional ranks. Our data include large
samples of senior faculty, junior faculty and Ph.D. students, allowing us to understand and uncover novel
evidence in the differential effects of time mechanisms (e.g., teaching, childcare, and chores), production
mechanisms (e.g., concerns about feedback, health, isolation) and highlight potentially important
implications for junior scholars and students, who will shape the profession for years to come.
    The disparate effects of COVID-19 that we document have implications that extend beyond finance
academia and beyond the specific setting of COVID. Many of the professional responsibilities of finance
faculty and the research criteria by which they are evaluated are shared across a wide range of disciplines.
And lessons learnt from COVID are applicable to other major negative shocks to academic production that
might happen in the future. If administrators are not deliberate in their policy responses to the pandemic,
the sharp decline in research productivity reported by faculty with children and female faculty will have
lasting impacts on careers and the diversity of individuals contributing to knowledge production. In
particular we caution against one-size-fits-all policies such as a uniform tenure clock extension, echoing
the earlier findings of Anecol et al. (2018) on gender-neutral parental leaves in a new setting, and providing
empirical support for the sentiment expressed in the opinion piece by Malisch et al. (2020). Our findings
support policy responses accounting for the disparate impact of a common negative shock (Oleschuk,
2020), e.g., via an opt-out tenure clock extension, more support to junior faculty, and non-essential service
relief.


2. Data
2.1. Survey Overview
    We designed the survey with two goals: (i) to collect a large sample that is less likely to be affected by
selection and (ii) to obtain a statistically powerful observation count to allow us to explore not only the
effect of COVID on individual researchers but also the underlying mechanisms. Toward that aim, we



                                                                                                             7
designed a short survey (less than 5 minutes) with no tracking of locations or information that could reveal
location so as to reduce potential concerns from respondents. The American Finance Association (AFA)
kindly agreed to implement the survey.
    After obtaining requisite IRB clearances and signing data use agreements, we sent an invitation to take
the voluntary survey to 8,421 members of the AFA via email on October 26, 2020, with a deadline of
November 4, 2020. Two reminders were sent out, on October 31 and on November 4, 2020.2 A total of
1,440 responses were received by the deadline, for a response rate of 17.5% after accounting for bounced
email (see Online Appendix for details).3
    Given the importance of research productivity to institutions and to individual career outcomes, the key
information we solicited regarded how research productivity and time allocated to research were affected
by the pandemic. We also asked questions about changes in research support, specifically financial
resources and feedback from colleagues. The survey was anonymous, and we did not collect IPs or other
identifiers; however, we collected demographic information on gender, professional role, tenure status (for
faculty), household structure (spouse/partner, children), and continent location. The surveyed individuals
were also asked about their institution's response to the pandemic such as extensions of tenure-clocks and
elimination/optionality of student evaluations of instruction. Finally, we asked how concerned survey
respondents were about a number of emerging issues related to the pandemic, such as isolation, online
teaching, in-person teaching, children's' education, employer and personal finances, and personal health.
The survey questions are summarized in the Online Appendix.


2.2. Descriptive Statistics
    Unless otherwise stated, we use all survey respondents as the denominator (regardless of whether they
answered a specific question). The respondents are distributed across geographic regions as follows: 51.9%
of the respondent work in the U.S.; 24.6% in the European Economic Area (EEA); and 23.4% in the Rest
of the World (RoW). Respondents with university-related positions comprise 85.4% of the sample and this
is the subsample which our main analysis focuses on. Among respondents who identify as male or female,
66.8% identify as male and 33.2% female.4
    In the main analyses, we focus on the respondents with university-related positions who identified
themselves as male or female. We delete an additional 42 observations where all responses to time
allocations are blank or all responses to concerns/worries are blank. The resulting main sample consists of
1,008 university respondents: 731 faculty (402 senior faculty and 329 junior faculty) and 277 students. The

2
  A copy of the invitation is in the Online Appendix.
3
  Typical response rates for voluntary surveys without incentives (such as gift cards, etc.) ranges from 10-20% in
recent years (Pedersen and Nielsen (2016)).
4
  226 individuals, or 15.7%, chose "prefer not to answer", "other", or do not answer the question about gender identity.


                                                                                                                      8
geographic representation of the final sample is very similar to that of all respondents (55% US, 25% EEA,
20% RoW).
    This sample selection is driven by the objectives of the study, the relatively low number of responses
from non-university researchers, and heterogeneity in their career demands. Non-university researchers
face different trade-offs than faculty, as they typically do not teach. They also do not have a tenure-track
process. We do not consider the group without disclosed gender information since their responses would
not allow us to uncover potential disparate effects on female researchers.
    Table 1 reports the summary statistics for our sample, and the subsamples of senior faculty, junior
faculty, and Ph.D. students. The average response to the question "How did the COVID-19 pandemic affect
your research productivity?" (Research_Productivity) is 1.94 for faculty, based on a Likert scale from
1=significantly negative to 5=significantly positive (where 3 is the neutral value). Junior faculty are the
most negatively affected group. Both senior faculty and students report less of a negative effect than junior
faculty (a difference of 0.35, t=4.06, and 0.38, t=4.29, respectively).
                                                [Insert Table 1 here.]
    The decline in self-reported research productivity that we observe seems more negative compared to
findings in concurrent research by Kruger, Maturana, and Nickerson (2020), who report a 35% increase in
new finance and economics working papers posted to SSRN following the pandemic.5 There are several
potential explanations for why the average survey respondent reports adverse effects on research
productivity while working paper postings increased. First, while many scholars are reporting decreases in
productivity, not all of them do. Indeed, 14.5% of our sample reports that the pandemic has had a "slightly
positive" or "very positive" impact on their research productivity. COVID-19 has steepened the
productivity curve, where more productive researchers may become even more productive. Second,
COVID-19 itself acts a natural experiment for many settings and has attracted a lot of research. Such
research has more urgency than usual and might push researchers to post on SSRN (and other open-source
repositories) in an earlier stage. Third, outside of such "topical" research, SSRN postings might capture a
part of the research process that has suffered less from the crisis (e.g., later stage work on revisions or very
new projects). This would be expected if the time required to prepare an initial draft of already up-and-
running project is less than the investment one makes when starting something new or revising existing
work for publication. Finally, it could also be that survey respondents are those who are most negatively
affected by the pandemic as it is generally true that subjects that are expected to be more affected by policies


5
  Similarly, Cui, Ding, and Zhu (2020) report a similar increase for social science researchers more generally. They
report that total research productivity increased by 35%, in terms of open-access preprint repositories, ten weeks after
the lockdown in the U.S.; however, female researchers' productivity dropped by 13.9% relative to that of male
researchers. Within their sample, they report that increases in gender differences were particularly large in Finance
(along with Criminal, Economics, Health Economics, Political Science, and Sustainability).


                                                                                                                      9
coming out of the survey are more likely to participate (Bertrand and Duflo, 2016). Importantly, even if
this is the case, it would not drive the cross-sectional variation (i.e., role of family structure, seniority and
gender) that we observe in the data.
    The variable that captures changes in time spent on specific activities (Time_Activity) is based on a
Likert scale from 1=much less time to 5=much more time during compared to before the pandemic. The
stay-at-home measures to help curb the spread of COVID-19 thrust faculty into rapid transitions to online
teaching. At the same time, many faculty took on at-home tasks such as childcare, home schooling, and
domestic chores part of which may have been outsourced under normal circumstances. This forced
researchers to reallocate their time significantly. Faculty in our sample report spending significantly less
time on research, leisure, and sleep while spending more time on teaching, childcare/schooling, and
household chores than before the pandemic. The effects of COVID-19 on time allocation are similar for
senior and junior faculty (none of the differences between the two groups are statistically significant). In
contrast to faculty, however, Ph.D. students do not report a significant decline in time allocated to research
or teaching; they even sleep more during the pandemic. Compared to faculty, students also report a smaller
increase in time devoted to childcare and schooling and a smaller decline in leisure, mostly due to the fact
that Ph.D. students are significantly less likely to have children.
    Thirty percent of the faculty respondents in our final sample are female (fem_ind). This fraction is
higher among junior faculty (33.4%) and is even higher among students (45.5%) than among senior faculty
(27.1%). The lower representation of women among the most senior faculty is consistent with the faculty
population in economics and related fields. For example, Committee on the Status of Women in the
Economics Profession's (CSWEP) 2019 reports that women comprise: 14.6% of full professors; 25.9% of
associate professors; 30.3% of assistant professors; and 32.3% of graduating Ph.D. students. The percent
female finance faculty respondents to our survey are larger than some of the estimates that appear in the
current literature and suggests greater response rates from women. 6 Over-sampling women should not
impact the estimated gender effects if the males and females who do respond do not have pandemic-period
experiences that differ, along gender lines, from those who do not.
    Family structure is a variable of interest in any analysis of how the COVID-19 pandemic affects
researchers. The need to spend additional time on childcare and schooling as well as on domestic chores is
likely to depend on the size of the household, age of the dependents, and whether or not those tasks can be
shared with partners. We gather several variables to capture all these aspects of household characteristics.
In light of evidence from other fields that presence of young children reduces productivity (e.g., Krukowski,


6
 Sherman and Tookes (2020) report that women comprise 16% of their sample of female faculty at top 100 business
schools. Chari and Goldsmith-Pinkham (2018) report 14.6% female representation on the finance programs at the
NBER Summer Institute.


                                                                                                              10
2020; Myers et al. 2020), we focus the analysis on the ages of children (if any) and whether a respondent
has a non-working spouse or partner (nonwork_spouse). On average 24.9% of our faculty respondents have
a non-working spouse, and senior faculty are more likely to have a non-working spouse than either junior
faculty or students.
    In terms of children, 62.4% of senior faculty and 55.3% of junior faculty have children between the
ages of 0 and 18, while only 19.9% of students have children. The age distribution of children varies
predictably for senior and junior faculty. Among all respondents, 32.6% have children between the ages of
0 to 5 years, and another 30.2% have children in the 6-12 year category. Junior faculty tend to have younger
children than senior faculty. To facilitate interpretation of our results, we construct a cardinal variable,
between 0 and 3, to summarize the ages of children (childcardinal), corresponding to the level of required
parental care. It constructed as follows: 0 for no children or children 18 and over; 1 for children ages 13-
18; 2 for children ages 6-12; and 3 for children ages 0-5.
    The pandemic has caused many people to shelter at home, which has reduced the ability of faculty to
interact, both professionally and socially. This lack of social connection affects the ability of faculty to
receive feedback on their work, can create the feeling of social isolation, and induce worry about one's
physical or mental health. All such factors might affect research productivity. We construct three variables
to measure these dimensions of the pandemic experience: Feedback, Isolation and Health.
    We ask survey participants about the impact of COVID-19 on a researcher's ability to receive timely
feedback (Feedback) on their research projects, working papers, or other work. We again use a Likert scale
from 1=strong positive impact to 5=strong negative impact so that a higher value corresponds to a more
negative outcome.7 The average reports a negative impact on the ability to receive timely feedback, and it
is particularly junior faculty that feel they do not get timely feedback during the pandemic (a difference of
0.33 compared to senior faculty, t=5.26). Students appear somewhat better off than junior faculty in terms
of getting timely feedback (a difference of 0.36, t=4.97), perhaps because students do not yet require
external research feedback as much and they have supervisors in place to provide feedback.
    We also ask respondents about their well-being in the wake of COVID-19. For this study, we focus on
two concerns: isolation due to working from home (Isolation) and physical and mental health (Health).
These variables are reported on a Likert scale where 1=strongly disagree and 5=strongly agree, that is, a
higher value corresponds to a more negative outcome. We find widespread self-reported worry among
faculty and students about isolation and health. The means for all groups are significantly above the neutral
value of 3. Comparing senior and junior faculty, we find that junior faculty worry more about isolation and
health than their senior colleagues (differences of 0.23, t=2.75, and 0.45, t=5.53, respectively). Students

7
  For ease of interpretation, this variable is rescaled so that an answer of a "strong positive" impact is assigned a 1 and
a "strong negative" impact a 5.


                                                                                                                        11
and junior faculty have similar concerns about isolation, but students reveal even greater concerns about
physical and mental health (a differences of 0.26, t=3.30). This finding is consistent with Woolsen (2020),
who reports a doubling of signs of depression among graduate students during the pandemic based on a
survey at nine leading research universities in the U.S.
    Apart from personal characteristics, university policies and institutional resilience also impact faculty
members' personal experiences. To investigate institutional effects, we focus on two variables:
ExtendClock and Employer_Finances. The ExtendClock variable is based on responses to a number of
questions about how institutional policy has changed in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. For ease of
interpretation, we define the dummy variable (ExtendClock) to be one if the institution either gave the
option to extend the tenure clock or automatically extended the tenure clock, and zero if no such policy is
in place. On average 68.9% of faculty respondents say their institutions have policies that enable junior
faculty to extend the tenure clock.
    Similar to the worry about isolation or physical/mental health, we ask respondents if they are worried
about their employer's finances (1=strongly disagree and 5=strongly agree), hence a higher value
corresponds to a less ideal state. We use the response to this question to identify institutions that are likely
more affected financially by the pandemic. The basic idea is that variation in responses to this question can
capture variation in the financial resilience of universities to the crisis (e.g., endowment fluctuations,
exposure to international students, etc.). Faculty report some worry about employer finances. While the
mean worry for senior faculty is slightly larger in magnitude than for the other groups, the average value of
the variable Employer_Finances is not statistically different across senior faculty, junior faculty, and
students.


2.3. Family Structure by Gender and Rank
    A burgeoning literature (e.g., Schiebinger et al., 2008; Minello, 2020) on the impact of COVID-19 on
working professionals has naturally identified the role played by family structure. Most importantly, the
pandemic kept children home who would otherwise be in school or daycare during most working hours. To
set the stage for more analytical empirical testing, Table 2 shows descriptive statistics on the key family
structure variables, by rank and gender.
                                            [Insert Table 2 here.]
    Among faculty, women are significantly (at the 1% level) less likely to have a nonworking spouse than
men (14.2% vs. 29.5%). The difference is also increasing with seniority: from 9.9% among Ph.D. students
to 16.1% among senior faculty. The gap is significant across all ranks and is consistent with survey evidence
in Schiebinger et al. (2008), who report that male academics are more likely to have stay-at-home partner
than women. Senior women are somewhat more likely to have children that are between the ages of 0 and



                                                                                                             12
18, but the difference is only statistically significant for children between the ages of 6 and 12. In contrast,
junior women are much less likely to have children at all age groups except children over 13. Note that
children at this age range were likely born prior to the commencement of the academic career (or even
before entering the Ph.D. program). The fact that senior women are significantly more likely than men to
have young children and junior women are less likely to have children confirms the documented delaying
childbirth among female scholars (e.g., Mason and Goulden (2002); Armenti, 2004; Antecol et al., 2018).
There are no notable differences among Ph.D. students.


3. Empirical Results
3.1. Allocation of Time
    COVID-19 had disrupted normal life and forced to change ways people allocate their time. To
characterize the effect on researchers, we ask respondents to report changes in their time allocation pre-
versus post- the start of the pandemic across six categories of activities. We then analyze how the changes
in time allocation vary with gender and family structure. The six categories included in our analysis are
time spent on: research (Time_Research), teaching (Time_Teaching), domestic chores (Time_Chores),
caring for children (Time_Childcare), leisure activities (Time_Leisure), and sleep (Time_Sleep).
    Allocation of time inherently reflects trade-offs and hence time spent in each of the six categories
(which are the dependent variables in the regressions) represent a joint decision made for time spent in the
others. For this reason, we adopt the seemingly unrelated equation system model so that all six equations
representing the six categories are jointly estimated in that the error disturbances in the equations are
allowed to be correlated in arbitrary ways. Moreover, because the dependent variables are coded on Likert
scale from 1 to 5 (where a higher number indicates more time spent compared to a normal time), we use an
ordered logistic model in all equations so that the dependent variable can be viewed as interval-coded (from
1 to 5), condensed from a latent underlying variable that is continuous. The independent variables are the
pre-determined family structure and gender variables. The full equation system is as follows for i = 1, 2, 3,
4, 5, 6 where i is the index for categories:
             ! = ! + "!  + #! _ + $! 
                                                                                                           (1)
                               + %! (  ) + !
The coefficients in equation (1) are "log odds ratios" in an ordered logit model and carry a subscript i, as
they are equation specific. In addition to equation (1), we also explored the role of the interaction of fem_ind
with nonwork_spouse and the triple interaction of the explanatory variables. These extra interactions did
not have sufficient power to identify statistically significant time allocation patterns here or the research
patterns in subsequent tables; thus, we omitted them and resort to the parsimonious model with variables
that are most central to our interest. Table 3 reports the results.



                                                                                                             13
                                                [Insert Table 3 here.]
    The qualitative interpretation of the coefficients in Table 3 is similar to a linear regression model in that
a positive (negative) coefficient suggests a correlation in the same sign between the covariate and the
dependent variable, holding other covariates constant. The same is true for interpretation of the statistical
significance.
    Table 3 shows striking gender effects in how the pandemic has changed researchers' time allocation.
The estimated coefficients on fem_ind implies that women allocate significantly (at the 5% level) less time
to research, and significantly (at the 1% level) more time to teaching following the onset of the pandemic.
The magnitudes of these two coefficients are comparable, and changes in time allocated to all other
categories exhibit little disparity along the gender dimension. A non-working spouse/partner
(nonwork_spouse), as expected, decreases time allocated in childcare (significant at the 10% level), but
most of the time saved seems to go into teaching (significant at the 10% level). On balance, and somewhat
surprisingly, the research time advantage of researchers with a non-working spouse is insignificant.
    The presence of children in the family, especially young children (childcardinal), significantly (at the
1% level) increases time spent on childcare and domestic chores. The extra time has to be diverted from
other activities, resulting in reduced allocation in research, sleep, and leisure activities (in that order). All
of these negative effects are significant at the 1% level. The coefficients on the interaction term fem_ind ×
childcardinal indicate that presence of children, especially young ones, has an incremental impact on
female researchers such that they spend even more time on childcare and even less time on leisure activities
than their male counterparts. Both effects are significant at the 5% level. The estimated coefficient on the
fem_ind × childcardinal interaction term in the Time_Research regression is insignificant, implying that
women with children strived to maintain roughly the same research time compared to men with similar
family structure.
    The quantitative magnitudes of the coefficients in an ordered logit model are not as straightforward as
that in a linear regression. Here the coefficients are "log odds ratios," and therefore, the coefficients
exponentiated become the odds ratio. Take the coefficient of ­0.420 on fem_ind in the equation for
Time_Research as an example. Suppose the probability that a researcher responds that time allocated to
research has changed in a particular way, such as "much less time" (i.e., level 1 out of 5) is (1 ­ p). Then
the odds ratio for the researcher to end up in any level higher than the current one is p/(1 ­ p). The value of
the coefficient suggests that, if the gender of the researcher is changed from male to female while keeping
other variables constant, the odds ratio that the researcher could go to a higher level is reduced by 34.3%
(exp(-0.42) = 0.657; given the neutral value being one, this is 34.3% below the reference level).8

8
  The ordered logit model assumes that the sensitivity of the odds ratio of going to higher level(s), from any given
level below the top level, has constant elasticity with respect to the covariates. The model does allow differential base-


                                                                                                                       14
    A more intuitive way to present the gender disparity result in Table 3 from the ordered logit model is
to show the predicted probabilities of a subject to end up in each of five levels (from "much less time" to
"much more time") separately for men and women, assuming that they both have the same family structure
imputed with the sample average values of nonwork_spouse and childcardinal. Figure 1, which contains
six subfigures, compares the predicted probabilities that an average woman and an average man would
respond in one of the five levels of time allocation for each of the six time categories (with other covariates
measured at sample averages). For Time_Research (top left subfigure), women lead men in reporting "much
less" (24.3% vs. 18.5%) and "less" (41.7% vs. 39.3%) time spent in research compared to pre-pandemic
levels, and trail men in all three higher levels. As for time spent in teaching (top middle subfigure), women
are less likely to report the three lowest levels (1.0%, 6.2%, and 26.6% for "much less," "less," and "about
the same" respectively) than men (1.4%, 8.6%, and 32.2%), and more likely to be in the "more" and "much
more" levels. For domestic chores (top right subfigure), very few men and women report less work than
before, but women are less likely to remain "about the same" than men (33.2% vs. 36.8%) and are
correspondingly more represented in the two higher levels. A very similar pattern applies to time allocated
to childcare (bottom left subfigure). For leisure activities (bottom middle subfigure), proportionally more
women report "much less" than men (37.3% vs. 32.8%). Finally, the bottom right subfigure shows that
proportionally fewer women report that they have kept the same amount of sleep time (57.1% vs. 59.3%),
with the difference mostly offset by the "less time" category.
                                               [Insert Figure 1 here.]
    We apply the same method to show the predicted probabilities being in any of the five reported time
allocation categories, where we sort researchers in increasing order of demands for childcare using the
presence of children and their ages: No child at home; children 13-18 years; children 6-12 years, and
children 0-5 years. It is clear from Figure 2, top left subfigure, that the probabilities or answering "much
less time" allocated to research increases monotonically with the demand of childcare: 10.9%%, 17.8%,
28.1%, and 41.1%. The pattern for the "less time" category is similar but less steep. The three higher-level
categories all show a reverse order. For example, predicted probabilities for reporting "more time" in
research are 26.2%, 17.8%, 11.1%, and 6.6%. The steepest contrast in this sorting, not surprisingly, occurs
in time allocation to childcare (bottom left subfigure). The predicted probabilities of being in the "much
more time" categories are 2.8%, 14.4%, 49.8%, and 85.3% from no-child to at least one child being in the
0-5 year age range. A similar, but less steep, pattern prevails in time spent in domestic chores and reverse
patterns are observed in time spent in leisure and sleep. Interestingly, there is very little difference in time


level probabilities for each level, which are captured by the intercept estimates associated with different levels. This
is analogous to a linear model, except that the linear relation pertains to the
log odds ratio.


                                                                                                                     15
spent teaching as we vary childcare demands. More likely this could reflect that time required for teaching
is less flexible than research time and has to be put in regardless of other constraints; indeed the pandemic
with the move to online classes may have imposed a uniform learning time cost on all.
                                              [Insert Figure 2 here.]
    We would like to note that the ultimate effects of a non-working spouse and children on men versus
women is more nuanced than what the regressions and corresponding figures indicate. This is because the
coefficients represent estimates conditional on a particular state, but they ignore the differential
unconditional probabilities of being in the state for men and women. The summary statistics in Table 2
show that non-working spouse is much more common for men, while junior women are less likely to have
children. Hence, the total impact of COVID-19 will vary accordingly even if the coefficients on these
variables are similar across different groups.


3.2. Research Productivity
    The time allocation changes reported in Table 3 capture tradeoffs for the scarce resource of time.
Research time is a pre-requisite for research output but is also just one of many inputs into research
productivity. To understand how the pandemic is affecting research productivity as an output, we turn to
our output measure of self-assessed research productivity. We first look at how research productivity varies
according to predetermined variables, gender and family structure. We then add time inputs (of time spent
on non-research activities), which reflect how people are allocating time differently during the pandemic.
We then layer in variables that measure concerns regarding social interactions and health, which may also
affect people differentially. Mental health is of particular concern, given that there is already broad evidence
that mental health affects employment prospects and workplace productivity (Bubonya et al. 2017; Frijters
et al. 2014) and that the associated costs are large in magnitude (Greenberg et al. 2015). Our analysis
provides the first (to our knowledge) glimpse at potential linkages between research productivity in
academia to pandemic-related increases in concerns about isolation and mental health.
    We begin by estimating an ordered logistic regression analogous to the time allocation estimations of
Table 3, but the dependent variable is now the effect of the pandemic on research productivity, ranging
from 1 (strong negative effect) to 5 (strong positive effect). Results are reported in Table 4. In Table 5, we
run the same regressions as in Table 4, but we separate the subjects into three groups according to seniority:
senior (i.e., tenured) scholars, junior scholars, and Ph.D. students. This allows us to examine potentially
differential impacts of COVID-19 at different stages of research career.
                                          [Insert Table 4 & 5 here.]
    Column (1) of Table 4, and Columns (1), (3), and (5) of Table 5 include as regressors only exogenous
factors, including the gender and family structure variables. Table 4 Column (1) shows that having a non-



                                                                                                             16
working spouse helps research productivity (at the 10% significance level). The breakdown of subjects into
three groups based on seniority rank (Table 5) reveals that the non-working spouse effect is driven by junior
faculty, not tenured faculty nor by Ph.D. students. Young children negatively impacted research
productivity during the pandemic for all faculty; the effect is highly significant (at the 1% level) for senior
and junior faculty, but not at all significant for Ph.D. students. Even after controlling for family structure,
however, women are still significantly (at the 1% level) more negatively impacted by COVID-19.
Moreover, the magnitude of the gender effect increases as faculty become more senior, it goes from small
and insignificant for Ph.D. students, to sizable and marginally significant (at the 10% level) for junior
faculty, to large and highly significant (at the 1% level) for senior faculty.
    We can think of two possible explanations for the gender disparity in research productivity even after
controlling for family structure. First, senior women generally take on disproportionately more service
work for both their employers and the profession due to their under-representation. For example, Guarino
and Borden (2017) document that women, especially senior women, shoulder disproportionately more
service work such as serving on committees and mentoring students. The volume of such work ballooned
during the pandemic as most schools set up many task forces to address the challenges created by the
pandemic. As such, female scholars, especially senior women, in the profession may have faced
disproportionately more administrative "taxes" on their research productivity. Second, the impact of
childcare transmits via the coauthor network. A researcher's productivity could be negatively impacted if
their coauthors are time-constrained due to the heightened childcare needs. Table 3 shows that women
spend more time in childcare than men even given the same family structure, which induces a larger indirect
effect on women as a whole (including those without young children of themselves) because women, on
average, three times more likely to have female coauthors than men (Sarsons, et al. (2020))
    Similar to Figures 1 and 2, Figure 3 presents the predicted probabilities of changes in research
productivity based on the model of Table 4, column (1). The results echo those of the time allocation graphs
summarized in Figures 1 and 2. In Figure 3, the left subfigure shows a sizable gender gap in the predicted
reporting of "much less" research productivity, 53.9% for women and 43.0% for men. The right subfigure
shows the impact of children. Consistent with the patterns in Figure 2, the impact of children is the steepest
in the "much less" category. The predicted probability for a researcher to feel "much less" productivity than
before is 31.8% for those without children at home, 42.7% with children of age 13-18 years, 55.4% with
children of age 6 to 12; and 67.4% with children of age 0 to 5. An equally steep distribution also manifests
itself in the predicted probabilities that researchers will report "more" or "much more" productivity range
from 5.8% for faculty with children ages 0 to 5 to 21.6% for faculty with no children. This highlights the
positive productivity shocks for a segment of the faculty population, who could be contributing to the
increased flow of papers posting in the repositories or submitted to journals during the pandemic.



                                                                                                            17
                                            [Insert Figure 3 here.]
    In Columns (2) and (3) of Table 4, we further explore potential mechanisms underlying the relationship
between research productivity and both gender and family structure, including the role played by the time
inputs. For this analysis, we step in the time allocation variables to assess their effect on the predetermined
family structure and gender variables. Columns (2) shows that the negative effect on research that is
associated with having young children is completely explained by time allocated to childcare and chores.
Column (3) shows an additional negative effect on research associated with time devoted to teaching. These
effects all significantly hurt research productivity (at the 1% level).
    In the last column of Table 4, we add three new variables that characterize the professional environment
and social-psychological state of faculty. Feedback, Isolation, and Health measure concern about timely
feedback on research, isolation, and physical/mental health on a Likert scale ranging from "Not Concerned"
(value of one) to "Very Concerned" (value of five). Column (4) of Table 4 shows that perceived lack of
feedback on research and concerns for health are highly significantly (at the 1% level) correlated with
research productivity; and the feeling of isolation also contributes negatively (significant at the 10% level)
to research productivity.
    Returning to Table 5, the breakdown by seniority rank further reveals that the time consumed by
childcare affects junior scholars more than seniors (both are significant at the 1% level), but it does not
significantly impact Ph.D. students (who are also less likely to have children). The impact of time allocated
to teaching affects faculty, but not Ph.D. students (perhaps because their teaching is limited or confined to
supporting roles). Domestic chores affect all groups roughly evenly. Lack of feedback on research and
concern for personal health also affects self-reported research productivity of all groups similarly, but
perceived isolation hit the Ph.D. students the hardest. Students are the only group with a significant effect
of isolation, which is consistent with the increased rates of depression and anxiety among graduate students
reported in Woolston (2020).
    Several interactive effects are worth noting. First, comparing the different specifications in Tables 4
and 5 sheds light on whether and to what extent time choices absorb the effect of family structure. The time
choices only slightly offset the effect from a nonworking spouse. However, the inclusion of changes in time
allocated to childcare, chores and teaching render the coefficients on childcardinal insignificant, both
economically and statistically, and for all groups of subjects. Such an absorption implies that the variable
childcardinal, in this context, is not picking up heterogeneity between households with and without children
outside of the parental time commitment required to childcare during a time when the usual help (day care,
babysitters, housekeepers etc.) were not available. The contrast between the baseline and extended
regressions in Tables 4 and 5 suggests that the impact of family structure on research productivity during




                                                                                                            18
the COVID-19 pandemic was more likely to be causal than being the outcome of unobserved heterogeneity
across households that are correlated with children.
    Second, the coefficient on the interaction term fem_ind × childcardinal is positive and significant (at
the 1% level) when time allocation is controlled for (Table 4, Columns 3 and 4). This is true for the faculty
subsample (Table 5, Columns 2 and 4), but not Ph.D. students (Table 5, Column 6). Moreover, the inclusion
of the interaction term does not notably change the magnitude of the coefficients of fem_ind. Therefore,
women seem to be more effective at offsetting the loss of research time due to time spent with children in
a more research-productive way than men. This is a novel finding and is consistent with the idea that women
may have already learned, more than men, how to adapt to multitasking and managing work-life balance.
    Finally, the inclusion of social psychological variables reduces the gender effect: The coefficient on
fem_ind changes from ­ 0.718 to ­0.514 from columns (3) to (4) in Table 4, suggesting that part of the
gender disparity might be driven by differential impact of COVID-19 on the environment and psychology
of women and men. The next section will explore this mechanism in more detail.


3.3. Intensity of Mechanisms that Affected Research Productivity
    Building on the previous results, this section further explores the various mechanisms that reduce
research productivity, and how such mechanisms vary with gender and seniority rank. More specifically,
we estimate a regression of the following form:
               ! =  + "  + #  + $ (  ) + ! .                                                             (2)
In equation (2), the dependent variable, Mech, is a group of variables representing potential mechanisms
through which COVID-19 impacts research productivity. The mechanisms that we consider include
concerns about feedback, isolation, and physical/mental health (Feedback, Isolation, and Health). We also
include the family structure variables, nonworking_spouse and childcardinal. The independent variables
include gender, seniority ranks (dummy variables for junior faculty and students), and the interaction of the
two. We highlight junior faculty and Ph.D. students because their long-term career outcomes are potentially
more vulnerable to the pandemic shock. In these regressions, senior faculty serves as the omitted category.
Table 6 reports the results.
                                           [Insert Table 6 here.]
    In Table 6, all of the odd columns report regressions results for the faculty subsample only; all the even
columns include both faculty and Ph.D. students. Overall, the results in Table 6 show that junior faculty are
in a significantly weaker position to withstand the COVID-19 shock compared to senior faculty: They are
more likely to express concerns for the lack of feedback on their research, to feel isolated, and to worry
about their own health (physical or mental). The last four columns examine the distribution of pre-existing
family structure in relation to junior and student status. Results confirm that junior scholars and Ph.D.



                                                                                                           19
students are less likely to have the help of a non-working spouse and are more like to have young children
(compared to the omitted category of senior scholars). All of these factors, significant at the 5% level or
less, have a negative effect on research productivity, contributing to the overall lower research productivity
reported by juniors in Table 1. In sum, despite the fact that the elasticity at which mechanisms affecting
productivity impact junior and senior faculty is similar (Table 5, Columns 2, 4 and 6), the intensity of the
mechanisms is consistently greater for junior faculty.
    Focusing on gender, we find that women are also more concerned about feedback than their male peers
(significant at the 1% level) possibly due to the relatively narrow professional network and the relative
scarcity of other senior female scholars in the field.9 The network issue was only exacerbated during the
COVID-19 pandemic, as conferences and seminars went virtual and other opportunities to interact with
colleagues were dramatically reduced. While women express similar feelings of increased isolation relative
to men, they expressed more concerns over their own health (significant at the 5% level) than men. They
are also less likely to have a nonworking spouse though the presence of children does not differ
significantly. In short, the mechanisms affecting research productivity tend to be more intense for women
than men.
    Several interaction terms reveal additional nuances. For example, the reliably negative interaction of
junior × female in the Feedback regression (Columns 1 and 2) indicates that concerns regarding feedback
are similar for male and female junior faculty (which are significantly higher than for senior faculty), but
they are significantly stronger for senior women compared to senior men. Analogously, the reliably
negative coefficient on junior × female interaction term in the regression where childcardinal is the
dependent variable (Column 9) suggests that junior men are more likely than junior women to have high
childcare needs (consistent with Table 2, which shows that junior women are less likely than junior men to
have children).
    Table 6 then extends the analyses to include students. Though students do not express increased
concerns about feedback (perhaps because many are not at the stage to have a product requiring feedback
beyond the supervisors), they do report significantly heightened concerns about isolation (at the 5% level)
and health (at the 10% level) compared to faculty. Due to the stage in their lives in which many students
attend graduate school, students are less likely to have a nonworking spouse and are less likely to have
children. Connecting results in Table 6 with those in Table 5, we learn that Ph.D. students are not only more
likely to feel isolated and are concerned about their health, but also that a given level of such a state exerts
a stronger effect on their research productivity. The coefficients of the interaction between female and


9
  Sherman and Tookes (2020) report that women represent only 14.8% of tenured faculty in 2017, and their sample of
recent graduates is 20.4% female. Santos and Phu (2019) document a similar pattern among 24 Russell Group
universities in the UK.


                                                                                                               20
student in Table 6 all point to a negative impact on research productivity, though only the effect on health
is significant (at the 5% level). In other words, female Ph.D. students are significantly more likely to be
concerned about their own health compared to their male classmates. The combined results from the student
subsample demand more awareness by institutions and the profession on the physical and social conditions
on the next-generation of scholars in a negative shock like the COVID-19 lockdowns.


3.5 Marginal and Expected Impact of Mechanisms that Affect Research Productivity Across
    Professional Ranks
    Table 5 shows that time allocation, feedback, isolation, and health mechanisms all contribute to the
average decline in research productivity for faculty and PhD students alike. The economic magnitudes of
these effects, in addition to the directional signs, are of considerable interest. To calibrate the economic
significance, we calculate how a particular mechanism affects the probability that a researcher ends up in
the state of being "much less" research productive, the most negative impact category. We focus on two
categories of mechanisms ­ time mechanisms and production mechanisms. For the mechanism of "time
spent on childcare," for example, we are interested in how researchers who have an input value of 5 ("much
more" time spent on childcare) fare, relative to those who have an input value of 3 ("no change" in time
spent on childcare), in terms of being "much less" research productive. We estimate this effect as a marginal
effect in ordered logit estimation, setting all other variables at their respective mean values. There are
analogous calculations for all the other variables. We depict these marginal effects in Figure 4.
    In Figure 4, Panel A, the marginal effects of time spent on teaching, childcare and chores are all large.
For example, senior faculty spending "much more" time on childcare, relative to "no change," are 54.7
percentage points more likely to be in the state of "much less" research productive. The childcare effect is
somewhat less for junior faculty and dramatically lower for students. We observe a similar pattern for time
spent on chores across ranks, and those who are devoting "much more" time to chores are again over 50
percentage points more likely to be "much less" research productive. These effects of work-life balances
on research output during this unusual time, even temporary, could have long-lasting impact on career
outcomes and competitive positioning among demographics.
    The other balances that researchers have to make are the work-work balance, say, allocating time
between teaching versus research. In Figure 4, Panel A, we depict the marginal effects of time spent on
teaching on the probability of reporting being "much less" research productive. Senior faculty who spend
"much more" time teaching (relative to "no change") experience a 39.0 percentage point higher probability
of being "much less" research productive. This effect is a third lower for junior faculty, perhaps reflecting
their pressure to perform in research, and/or the extra burdens senior faculty experience in teaching as they
are more likely to teach multiple subjects and in leading the curriculum.



                                                                                                          21
    We turn to the other production mechanisms ­ wellbeing and social connection variables ­ in Figure 4,
Panel B. These mechanisms likely affect productivity per unit of time and thus can contribute to reductions
in research independent of time allocations. The figure shows effects that rival those of the time allocation
variables; note that the figures are on the same y-axis scale. Senior faculty, junior faculty, and students
expressing the most significant worries about feedback are 49.9 percentage points, 41.7 percentage points,
and 33.7 percentage points more likely to report being "much less" research productive. All of these
magnitudes are large. Feedback is clearly a critical input in our research production process. The lack of
feedback may be from local colleagues (especially, perhaps for students and juniors), but also the lack of
conversations at in-person conferences and seminars is clearly taking a toll on our profession's ability to
exchange ideas and provide feedback. Even the mergence of seminars and conferences on Zoom does not
fully restore spontaneous interactions and serendipitous brainstorming, and such a shortfall may be
particularly hard on scholars who yet to establish themselves in the profession.
    Isolation has the smallest effect and varies relatively little by rank, but we nevertheless want to draw
attention to the effect of isolation on students. Students who are "much more" worried about isolation are
23.4 percentage points more likely to be "much less" research productive. Finally, we turn to physical and
mental health. Health concern has a dramatic effect on research productivity. Seniors who are much more
worried about health are 46.9 percentage points more likely to be "much less" research productive. This
effect drops to 30.3 percentage points and 25.0 percentage points for students, presumably younger people
are physically more robust in general. However, many of us have heard stories of how many Ph.D. students
are struggling with mental as well as physical health during the pandemic.
    We would like to note that the marginal effects across different groups do not take into account that the
groups exhibit disparity in being in a category (say, "much more" worried about health). This leads us to
analyze not just the marginal impact of each mechanism, but the expected total impact for anyone in a given
rank within the population. Put differently, the marginal effects shown in Figure 4 summarize the impact
for a given change in a particular mechanism by rank, but do not account for the differential probability
that the mechanism is in place across ranks. Although time spent on childcare has a bigger effect on senior
faculty, junior faculty are more likely to have small children in the home. Thus, the expected effect of
childcare on junior faculty could still be greater because of their greater likelihood of having children in the
first place. To make more pertinent comparisons of the relative magnitudes of the effects that account for
both the marginal effect and the exposure of a particular group to the mechanism, we plot the expected
marginal effect on research productivity in each population by multiplying the marginal effects shown in
Figure 4 by the probability that each group reports "much more" (i.e., a value of 5) for the input of interest.
We summarize the results in Figure 5.




                                                                                                             22
    In Figure 5, Panel A, we summarize the time variables. In stark contrast to the marginal effects, we
observe that junior faculty are more likely to endure a negative effect from childcare and chores. For
example, a junior faculty member is 17.8 percentage points more likely to report a significant negative
research impact that can be traced to a significant increase in childcare responsibilities despite the fact that
the marginal effect of both variables is smaller on junior than senior faculty. This result obtains because
junior faculty are more likely to report significant increases in time spent on childcare because of the stage
in the life cycle they are in. In contrast, the expected marginal effects on students are quite small because
they are less likely to have significant increases in childcare and chores during the pandemic and the
marginal effects of these demands are also smaller.
    In Figure 5, Panel B, we summarize the wellbeing and social connection variables. These patterns are
also starkly different from those reported in Figure 4, Panel B. Junior faculty are much more likely to be
affected by the lack of feedback than senior faculty or students. The expected increase in the probability
that a representative junior faculty is "much less" research productive because of being "much more"
worried about feedback is 16.2 percentage points. The effect on students is now materially lower than junior
faculty, because students are less likely to be in the category of having the highest worry about feedback.
This emphasis on feedback for juniors in particular reflects, perhaps, the setting where students' advisors
still look after students advanced in their dissertation work, but juniors lack such a built-in feedback process.
     In contrast, worries about both isolation and health have larger expected impacts for the student
population than for faculty. This magnitude is important in many ways. We find that any student is 10.5
percentage points more likely to be "much less" research productive because of being "much more" worried
about physical and mental health. The effect is also large for juniors. This finding suggests that ten percent
of students (and a little less so for junior faculty) are suffering severe research production declines because
of mental and physical health concerns.
    Bringing some of these findings together, we find that junior faculty are most affected by the lack of
feedback and childcare burdens. Students are most affected by concerns about feedback, isolation and
health. Institutions' efforts to support their faculty and Ph.D. student populations need to account for the
heterogeneous ways in which the crisis has taken a toll on research.


4. Institutional Variation and Responses
    In this section, we explore variation in the effect of COVID-19 on research productivity across
institutions. We focus on differences in financial strength and the tenure accommodation policies
introduced as a result of the pandemic.




                                                                                                              23
4.1. Institution Financial Strength
    Research requires resources which are impacted by the institutional financial situation. Not only do
universities differ hugely in terms of their endowments, revenues, and gifts, but they were also affected by
the COVID-19 shock differently. For example, schools relying more heavily on tuition from international
students are hit harder (Fischer, 2019). We attempt to capture faculty members' assessments of their
institutions' financial health by using the responses to a question about employer finances. Specifically, we
use responses to "I worry about the finances of my employer," where responses measured on a 5-point
Likert scale from 1 to 5.
    To quantify the impact of employer finances on employee research productivity, we estimate an ordered
logistic regression where the dependent variable is Research_Productivity. We also estimate regressions
where the dependent variable is a factor that affects research output and likely varies across institutions
(Time_Research, Time_Teaching, Feedback, Isolation, and Health). The key independent variable is
Employer_Finance, the self-reported concern for employer finances from "strongly disagree" (value of one)
to "strongly agree" (value of five), where a lower value indicates a better financial situation. All variables
are in the original 5-point scale.
                                            [Insert Table 7 here.]
    Table 7 reports the results. We find that heightened concern about employer finances and vulnerability
to the COVID-19 shock is significantly (at the 1% level) associated with lower research productivity. In
the remaining columns of Table 7, we also observe all of the mechanisms that affect research productivity
are stronger at institutions that are perceived as financially insecure. Heightened concern about employer
finances is associated with less time spent in research, more time spent in teaching (as teaching became
incrementally more demanding in schools with poor financial cushions), more worries about feedback on
research, more intense feeling of isolation, and more concerns about own health.
    Figure 6 is analogous to Figures 1 through 3 and shows the relationship between worry about employer
financial health and changes in research productivity and time spent on teaching (the two most important
job activities of faculty), using the same method to predict probabilities as in the earlier figures. The left
subfigure shows that the predicted probability in the "much less" research productivity category increases
monotonically and steeply with the worry for the financial conditions of their institutions (30.0%, 35.8%,
43.2%, 50.9%, and 58.6% from "strongly disagree" to "strongly agree," respectively). The patterns in all
higher levels of research productivity manifest a reverse order, but the steepest ascendances are in the
"more" and "much more" research productivity categories.
                                           [Insert Figure 4 here.]
    One mechanism driving the impact of institutional financial well-being on research productivity could
be teaching. Universities with financial constraints may be imposing more teaching burdens on faculty.



                                                                                                           24
These burdens could be in the form of more preparations, more course loads, and/or inadequate support for
faculty to transition to online teaching. As a result, faculty at less well-endowed institutions and institutions
that experience more revenue drops lose more research productivity due to more time spent on teaching, a
relation existed before the pandemic (O'Meara et al., 2003; Hanlon, 2019). The right subfigure of Figure 4
confirms this hypothesis. It shows that the predicted probability that subjects spend "much less," "less,"
and "about the same" time in teaching is monotonically decreasing in their worry for employer financial
condition; and the order is reversed for the predicted probability that subjects spend "more" or "much more"
time in teaching. For subjects that "strongly disagree" that they worry about employer finance, the predicted
probability that they have to spend "much more" time in teaching is 12.1%, the same figure is more than
doubled at 29.4% for subjects that "strongly agree" with the statement regarding worry about their
employer.
    Overall, COVID-19, already a negative shock, has the unfortunate additional impact of exacerbating
the existing unequal resources and support for researchers due to variation in the financial conditions of
their universities. We anticipate the gap in research productivity between researchers in well-endowed
institutions and those in the less resourceful schools will increase in the coming years.


4.2. Clock Extensions
    One prompt policy response to the pandemic was the decision by many universities to extend the tenure
clock, either automatically or optionally. This action acknowledged the fact that research would suffer
considerable delays due to direct forces such as limited or suspended access to labs and data, and indirect
ones such as hiring freezes on research assistants. To explore the effect of these clock extensions on research
productivity, we construct an indicator variable, ExtendClock, that equals one if the respondent affirms the
presence of an automatic or optional clock extension for untenured faculty at their institution. About 70%
of respondents indicate the presence of such a policy (see Table 1). The clock extension policy may also be
a proxy for an institution's overall willingness and preparedness to support employees during an unusually
difficult time. In this analysis, we restrict the analysis to junior faculty since it is among this group that we
would expect to observe changing behavior in response to tenure clock changes. Results are reported in
Panel B of Table 7.
    Interestingly, clock extension, if anything, reduces research productivity (significant at 10%), and also
reduces time allocated to research (not significant) and teaching (significant at 10%). While it is plausible
that junior faculty reduce research in response to a clock extension because they no longer feel an impending
deadline, we find it surprising that we observe a similar effect for teaching. None of the remaining
mechanisms are affected by the clock extensions in a statistically significant way.




                                                                                                              25
    We emphasize that clock extension policies are one-size-fits-all and temporary accommodations. Clock
extensions do not address the differential mechanisms that are affecting productivity (e.g., variation in
teaching responsibilities, family structure, and gender). Given that different groups are differentially
impacted by the pandemic as we report here, sweeping clock extension policies may exacerbate rather than
address disparities that have emerged during the crisis. The outcome could well be analogous to the
unintended consequence of the gender-neutral parental clock-stopping which ended up creating a new
advantage for men relative to women, as analyzed in Antecol, Bedard, and Stearns (2018).
This is because men on average are able to allocate more time into research than women during parental
leaves, but a "cohort" analysis (that is, comparing researchers with about the same length of time since
Ph.D. degree) at tenure evaluation remains a convention.
    In our context, 14.5% of the faculty respondents to our survey responded that their research productivity
increased during the pandemic, and this outcome is significantly correlated with gender and family
structure. This subset of researchers is given more time to accelerate relative to others under the policy. In
institutions giving the same length of clock extension within the sample of clock-extending institutions,
those whose research productivity is more negatively impacted by COVID-19 due to pre-existing situations
are expected to lag behind. And, given the cohort comparison method commonly adopted in the tenure
review process, male faculty and faculty without young children may catapult above the rest as a result of
with the additional time given due to the current public health crisis. The outcome may well be a repeat of
the parental-leave effect, aka Antecol, Bedard, and Stearns (2018), where a non-differentiating policy led
to a discriminatory outcome. In their call for new solutions to support equity in academia, Malisch et al.
(2020) encourage institutions to develop strategic action plans to account for differential changes in faculty
productivity due to COVID-19. Our survey results support the need for such action plans. We encourage
discussions on how to incorporate the differential effects of the pandemic on individual faculty research,
based on objective information such as the presence of young children. Such guidance will be particularly
important for letter writers, who are often asked for a cohort comparison when assessing a candidate's merit
for tenure.
    Our findings on faculty and student concerns around physical and mental health and isolation should
also be considered. At many institutions, faculty are being encouraged to discuss the effect of COVID-19
on their research productivity in merit or promotion reviews. These practices may not address potential
mental health issues that affect research productivity because the stigma associated with mental illness may
cause people to underreport mental illness compared to other health conditions (Bharadwaj, Pai, and
Suziedelyte 2017). Even if promotion candidates do report on these conditions, it is possible that some
reviewers will not consider mental illness a consideration on par with other health conditions absent explicit




                                                                                                           26
institutional guidance on the issue. At a minimum, we recommend explicit institutional guidance and
statements on best practices.


5. Conclusion
    COVID-19 has upended normal life and dramatically changed the working environment for most
researchers. To understand the impact of COVID-19 on research productivity in the academic finance
profession, we administered a survey to the membership of the American Finance Association (AFA).
    In the survey, we asked members to evaluate the impact of the pandemic on their own research
productivity and on the time spent on research and related activities. Overall, faculty respondents report a
negative research effect. But there is also heterogeneity in the response, with 14.5% of our faculty
respondents reporting an increase in research productivity. We analyze how effects on research productivity
differ by seniority, gender and family structure.
    We find that there is a significant overall decline in research productivity but there are marked
differences by family structure and gender. In particular, research productivity of women and faculty with
young children are affected more adversely. Further, while faculty are spending more time on their teaching,
we observe a strong gender effect, with women reporting spending more time on teaching-related activities.
Our results suggest that the pandemic has the effect of widening the gap for women and for faculty with
young children.
    We further examine the underlying mechanism for differentials in research productivity by examining
changes in time allocation of different tasks. Here we find that the productivity loss of faculty with young
children stems from time being allocated to childcare and chores.
    Our survey results suggest that, like the general population, faculty and students are also vulnerable to
isolation and concerns about health as a result of COVID-19. We directly relate these concerns to research
productivity. We find that perceived lack of feedback on research, concerns for health, and feelings of
isolation are highly correlated with reduced research productivity. These concerns are particularly strong
for junior faculty, and for faculty in institutions with serious financial concerns. Ph.D. students are
particularly vulnerable to feelings of isolation.
    Many institutions have responded to the pandemic with blanket uniform extensions of the tenure clock
for junior faculty. Our results suggests that there are heterogeneous effects of the pandemic with systematic
patterns for different groups. As such, one size fits all clock extension policies may exacerbate rather than
address disparities that have emerged during the crisis. We hope that the findings reported here generate
discussion and awareness among university administrations about the potentially disparate impact of a well-
intentioned uniform policy.




                                                                                                          27
References
Amano-Patiño, Noriko, 2020, Who is doing new research in the time of COVID-19? Not the female, VOX,
          CEPR Policy Portal.
Andersen, Jens Peter, Mathias Wullum Nielsen, Nicole L Simone, Resa E Lewiss, and Reshma Jagsi, 2020,
          COVID-19 medical papers have fewer women first authors than expected, eLife 9.
Anon., 2020, How Will the Pandemic Change Higher Education? The Chronicle of Higher Education.
Antecol, Heather, Kelly Bedard, and Jenna Stearns, 2018, Who Benefits from Gender-Neutral Tenure Clock
          Stopping Policies?, American Economic Review 108, 2420­2441.
Bertrand, Marianne and Esther Duflo, 2016, Field Experiments on Discrimination. Prepared for the
          Handbook of Field Experiments.
Besser, Avi, Sari Lotem, and Virgil Zeigler-Hill, 2020, Psychological Stress and Vocal Symptoms Among
          University Professors in Israel: Implications of the Shift to Online Synchronous Teaching During
          the COVID-19 Pandemic, Journal of Voice.
Bharadwaj, P., Pai, M. M., & Suziedelyte, A. (2017). Mental health stigma. Economics Letters, 159, 57-
          60.
Bhagat, Sarbottam, and Dan J. Kim, 2020, Higher Education Amidst COVID-19: Challenges and Silver
          Lining, Information Systems Management 37, 366­371.
Bubonya, M., Cobb-Clark, D. A., & Wooden, M. (2017). Mental health and productivity at work: Does
          what you do matter?. Labour economics, 46, 150-165.
Chirikov, I., Soria, K. M., Horgos, B., & Jones-White, D. (2020). Undergraduate and graduate students'
          mental health during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Cui, Ruomeng and Ding, Hao and Zhu, Feng, Gender Inequality in Research Productivity During the
          COVID-19 Pandemic (June 9, 2020). Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3623492 or
          http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3623492
Czerniewicz, Laura, Najma Agherdien, Johan Badenhorst, Dina Belluigi, Tracey Chambers, Muntuwenkosi
          Chili, Magriet De Villiers, Alan Felix, Daniela Gachago, Craig Gokhale, Eunice Ivala, Neil
          Kramm, Matete Madiba, Gitanjali Mistri, Emmanuel Mgqwashu, Nicola Pallitt, Paul Prinsloo,
          Kelly Solomon, Sonja Strydom, Mike Swanepoel, Faiq Waghid, and Gerrit Wissing, 2020, A
          Wake-Up Call: Equity, Inequality and Covid-19 Emergency Remote Teaching and Learning,
          Postdigital Science and Education 2, 946­967.
Das, Madhushree and Bhuyan, Chandan and Sultana, Syeda Fahima Shahnaz, COVID-19 Pandemic-
          Induced Teaching-Learning Experiences: Some Realities from Assam (India) (October 7, 2020).
          International Journal of Innovation, Creativity and Change 2020, Available at SSRN:
          https://ssrn.com/abstract=3707078.
Deryungina, Tatyana, Olga Shurchkov, and Jenna E. Stearns, 2021, Covid-19 Disruptions
          Disproporationately Affect Female Academics. NEBR working paper 28360.
El-Alayli, A., Hansen-Brown, A.A. & Ceynar, M., 2018, Dancing Backwards in High Heels: Female
          Professors Experience More Work Demands and Special Favor Requests, Particularly from
          Academically Entitled Students. Sex Roles 79, 136­150.
Fischer, Karin, 2019, International Students Bailed Out Colleges in the Last Recession. They Won't This
          Time., The Chronicle of Higher Education.
Frederickson, Megan, 2020, COVID-19's gendered impact on academic productivity, GitHub.
Frijters, P., Johnston, D. W., & Shields, M. A. (2014). The effect of mental health on employment: evidence
          from Australian panel data. Health economics, 23(9), 1058-1071.
Furstenberg, François, 2020, University Leaders Are Failing, The Chronicle of Higher Education.




                                                                                                        28
Greenberg, P. E., Fournier, A. A., Sisitsky, T., Pike, C. T., & Kessler, R. C. (2015). The economic burden
        of adults with major depressive disorder in the United States (2005 and 2010). The Journal of
        clinical psychiatry, 76(2), 155-162.
Guarino, Cassandra M, and Victor M. H. Borden, 2017, Faculty Service Loads and Gender: Are Women
        Taking Care of the Academic Family?, Research in Higher Education 58, 672­694.
Hanlon, Aaron, 2019, Colleges Say More Teaching Is Better. They are Wrong. The Chronical of Higher
        Education, February 8, 2019.
Johnson, Nicole, George Veletsianos, and Jeff Seaman, 2020, U.S. Faculty and Administrators'
        Experiences and Approaches in the Early Weeks of the COVID-19 Pandemic, Online Learning 24.
Jones, Mark L. and Page, Cathren and Painter-Thorne, Suzianne Desiree and Simson, Gary J., It's Alright,
        Ma, It's Life and Life Only: Are Colleges and Universities Legally Obligated during the
        Coronavirus Pandemic to Exempt High-Risk Faculty from In-Person Teaching Requirements?
        (September 1, 2020). Pepperdine Law Review, Vol. 48, No. 3, 2021, Available at SSRN:
        https://ssrn.com/abstract=3684190 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3684190.
Kezar, Adrianna, 2020, The Future of the Academic Work Force, The Chronicle of Higher Education.
Kirschenbaum, Matthew, 2020, Don't Blame Colleges for the Coming Fall Debacle, This is just what higher
        education looks like in a failed state, The Chronicle of Higher Education.
Kramnick, Jonathan, 2020, The Humanities After Covid-19, The Chronicle of Higher Education. Levitt,
Larry, and Gary Claxton, 2020, How Many Teachers Are at Risk of Serious Illness If Infected with
        Coronavirus?, Kaiser Family Foundation.
Malisch, Jessica L., Breanna N. Harris, Shanen M. Sherrer, Kristy A. Lewis, Stephanie L. Shepherd,
        Pumtiwitt C. Mccarthy, Jessica L. Spott, Elizabeth P. Karam, Naima Moustaid-Moussa, Jessica
        Mccrory Calarco, Latha Ramalingam, Amelia E. Talley, Jaclyn E. Cañas-Carrell, Karin Ardon-
        Dryer, Dana A. Weiser, Ximena E. Bernal, and Jennifer Deitloff, 2020, Opinion: In the wake of
        COVID-19, academia needs new solutions to ensure gender equity, Proceedings of the National
        Academy of Sciences 117, 15378­15381.
Marginson, Simon, 2020, The relentless price of high individualism in the pandemic, Higher Education
        Research & Development 39, 1392­1395.
Masri, Amira El, and Emma Sabzalieva, 2020, Dealing with disruption, rethinking recovery: Policy
        responses to the COVID-19 pandemic in higher education, Policy Design and Practice 3, 312­333.
McChesney, Jasper, and Jacqueline Bischel, 2020, Rep. The Aging of Tenure-Track Faculty in Higher
        Education: Implications for Succession and Diversity, CUPA-HR. Available from
        https://www.cupahr.org/surveys/research-briefs/.
Mengel, Friederike, Jan Sauermann, and Ulf Zolitz, 2019, Gender Bias in Teaching Evaluations, Journal
        of the European Economic Association 17(2), 535-566.
Minello, Alessandra, 2020, The pandemic and the female academic, Nature News (Nature Publishing
        Group).
Myers, Kyle R., Wei Yang Tham, Yian Yin, Nina Cohodes, Jerry Thursby, Marie C. Thursby, Peter
        Schiffer, Joseph T. Walsh, Karim R. Lakhani, and Dashun Wang, 2020, Unequal effects of the
        COVID-19 pandemic on scientists. Nature Human Behavior 4, 880­883 (2020).
Nash, Meredith, and Brendan Churchill, 2020, Caring during COVID19: A gendered analysis of Australian
        university responses to managing remote working and caring responsibilities, Gender, Work &
        Organization 27, 833­846.
Oleschuk, Merin, 2020, Gender Equity Considerations for Tenure and Promotion during COVID-19,
        Canadian Review of Sociology 57(3), 502-515.




                                                                                                       29
O'Meara, KerryAnn, Regina R. Kaufman, and Aaron M. Kuntz, 2003, Faculty Work in Challenging Times:
        Trends, Consequences & Implications, Liberal Education 89. 4.
Perry, Andre, 2020, Experienced teachers could retire in droves by the time schools reopen, The Hechinger
        Report.
Pham, Hiep-Hung, and Tien-Thi-Hanh Ho, 2020, Toward a `new normal' with e-learning in Vietnamese
        higher education during the post COVID-19 pandemic, Higher Education Research &
        Development 39, 1327­1331.
Rome B. Moralista, Ryan Michael F. Oducado (2020). Faculty Perception toward Online Education in a
        State College in the Philippines during the Coronavirus Disease 19 (COVID-19) Pandemic.
        Universal Journal of Educational Research, 8(10), 4736 - 4742. DOI: 10.13189/ujer.2020.081044
Santos, Georgina, and Stephanie Dang Van Phu, 2019, Gender and Academic Rank in the UK,
        Sustainability11(11), Special Issue Economics of Education and Sustainable Development, 3171.
Sarsons, Heather, Klarita Gerxhani, Emesto Reuben, and Arthur Schram, 2021, Gender Differences in
        Recognition for Group Work, Journal of Political Economy, vol. 129, no. 1, 101-147.
Schiebinger, Londa, Andrea Davies Henderson, and Shannon K. Gilmartin, 2008, Dual-Career Academic
        Couples: What Universities Need to Know, Dual-Career Academic Couples: What Universities
        Need to Know | Office of the Vice Provost for Graduate Education.
Sugimoto, Cassidy R, Yong-Yeol Ahn, Elise Smith, Benoit Macaluso, and Vincent Larivière, 2019, Factors
        affecting sex-related reporting in medical research: a cross-disciplinary bibliometric analysis, The
        Lancet 393, 550­559.
Sugimoto, Cassidy R., 2020, The decline of women's research production during the coronavirus pandemic,
        Nature Index.
Viglione, Giuliana, 2020, Are women publishing less during the pandemic? Here's what the data say, Nature
        News (Nature Publishing Group).
Winslow, Sarah, 2010, Gender inequality and time allocations among academic faculty, Gender & Sociaety
        24, 769-793.
Woolston, Chris, 2020, Signs of depression and anxiety soar among US graduate students during pandemic,
        Nature News (Nature Publishing Group).
Yang, Rui, 2020, China's higher education during the COVID-19 pandemic: some preliminary
        observations, Higher Education Research & Development 39, 1317­1321.
Zeeshan, Mahwish, Dr. Abid Ghafoor Chaudhry, and Shaheer Ellahi Khan, 2020, Pandemic Preparedness
        and Techno Stress among Faculty of DAIs in Covid-19, Sir Syed Journal of Education & Social
        Research 3, 383­396.




                                                                                                         30
Table 1. Summary Statistics: Means (Standard Deviation)
Fem_ind, nowork_spouse, Child_0to5 (etc.), ExtendClock, Europe and United States are indicator variables. Research
Productivity is effect of COVID on research on a Likert: (1) Strong Negative Effect to (5) Strong Positive Effect. Time
varuables are time spent on an activity during the pandemic measured on a Likert scale: (1) much less to (5) much more.
childcardinal is 0 for respondents with no children, 1 for those with children over 13, 2 for those with children between 5 and
13, and 3 for those with children under 5. Feedback, Isolation, Health , and Employer_Finances measure concerns on a Likert
scale: (1) Not Concerned to (5) Very Concerned.
                                    All Faculty           Senior Faculty          Junior Faculty           PhD Students
VARIABLES                            (N=731)                (N=402)                  (N=329)                 (N=277)
Research_Productivity                  1.943                  2.100                    1.751                   2.126
                                      (1.169)                (1.239)                  (1.047)                 (1.104)
Time_Research                          2.427                  2.478                    2.365                   2.957
                                      (1.141)                (1.154)                  (1.124)                 (1.132)
Time_Teaching                          3.714                  3.761                    3.657                   2.928
                                      (0.942)                (0.928)                  (0.957)                 (0.873)
Time_Childcare                         3.841                  3.808                    3.881                   3.271
                                      (0.935)                (0.910)                  (0.963)                 (0.734)
Time_Chores                            3.752                  3.714                    3.799                   3.603
                                      (0.778)                (0.744)                  (0.817)                 (0.799)
Time_Leisure                           1.929                  1.893                    1.973                   2.466
                                      (0.857)                (0.833)                  (0.885)                 (1.065)
Time_Sleep                             2.713                  2.736                    2.684                   3.162
                                      (0.742)                (0.688)                  (0.802)                 (0.900)
Female                                 0.300                  0.271                    0.334                   0.455
                                      (0.458)                (0.445)                  (0.472)                 (0.499)
Nonwork_spouse                         0.249                  0.301                    0.185                   0.173
                                      (0.433)                (0.459)                  (0.389)                 (0.379)
Child_0to18                            0.592                  0.624                    0.553                   0.199
                                      (0.492)                (0.485)                  (0.498)                 (0.400)
Child_0to5                             0.326                  0.226                    0.447                   0.152
                                      (0.469)                (0.419)                  (0.498)                 (0.359)
Child_6to12                            0.302                  0.361                    0.231                   0.069
                                      (0.460)                (0.481)                  (0.422)                 (0.253)
Child_13to18                           0.140                  0.236                    0.021                   0.025
                                      (0.347)                (0.425)                  (0.145)                 (0.157)
Childcardinal                          1.249                  1.124                    1.401                   0.487
                                      (1.188)                (1.042)                  (1.331)                 (1.031)
Feedback                               4.001                  3.853                    4.182                   3.823
                                      (0.855)                (0.855)                  (0.821)                 (0.937)
Isolation                              3.702                  3.597                    3.830                   3.783
                                      (1.140)                (1.140)                  (1.130)                 (1.205)
Health                                 3.658                  3.455                    3.906                   4.170
                                      (1.118)                (1.149)                  (1.027)                 (0.923)
ExtendClock                            0.689                  0.679                    0.702                   0.058
                                      (0.463)                (0.467)                  (0.458)                 (0.234)
Employer_Finances                      3.446                  3.505                    3.374                   3.437
                                      (1.121)                (1.079)                  (1.167)                 (1.084)



                                                                                                                       31
Table 2. Family Structure by Gender and Rank

The table presents mean values by gender and faculty rank with tests for differences. Nonworking Spouse and Child_0to5 (6to12, 13to18) are indicator
variables. Childcardinal is 0 for respondents with no children, 1 for those with children over 13, 2 for those with children between 5 and 13, and 3 for
those with children under 5.

                                 All Faculty                      Senior Faculty                      Junior Faculty                     PhD Students
                                  (N=731)                           (N=402)                             (N=329)                            (N=277)

                                               Men -                               Men -                               Men -                            Men -
                       Men        Women        Women      Men        Women         Women      Men        Women         Women     Men       Women        Women
NonworkingSpouse       0.295       0.142       0.153***   0.345       0.183    0.161***       0.228       0.100    0.128***      0.219      0.119       0.099**

Child_0to5             0.334       0.306        0.028     0.222       0.239         -0.017    0.484       0.373        0.111*    0.159      0.143        0.016

Child_6to12            0.301       0.306        -0.005    0.324       0.459        -0.134**   0.269       0.155        0.115**   0.060      0.079       -0.020

Child_13to18           0.141       0.137        0.004     0.229       0.257         -0.028    0.023       0.018         0.005    0.026      0.024        0.003

Child_0to18            0.605       0.562        0.044     0.608       0.670         -0.062    0.603       0.455        0.148**   0.199      0.198        0.000

Childcardinal          1.275       1.187        0.088     1.102       1.183         -0.081    1.507       1.191        0.316**   0.490      0.484        0.006
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                                                                          32
Table 3. COVID Time Effects and Family Structure
The sample includes research faculty in tenure-track university positions. The dependent variable is time spent
on an activity during the pandemic measured on a Likert scale that ranges from (1) much less to (5) much more.
The independent variables include a gender indicator, a nonworking spouse indicator, and cardinal child
variable. The child variable is 0 for respondents with no children, 1 for those with children over 13, 2 for those
with children between 5 and 13, and 3 for those with children under 5. Models are estimated as ordered logistic
regressions in a seemingly unrelated regression framework.

                               (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)           (6)
                             Time_          Time_         Time_          Time_          Time_          Time_
VARIABLES                   Research       Teaching       Chores        Childcare       Leisure        Sleep

Female                       -0.420**      0.499**         -0.0337        -0.308         0.0572        -0.0544
                              [0.199]       [0.221]        [0.211]       [0.213]         [0.202]       [0.236]
Nonwork_spouse                 0.124        0.262*          -0.125       -0.360*          -0.210       -0.0787
                              [0.165]       [0.158]        [0.153]       [0.189]         [0.159]       [0.157]
Childcardinal               -0.596***      -0.00674       0.427***      1.631***       -0.272***     -0.539***
                             [0.0740]      [0.0680]       [0.0736]       [0.112]        [0.0697]      [0.0740]
Female*Childcardinal          0.0320        -0.0916         0.173        0.442**        -0.282**        -0.141
                              [0.121]       [0.132]        [0.133]       [0.203]         [0.136]       [0.140]

Observations                   731            731           731            731            731            731
Robust standard errors in brackets
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                            33
Table 4. COVID Research Effects
The sample includes research faculty in tenure-track university positions. The dependent variable is
research productivity during the pandemic measured on a Likert scale ranging from (1) Strong
Negative Effect to (5) Strong Positive Effect. The independent variables include indicators for gender,
nonworking spouse, and a cardinal child variable. The independent time variables measure time spent
on an activity during the pandemic measured on a Likert scale that ranges from (1) much less to (5)
much more. Feedback, Isolation, and Health measure concern about timely feedback on research,
isolation, and physical/mental health on a Likert scale ranging form (1) Not Concerned to (5) Very
Concerned. Models are estimated as ordered logistic regressions.
                                (1)                (2)                 (3)                 (4)
                             Research_          Research_           Research_           Research_
VARIABLES                   Productivity       Productivity        Productivity        Productivity

Female                       -0.650***          -0.794***           -0.718***            -0.514**
                               [0.213]            [0.217]             [0.219]             [0.223]
Nonwork_spouse                 0.305*              0.208               0.277                0.197
                               [0.163]            [0.167]             [0.168]             [0.171]
Childcardinal                -0.550***           -0.00796             -0.0617              -0.117
                              [0.0740]           [0.0931]            [0.0940]            [0.0989]
Female*childcardinal            0.192            0.378***            0.378***            0.382***
                               [0.134]            [0.135]             [0.138]             [0.142]
Time_Childcare                                  -1.000***           -0.951***           -0.920***
                                                  [0.126]             [0.128]             [0.134]
Time_Chores                                     -0.404***           -0.456***           -0.319***
                                                  [0.108]             [0.110]             [0.113]
Time_Teaching                                                       -0.600***           -0.514***
                                                                     [0.0820]            [0.0840]
Feedback                                                                                -0.577***
                                                                                         [0.0979]
Isolation                                                                                 -0.128*
                                                                                         [0.0748]
Health                                                                                  -0.385***
                                                                                         [0.0760]

Observations                     731               731                 731                 730
Standard errors in brackets
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                    34
Table 5. COVID Research Effects by Rank (Senior Faculty, Junior Faculty, or Student)

The subsamples includes research tenured faculty in university positions (senior faculty), untenured faculty in
university positions (junior faculty), and students. The dependent variable is research productivity during the
pandemic measured on a Likert scale ranging from (1) Strong Negative Effect to (5) Strong Positive Effect. The
independent variables include indicators for gender, nonworking spouse, and a cardinal child variable. The
independent time variables measure time spent on an activity during the pandemic measured on a Likert scale
that ranges from (1) much less to (5) much more. Feedback, Isolation, and Health measure concern about timely
feedback on research, isolation, and physical/mental health on a Likert scale ranging form (1) Not Concerned to
(5) Very Concerned. Models are estimated as ordered logistic regressions.



                                Senior Faculty               Junior Faculty                   Students

                              (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)
                           Research_    Research_    Research_    Research_    Research_    Research_
VARIABLES                 Productivity Productivity Productivity Productivity Productivity Productivity

Female                      -0.733**         -0.471        -0.399       -0.584*       -0.0666         0.0505
                             [0.311]        [0.333]       [0.305]       [0.321]       [0.243]         [0.250]
Nonwork_spouse               0.0473         -0.0300       0.538*          0.491        -0.228        -0.0772
                             [0.204]        [0.214]       [0.283]       [0.301]       [0.299]         [0.310]
Childcardinal              -0.618***         -0.183     -0.474***       -0.0144        -0.148        -0.0559
                             [0.109]        [0.139]      [0.106]        [0.146]       [0.154]         [0.186]
Female*childcardinal          0.142        0.494**         0.175        0.341*         -0.326          -0.239
                             [0.214]        [0.234]      [0.176]        [0.188]       [0.233]         [0.246]
Time_Childcare                            -0.875***                   -1.064***                        -0.215
                                            [0.178]                     [0.209]                       [0.220]
Time_Chores                                -0.332**                    -0.319**                      -0.293*
                                            [0.160]                     [0.162]                       [0.155]
Time_Teaching                             -0.608***                   -0.441***                        -0.193
                                            [0.114]                     [0.129]                       [0.140]
Feedback                                  -0.587***                   -0.548***                     -0.522***
                                            [0.134]                     [0.151]                       [0.134]
Isolation                                    -0.106                      -0.150                     -0.272***
                                            [0.100]                     [0.115]                       [0.102]
Health                                    -0.427***                    -0.267**                     -0.392***
                                            [0.101]                     [0.122]                      [0.130]

Observations                   402           401           329           329            277              277
Standard errors in brackets
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                           35
Table 6. Mechanism Intensity by Rank and Gender

The dependent variables are Feedback, Isolation, Health, and childcardinal. Odd columns use the sample of tenure-track faculty with independent
indicator variables for gender and junior rank. Even columns use the sample of tenure-track faculty plus students and add indicators for student and its
interaction with gender. Models are estimated as ordered logit regressions.

                         (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)         (7)          (8)           (9)          (10)
                                                                                                    Nonwork_     Nonwork_        Child        Child
VARIABLES            Feedback     Feedback      Isolation    Isolation      Health       Health      spouse       spouse        cardinal     cardinal

Junior                1.033***     1.012***     0.357**       0.344**     0.852***      0.850***    -0.576***     -0.576***    0.594***      0.555***
                       [0.172]      [0.169]     [0.162]       [0.160]      [0.168]       [0.167]      [0.203]       [0.203]     [0.166]       [0.164]
Female                0.885***     0.864***     0.0786         0.0770     0.525**        0.524**    -0.851***     -0.851***      0.126          0.120
                       [0.211]      [0.209]     [0.205]       [0.203]      [0.208]       [0.207]      [0.276]       [0.276]     [0.192]       [0.190]
Junior*Female        -0.831***    -0.812***      0.199          0.190       -0.338        -0.337       -0.129        -0.129    -0.693**      -0.652**
                       [0.305]      [0.304]     [0.302]       [0.298]      [0.298]       [0.298]      [0.451]       [0.451]     [0.303]       [0.299]
Student                            0.00210                    0.423**                   1.460***                  -0.632***                 -1.436***
                                    [0.189]                   [0.184]                    [0.191]                    [0.232]                   [0.229]
Student*Female                       -0.372                    -0.119                    -0.551*                     0.123                     -0.126
                                    [0.307]                   [0.303]                    [0.307]                    [0.437]                   [0.358]

                                  Faculty +                  Faculty +                 Faculty +                  Faculty +                 Faculty +
Sample                Faculty                    Faculty                   Faculty                    Faculty                   Faculty
                                  Students                   Students                  Students                   Students                  Students

Observations            730         1,007          731         1,008         731         1,008          731         1,008         731         1,008
Standard errors in brackets
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                                                                    36
Table 7. Institution Finances and Policy Responses
In Panel A, the sample is all tenure-track university faculty and Employer_Finances measure concerns on a
Likert scale: (1) Not Concerned to (5) Very Concerned. In Panel B, ExtendClock is an indicator that takes a
value of one when respondent indicates institution had an automatic or optional clock extension in response to
the pandemic.
                                (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)
                             Research_      Time_        Time_
VARIABLES                   Productivity   Research     Teaching      Feedback      Isolation       Health
Panel A. Employer Finances
Employer_Finances        -0.307***         -0.216***    0.272***      0.282***      0.313***      0.378***
                           [0.0621]         [0.0610]    [0.0606]      [0.0632]      [0.0630]      [0.0641]

Observations                    731          731          731            730           731           731
Panel B. Clock Extensions
ExtendClock                   -0.388*        -0.319     -0.376*         0.325         0.269         0.286
                              [0.232]       [0.221]     [0.220]        [0.228]       [0.221]       [0.219]

Observations                  329            329          329            329           329           329
Standard errors in brackets
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                        37
                                                                                         Time_Research                                                                                                                  Time_Teaching                                                                                                                        Time_Chores
                             0 .05 .1 .15 .2 .25 .3 .35 .4 .45 .5 .55 .6




                                                                                                                                                            0 .05 .1 .15 .2 .25 .3 .35 .4 .45 .5 .55 .6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0 .05 .1 .15 .2 .25 .3 .35 .4 .45 .5 .55 .6
     Predicted Probability




                                                                                                                                    Predicted Probability




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Predicted Probability
                                                                           Much Less   Less   About the Same   More     Much More                                                                         Much Less   Less   About the Same   More      Much More                                                                         Much Less   Less    About the Same   More      Much More


                                                                                          Male                        Female                                                                                             Male                        Female                                                                                              Male                         Female



                                                                                         Time_Childcare                                                                                                                  Time_Leisure                                                                                                                        Time_Sleep
                             0 .05 .1 .15 .2 .25 .3 .35 .4 .45 .5 .55 .6




                                                                                                                                                            0 .05 .1 .15 .2 .25 .3 .35 .4 .45 .5 .55 .6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0 .05 .1.15.2.25 .3.35 .4.45.5.55 .6
     Predicted Probability




                                                                                                                                    Predicted Probability




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Predicted Probability
                                                                           Much Less   Less   About the Same   More     Much More                                                                         Much Less   Less   About the Same   More      Much More                                                                         Much Less   Less    About the Same   More      Much More


                                                                                          Male                        Female                                                                                             Male                        Female                                                                                              Male                         Female




Figure 1: Predicted Probabilites of Time Usage with the Marginal Effects of Gender

Plotted in each of the figures above is the marginal effect of gender on the predicted probability of a time-use level ("much less", "less", "about the same",
"more", and "much more") from each of the respective estimation of columns (1) - (6) of Table 3. In Table 3, the dependent variable for a column is a time-
use variable -- research, teaching, chores, childcare, leisure, or sleep. The estimation is an ordered logit. Independent variables are non-working spouse,
the cardinal child variable, the female indicator, and an interaction between female and the cardinal child variable. We take the marginal effect on the
predicted probabily of a response bucket by gender, at the mean of the other independent variables. The confidence bands shown are at the 95% level.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     38
                                                                             Time_Research                                                                                                        Time_Teaching                                                                                                            Time_Chores
                             0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9




                                                                                                                                                  0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9
     Predicted Probability




                                                                                                                          Predicted Probability




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Predicted Probability
                                                            Much Less     Less   About the Same    More     Much More                                                            Much Less     Less    About the Same    More     Much More                                                            Much Less    Less    About the Same   More   Much More


                                                                   None          13-18            6-12        0-5 Ages                                                                  None           13-18            6-12         0-5 Ages                                                                None           13-18        6-12       0-5 Ages




                                                                             Time_Childcare                                                                                                           Time_Leisure                                                                                                         Time_Sleep
                             0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9




                                                                                                                                                  0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9
     Predicted Probability




                                                                                                                          Predicted Probability




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Predicted Probability
                                                            Much Less     Less    About the Same     More     Much More                                                          Much Less     Less     About the Same     More     Much More                                                          Much Less    Less    About the Same   More   Much More


                                                                   None          13-18            6-12        0-5 Ages                                                                  None           13-18            6-12         0-5 Ages                                                                None           13-18        6-12       0-5 Ages




Figure 2: Predicted Probabilites of Time Usage with the Marginal Effects of Children

Plotted in each of the figures above is the marginal effect of the levels of the cardinal child variable on the predicted probability of a time-use level
("much less", "less", "about the same", "more", and "much more") from each of the respective estimation of columns (1) - (6) of Table 3. The levels of the
child variable -- the ages of children, if any -- are given in the legend. In Table 3, the dependent variable for a column is a time use variable -- research,
teaching, chores, childcare, leisure, or sleep. The estimation is an ordered logit. Independent variables are non-working spouse, the cardinal child variable,
the female indicator, and an interaction between female and the cardinal child variable. We take the marginal effect on the predicted probabily of a
response bucket by the cardinal child variable, at the mean of the other independent variables. The confidence bands shown are at the 95% level.



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               39
                                                  Research_Productivity                                                                        Research_Productivity
                             .75




                                                                                                                      .75
                             .7




                                                                                                                      .7
                             .65




                                                                                                                      .65
                             .6




                                                                                                                      .6
                             .55




                                                                                                                      .55
                             .5




                                                                                                                      .5
     Predicted Probability




                                                                                              Predicted Probability
                             .45




                                                                                                                      .45
                             .4




                                                                                                                      .4
                             .35




                                                                                                                      .35
                             .3




                                                                                                                      .3
                             .25




                                                                                                                      .25
                             .2




                                                                                                                      .2
                             .15




                                                                                                                      .15
                             .1




                                                                                                                      .1
                             .05




                                                                                                                      .05
                             0




                                                                                                                      0
                                   Much Less   Less     About the Same   More     Much More                                 Much Less   Less       About the Same          More          Much More


                                                      Male               Female                                                         None        13-18           6-12          0-5 Ages




Figure 3: Predicted Probabilites of Research Productivity with Marginal Effects of Gender and Chlidren
Plotted in each of the figures above is the marginal effect of gender on the predicted probability of Research Productivity response being in one if the
five choices ("much less", "less", "about the same", "more", and "much more"), from Table 4, column 1. The estimation is an ordered logit of answers to
the Research Productivity level. Independent variables are non-working spouse, the cardinal child variable, the female indicator, and an interaction
between female and the cardinal child variable. For the left figure, we take the marginal effect on the predicted probabily of a response bucket by gender,
at the mean of the other independent variables. For the right figure, we take the marginal effect on the predicted probabily of a response bucket by the
cardinal child variable, at the mean of the other independent variables.The confidence bands shown are at the 95% level.



                                                                                                                                                                                                     40
Panel A. Marginal Effect of Time Mechanisms
                                                           Time_Teaching                                                                         Time_Childcare                                                                         Time_Chores
                                            0.6




                                                                                                                                  0.6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.6
                                                                                                                                        0.547
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.529
                                            0.5




                                                                                                                                  0.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.5
 Marginal Effect on Research Productivity




                                                                                       Marginal Effect on Research Productivity




                                                                                                                                                                              Marginal Effect on Research Productivity
                                                                                                                                                      0.472


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.416
                                                  0.390
                                            0.4




                                                                                                                                  0.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.299
                                            0.3




                                                                                                                                  0.3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.3
                                                               0.265                                                                                                0.270
                                            0.2




                                                                                                                                  0.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.2
                                                                            0.170
                                            0.1




                                                                                                                                  0.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.1
                                            0.0




                                                                                                                                  0.0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.0
                                                  Senior       Junior      Students                                                     Senior       Junior       Students                                                     Senior      Junior     Students

                                                                             Marginal Effect ('Much More Time'                                                  'No Change in Time' )


Panel B. Marginal Effect of Production Mechanisms
                                                             Feedback                                                                               Isolation                                                                             Health
                                            0.6




                                                                                                                                  0.6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.6
                                                  0.499
                                            0.5




                                                                                                                                  0.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.5
 Marginal Effect on Research Productivity




                                                                                       Marginal Effect on Research Productivity




                                                                                                                                                                              Marginal Effect on Research Productivity
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.469


                                                               0.417
                                            0.4




                                                                                                                                  0.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.4




                                                                            0.337
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.303
                                            0.3




                                                                                                                                  0.3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.3




                                                                                                                                        0.273
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.250
                                                                                                                                                                    0.234
                                            0.2




                                                                                                                                  0.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.2




                                                                                                                                                      0.167
                                            0.1




                                                                                                                                  0.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.1
                                            0.0




                                                                                                                                  0.0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.0




                                                  Senior       Junior      Students                                                     Senior       Junior       Students                                                     Senior      Junior     Students

                                                                            Marginal Effect ('Much More Worry'                                                  'No Change in Worry' )



Figure 4. Marginal Effects of Time and Production Mechanisms on Most Negative Research
Outcome
The figure presents the marginal effect of reporting the most extreme negative effect on research
productivity (a score of 1 on the 5-point Likert scale) associated with moving from "no change"
(or a score of 3 on the 5-point Likert scale) to "much more" (a score of 5) for a particular
mechanism while all other covariates are assessed at the sample mean. Marginal effects are
estimated for senior, junior, and students using models 2, 4, and 6 of Table 5 (respectively).
Panel A summarizes time allocation mechanisms (teaching, childcare, and chores). Panel B
summarizes production mechanisms (concerns about feedback, isolation, and health).




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 41
Panel A. Expected Marginal Effect of Time Mechanisms
                                                                         Time_Teaching                                                                                      Time_Childcare                                                                                      Time_Chores


                                                                                                                                                                                 0.178
 Expected [ Marginal Impact on Research Productivity]




                                                                                                    Expected [ Marginal Impact on Research Productivity]




                                                                                                                                                                                                        Expected [ Marginal Impact on Research Productivity]
                                                        0.175




                                                                                                                                                           0.175




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.175
                                                                                                                                                                   0.161
                                                        0.150




                                                                                                                                                           0.150




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.150
                                                        0.125




                                                                                                                                                           0.125




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.125
                                                        0.100




                                                                                                                                                           0.100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.100
                                                                0.092
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.086
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.078
                                                        0.075




                                                                                                                                                           0.075




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.075
                                                                             0.052
                                                        0.050




                                                                                                                                                           0.050




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.050
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.039
                                                                                                                                                                                              0.029
                                                        0.025




                                                                                                                                                           0.025




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.025
                                                                                          0.007
                                                        0.000




                                                                                                                                                           0.000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.000
                                                                Senior       Junior      Students                                                                  Senior       Junior       Students                                                                  Senior      Junior     Students

                                                                            Marginal Effect ('Much More Time'                                                               'No Change in Time' ) X Pr('Much More Time')


Panel B. Expected Marginal Effect of Production Mechanisms
                                                                           Feedback                                                                                            Isolation                                                                                          Health
                                                        0.175




                                                                                                                                                           0.175




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.175
                                                                             0.162
 Expected [ Marginal Impact on Research Productivity]




                                                                                                    Expected [ Marginal Impact on Research Productivity]




                                                                                                                                                                                                        Expected [ Marginal Impact on Research Productivity]
                                                        0.150




                                                                                                                                                           0.150




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.150
                                                        0.125




                                                                                                                                                           0.125




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.125

                                                                0.113
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.105
                                                        0.100




                                                                                                                                                           0.100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.093

                                                                                          0.079                                                                                               0.077
                                                        0.075




                                                                                                                                                           0.075




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.075




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.071


                                                                                                                                                                   0.056
                                                                                                                                                                                 0.052
                                                        0.050




                                                                                                                                                           0.050




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.050
                                                        0.025




                                                                                                                                                           0.025




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.025
                                                        0.000




                                                                                                                                                           0.000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.000




                                                                Senior       Junior      Students                                                                  Senior       Junior       Students                                                                  Senior      Junior     Students

                                                                           Marginal Effect ('Much More Worry'                                                              'No Change in Worry' ) X Pr('Much More Worry')



Figure 5. Expected Marginal Effects of Time and Production Mechanisms on Most Negative
Research Outcome
The figure presents the expected marginal effect for a member of group (senior, junior, or
student) reporting the most extreme effect on research productivity that can be traced to a
particular mechanism. The expected marginal effect is calculated as the marginal effect (reported
in Table 4) multiplied by the probability that the group (senior, junior, or student) reports "much
more" (a score of 5 on the 5-point Likert scale) for a particular mechanism. Panel A summarizes
time allocation mechanisms (teaching, childcare, and chores). Panel B summarizes production
mechanisms (concerns about feedback, isolation, and health).




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         42
                                                    Research_Productivity                                                                                                     Time_Teaching
                        .65




                                                                                                                                               .65
                        .6




                                                                                                                                               .6
                        .55




                                                                                                                                               .55
                        .5




                                                                                                                                               .5
                        .45




                                                                                                                                               .45
Predicted Probability




                                                                                                                       Predicted Probability
                        .4




                                                                                                                                               .4
                        .35




                                                                                                                                               .35
                        .3




                                                                                                                                               .3
                        .25




                                                                                                                                               .25
                        .2




                                                                                                                                               .2
                        .15




                                                                                                                                               .15
                        .1




                                                                                                                                               .1
                        .05




                                                                                                                                               .05
                        0




                                                                                                                                               0
                              Much Less      Less             About the Same           More                Much More                                 Much Less      Less             About the Same           More                Much More


                                          Strongly Disagree           Disagree                   Neutral                                                         Strongly Disagree           Disagree                   Neutral

                                          Agree                       Strongly Agree                                                                             Agree                       Strongly Agree

                                          I worry about the financial condition of my employer                                                                   I worry about the financial condition of my employer




Figure 6: Predicted Probabilites of Research Productity and Teaching with Marginal Effects of the Financial Condition of Employer
Plotted in each of the figures above is the marginal effect of gender on the predicted probability of Research Productivity response being in
one if the five choices ("much less", "less", "about the same", "more", and "much more"), from Table 4, column 1. The estimation is an ordered
logit of answers to the Research Productivity level. Independent variables are non-working spouse, the cardinal child variable, the female
indicator, and an interaction between female and the cardinal child variable. For the left figure, we take the marginal effect on the predicted
probabily of a response bucket by gender, at the mean of the other independent variables. For the right figure, we take the marginal effect on
the predicted probabily of a response bucket by the cardinal child variable, at the mean of the other independent variables.The confidence
bands shown are at the 95% level.



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              43
