                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

   SOCIAL AND GENETIC EFFECTS ON EDUCATIONAL PERFORMANCE IN EARLY
                            ADOLESCENCE

                                        Martin A. Isungset
                                         Dalton Conley
                                      Henrik D. Zachrisson
                                         Eivind Ystrøm
                                       Alexandra Havdahl
                                         Pål R. Njølstad
                                       Torkild H. Lyngstad

                                       Working Paper 28498
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28498

                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2021

This research is part of the OPENFLUX project and the EQOP projects, which both received
funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union's Horizon 2020
research and innovation program (Grant agreements No. 818420 and No. 818425 respectively).
The Norwegian Mother, Father and Child Cohort Study is supported by the Norwegian Ministry
of Health and Care Services and the Ministry of Education and Research. We are grateful to all
the participating families in Norway who take part in this on-going cohort study. We thank
the Norwegian Institute of Public Health (NIPH) for generating high-quality genomic data.
This research is part of the HARVEST collaboration, supported by the Research Council of
Norway (#229624). We also thank the NORMENT Centre for providing genotype data,
funded by the Research Council of Norway (#223273), South East Norway Health Authority
and KG Jebsen Stiftelsen. We further thank the Center for Diabetes Research, the University of
Bergen for providing genotype data and performing quality control and imputation of the
data funded by the ERC AdG project SELECTionPREDISPOSED, Stiftelsen Kristian
Gerhard Jebsen, Trond Mohn Foundation, the Research Council of Norway, the Novo
Nordisk Foundation, the University of Bergen, and the Western Norway health Authorities
(Helse Vest) (to PRN). AH was supported by grants from the South-Eastern Norway Regional
Health Authority (#2018059 and #2020022) and the Research Council of Norway (#288083
and #274611). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Martin A. Isunget, Dalton Conley, Henrik D. Zachrisson, Eivind Ystrøm, Alexandra
Havdahl, Pål R. Njølstad, and Torkild H. Lyngstad. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Social and Genetic Effects on Educational Performance in Early Adolescence
Martin A. Isunget, Dalton Conley, Henrik D. Zachrisson, Eivind Ystrøm, Alexandra Havdahl,
Pål R. Njølstad, and Torkild H. Lyngstad
NBER Working Paper No. 28498
February 2021
JEL No. I24
                                           ABSTRACT

Research into the intergenerational transmission of educational advantage has long been criticized
for not paying sufficient attention to genetics. This study is based on the Norwegian Mother,
Father and Child Cohort Study (MoBa) and administrative register data on 25000 genotyped
Norwegian children and their parents. We assess and disentangle the relative importance of
genetics and social background for children's standardized academic test scores. Norway offers a
particularly interesting context for intergenerational transmission, as the welfare state and
educational system is designed to provide equal opportunity structures for children. The results
point to genetics only confounding the parent status-offspring achievement relationship to a small
degree, to `genetic nurture' effects being small, and pro-vide no evidence of neither Scarr-Rowe
interactions in test scores nor parent-child genotype interactions. Even in a universal welfare state
with relatively low levels of inequality, there are two systems of ascription, one genetic and one
social, and these are largely independent of each other.

Martin A. Isunget                                 Alexandra Havdahl
University of Oslo                                University of Oslo
Postboks 1096                                     Postboks 1094
Blindern                                          Blindern
Bergen 0317, Norway                               Oslo 0317, Norway
m.a.isungset@sosgeo.uio.no                        alexandra.havdahl@psykologi.uio.no

Dalton Conley                                     Pål R. Njølstad
Department of Sociology                           University of Bergen
Princeton University                              Postboks 7804
153 Wallace Hall                                  Bergen 7020, Norway
Princeton, NJ 08544                               Pal.Njolstad@uib.no
and NBER
dconley@princeton.edu                             Torkild H. Lyngstad
                                                  Department of Sociology and Human Geography
Henrik D. Zachrisson                              University of Oslo
University of Oslo                                Harriet Holters hus
Postboks 1140                                     Moltke Moesvei 31
Blindern                                          Oslo 0851, Norway
Oslo 0318, Norway                                 t.h.lyngstad@sosgeo.uio.no
h.d.zachrisson@isp.uio.no

Eivind Ystrøm
University of Oslo
Postboks 1094
Blindern
Oslo 0317, Norway
eivind.ystrom@psykologi.uio.no

Supplementary materials are available at
https://data.nber.org/data-appendix/w28498/norway_supplement.pdf
                                                                                     1




introduction
An abiding interest of social scientists is the extent to which successful parents
transmit social advantages to their children (Blau and Duncan 1967; Lareau 2011).
A well-established research literature has shown that such transmission of advan-
tage takes place in industrialized societies despite the hypothesized waning im-
portance of ascription, and that the educational system is at the center of these
transmission processes (Breen and Jonsson 2005). Researchers have considered a
wide range of different factors and mechanisms possibly involved in generating
the relatively higher achievement and attainment of children of more educated
parents, such as family income for purchasing of educationally-relevant goods
(Teachman 1987), relative risk aversion (Van de Werfhorst and Hofstede 2007),
parenting styles (Roksa and Potter 2011), cultural capital (Jæger 2009, 2011), and
school quality (Duncan and Murnane 2014).
     By and large, social and economic research has emphasized social explana-
tions as to how the effect of family background on educational outcomes emer-
ges. That the social influence of family background may be confounded by gen-
etics has been known for the better part of the last century (Burks 1928; Eckland
1967; Marks 2013). Yet, most social scientists studying intergenerational trans-
mission have not availed themselves of genetically informed data and research
designs. The large literature from behavior genetics has shown that nearly eve-
ry individual-level outcome of interest is heritable to some degree (Freese 2008;
Polderman et al. 2015; Turkheimer 2000). Social scientists' relative lack of interest
in genetics and its potential role as confounder, moderator or mediator of soci-
al effects may be due to lack of access to such data, a tradition for skepticism to
biological explanations in general, or more specific doubts about the validity of
genetically informed designs such as twin studies.
     Until fairly recently, most genetically informed designs available to social scien-
tists were twin designs or similar designs that predicated on indirectly inferring
genetic relatedness from pedigrees. Now, with technological advances in genetics
and a rapidly increasing availability of genetic data, some scholars have argued
that we are entering a new age of "sociogenomics" ­ the combination of genetics
and social science (Conley and Fletcher 2017; Freese 2018; Mills and Tropf 2020).
At any rate, social scientists are becoming increasingly aware of the role genetics
may play in intergenerational transmission processes. A small, but growing soci-
                                                                                   2


al science literature using direct measurements of genetics to study educational
outcomes has emerged (see e.g. Conley et al. 2015; Belsky et al. 2016; Liu 2018).
These studies have exploited recent advances in molecular genetic methods and
measurement to assess the role of genetic confounding of parental influences on
educational attainment using polygenic scores, summary measures of an indivi-
dual's genetic dispositions for a trait. The results thus far have allowed genetics
a role in adult educational attainment, but not found support for strong genetic
confounding of the relationship between parents' education (or SES) and child-
ren's own education in adulthood. Mechanisms that are suggested to produce
intergenerational correlations in educational outcomes should, however, chiefly
operate in life stages earlier than adulthood, as admissions to higher education at
least partly are decided on the basis of earlier achievement. There may also be inte-
ractions between a child's genetic dispositions and the parent's social and genetic
characteristics. One type is the the Scarr-Rowe interaction where lower SES fa-
mily environments led to suppression of heritability (Scarr-Salapatek 1971; Turk-
heimer et al. 2003), another is the possibility of genotype-genotype similarities,
where relationships between children and offspring with above-average genetic
similarity are particularly conducive of learning. Understanding the role genetic
dispositions of parents and children in how how such effects come about is a pri-
me interest to researchers in the stratification, family, and genetics fields alike.
     Most contributions to the existing literature in the genetics­social stratifi-
cation field analyze data from the United States or the United Kingdom. These
societies have relatively high levels of inequality and provision of education is
less standardized. In contrast, we analyze data from Norway, a fairly egalitarian
context with a universal school system with very few students attending priva-
te schools, relatively low variations in school quality (Hermansen, Borgen, and
Mastekaasa 2020), and a strong social welfare system (Esping-Andersen 1999).
All these factors could in principle reduce the importance of parents' social cha-
racteristics on test scores because children are provided with more equal opport-
unities, and those opportunities are to a lesser extent than in most other socie-
ties a function of their family background. Norway represents an interesting con-
trast on the political economy dimension to the US and UK studies, where both
inequalities in the school system and the intensity of social stratification are ge-
nerally higher.
     The present study offers several contributions to the literature. We estimate
genetic and social intergenerational effects on educational achievement using the
one of the largest genetic-trio datasets with measured genotypes of both parents
and offspring available, the Norwegian Mother, Father and Child Cohort Study
                                                                                   3


(MoBa, Magnus et al. 2016). Using the latest iteration of educational attainment
GWAS based on 1.1 million people (Lee et al. 2018) to create a polygenic score for
education for each family member, and linked data from administrative register
data, we study social and genetic effects on children's educational performance.
Our focus is on children's achievement scores on standardized tests in Reading
(Norwegian), English and Mathematics, taken in the 5th, 8th and 9th grades. We
first establish the extent to which associations between parents' education and
children's educational achievement, i.e. their test scores, are confounded by the
children's own genotypes. We then consider whether the mechanisms behind pa-
rental education effects on test scores stem from parents' own genetic profiles, or
operate largely independently of them. Third, we examine any interactions betwe-
en child genotype effects and parents' education, as suggested by the literature on
the Scarr-Rowe interaction. Finally, we test the existence of parent-child genotype
interactions, where genetic dispositions towards education in parents and their
child produce a synergy effect for educational achievement as has been suggested
for the US context (Conley et al. 2015).


education, intergenerational transmission, genes
and environments
Education is at the center of human development goals, and a crucial factor in
social mobility (Bernardi and Plavgo 2020). Social science classics have cente-
red on the intergenerational transmission of education from parents to children
(e.g. Boudon 1974) The explanations offered by social scientists for such transmis-
sion have for the most part been rooted in social mechanisms: parents' education
or socioeconomic status having a causal influence on children's achievements and
attainments­meaning that if we manipulated one generation's education levels
through a policy lever or other environmental change, we would observe the pa-
rameter estimate change in measures of the next generation's achievement and
attainment. There is a large catalog of mechanisms suggested contributing to the
link between family socioeconomic status and children's educational achieve-
ment (Fergusson, Horwood, and Boden 2008). This large body of work show
that parental socioeconomic status is a strong predictor of children's educatio-
nal achievements and a big part of children's cultural inheritance. But of course,
children do not only inherit their parents' cultural resources, but also their genes,
potentially confounding such social explanations.
    Indeed, studies in the behavioral genetics tradition have shown that a large
                                                                                   4


part of the correlation between twins is due to shared genetics, rather than sharing
or inheriting social resources for a vast array of outcomes (Polderman et al. 2015).
The workhorse of behavioral genetics is the ACE model, i.e. the classical twin
study of siblings reared together. The ACE model leverage the different degrees
of genetic relatedness between monozygotic and dizygotic twins, their siblings
and parents to estimate the variance of latent variables for genetic and environ-
mental influences on outcomes. The method indirectly partitions the outcome
variance into three components: Additive genetics (the narrow-sense heritability
coefficient, often just mentioned as heritability), common environmental influ-
ences (the variation that is shared between twins/siblings) and non-shared en-
vironmental influences (including measurement error). Genetic propensities are
always mediated through environment in some way or other, so these heritability
estimates vary across time, place and social organization (Engzell and Tropf 2018;
Rimfeld et al. 2018). On average, twin studies of educational attainment show fai-
rly consistently a considerable heritability, hovering around 40 % (Branigan, Mc-
Callum, and Freese 2013; Silventoinen et al. 2020). Contrary to what is typically
the case in twin studies of other types of outcomes (Polderman et al. 2015), com-
mon environmental influences are also found to be high, explaining around 30-40
% in the variance. As the common environmental influences component include
all environmental exposures influencing twin similarity, it encompasses paren-
tal socioeconomic status, parenting styles not varying across siblings, similarity
in school environments, and more. Twin studies on educational achievement in
adolescence show an even higher heritability, and lower common environment
influences than for adult educational attainment (de Zeeuw, de Geus, and Booms-
ma 2015; Nielsen 2006; Pokropek and Sikora 2015), yet clearly both genes and
common environments play a role in children's performance.
     Whereas classical social scientific studies are vulnerable to confounding by
genetic inheritance, the behavioral genetics field has been criticized for not measu-
ring genetics directly, and on the assumptions required to underpin twin and pe-
digree research designs (Barnes et al. 2014; Daw, Guo, and Harris 2015, but see
Conley et al. 2013 for empirical support of the assumptions; Felson 2014). With
scientific advances in genome sequencing and measurement, social scientists now
have access to new tools for investigating social and genetic effects on their out-
comes of interest (Conley 2016; Freese 2018). Important tools in the emerging
field of sociogenomics are genome-wide association studies (GWAS) and their
resulting composite: polygenic scores (PGS). A GWAS is a data-driven statisti-
cal search for associations between and a outcome and genetic variants at the
molecular level of the type single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), the vari-
                                                                                   5


ants that are most common in the population. Using large samples, standardized
measurements and strong standards of statistical significance to account for mul-
tiple testing across the genome, a large number of GWAS's have found correla-
tions between SNPs and many outcomes of interest to social scientists, such as
fertility (Barban et al. 2016) and educational attainment (Lee et al. 2018; Okbay et
al. 2016). Based on the results from GWASs, one can construct polygenic scores,
measures that aggregate all or many genetic associations for a trait into a single
score for each individual in an independent sample. Importantly, PGSs are based
on direct measurements of genetic variants which can be constructed using un-
related individuals, and therefore it does not rely on indirectly modelling genetic
relatedness such as in twin studies.
     Polygenic scores are a useful step forward in assessing the influence of genoty-
pes on phenotypes (traits) such as education (Ayorech et al. 2017). As the genetic
makeup of an individual is fixed at conception and does not change later in life,
PGS' offer a tool to disentangle genetic and environmental influences on educa-
tion, based on direct measurements of genetic variants. PGSes are, however, far
from a panacea, as they may pick up environmental variation too (Cheesman et
al. 2019), caused by population stratification, dynastic effects, and assortative ma-
ting (Morris et al. 2020). There are numerous statistical applications which may
alleviate some of the environmental confounding of the PGS', and the current
gold standard is using family-based samples (Young et al. 2019). Trios are family-
based samples where offspring and their parents are genotyped. In addition to its
use for removing environmental confounding, trios allow for investigating gen-
etic and environmental intergenerational pathways of particular interest to social
scientists (Koellinger and Harden 2018; Mills and Tropf 2020). One such pathway
is the effect of parental genomes on children's outcomes through environmental
pathways, in the genetics literature known as "genetic nurture" (Bates et al. 2018;
Conley et al. 2015; Kong et al. 2018). Researchers have established that there are
effects on offspring educational outcomes of parents' genetic variants that were
not transmitted to the offspring at conception. Such effects can only by mediated
environmentally as there are no direct genetic pathways left when children PGS'
are included in the model.
     With the increase in availability of genomic data sources, a small, but growing
social scientific literature has emerged that links genomic measures, such as poly-
genic scores, to educational outcomes. One study found parents' education to be
more important than genetics for the intergenerational transmission of educatio-
nal attainment. In a study from the United States, around 1/6 of the intergenera-
tional correlation was due to shared genetics (Conley et al. 2015), leaving a sizable
                                                                                  6


social background component. Liu (2018) used data on three generations and the
latest iteration of the educational attainment GWAS to assess effects of parents'
and grandparents' characteristics on adult educational attainment in a multige-
nerational design applied to the same data as Conley et al. (2015). Here, coeffi-
cients for parent's education, child's PGS and parents' PGSs are all significantly
associated with children's educational attainment, i.e. documenting "genetic nur-
ture" effects. The effect of child's PGS far outweighs the genetic nurturing effect
of parent's untransmitted PGS. Parents' (phenotypic) educational attainment is
still the most important variable, with genetics confounding the intergeneratio-
nal association by around 1/5.
     Much of the social science genetics literature has considered adult educatio-
nal attainment, and the literature on educational achievement in childhood and
adolescence is markedly smaller. The few existing studies with genomic data have
mostly supported the idea of two ascriptive systems. Using the UK BioBank data,
von Stumm et al. (2020) examined the role of the educational attainment PGS as
a predictor of educational achievement at differerent child ages, and found that
a child's genetics and mechanisms related to the family's socioeconomic status
operated largely independently of each other. A recent study of cognitive and
brain development with data from the UK, Germany, France and Ireland found
that higher socioeonomic status was associated with global changes in brain du-
ring adolescence and suggested that the educational attainment PGS and fami-
ly socioeconomic status operates largely independent of each other (Judd et al.
2020). Using UK data, Morris et al. (2020) found that effects of a PGS on educa-
tional achievement measures were attenuated by around 1/3 when controlling for
both mother's and father's genotypes. The heritability was attenuated by around
half of the original effect when controlling for parents' years of education. Thus,
both the child's own genetics and the genetics of the parents were found to shape
educational achievement. A recent review of "genetic nurture" studies conclu-
ded that most genetic nurture effects operate through the parental phenotypes,
i.e. their own educational attainment (Wang et al. 2021). With two exceptions,
the reviewed studies all used data from liberal welfare state countries (Wang et al.
2021).

The Context
Our data are drawn from the Norwegian survey and administrative register data.
This particular context has important implications for our empirical expecta-
tions. Norway is a wealthy Scandinavian welfare state, with a long history of acti-
                                                                                   7


ve policies towards reducing social disparities, providing a universal social safety
net, and expanding opportunity structures for all. The welfare state weakens the
impact of various life course events that otherwise would be harmful for the child's
parents, such as unemployment and illness.
     The educational system also has features that shapes our expectations. Most
Norwegian kids attend the local public school. Funding for schools vary little
across communities, and so does curricula and teaching staff qualifications. The-
re are no tuition fees in the public system. The share of students attending private
schools is very small, and these schools are typically international schools, offer
special pedagogical programs, or athletic programs and all are strictly regulated
by the government to comply with various national standards. For the parents,
there are several societal factors that contribute to opening opportunity struc-
tures for attaining educations. The State Educational Loan Fund offer universal
financial assistance for both secondary diplomas and tertiary degrees, there are
degree-granting tertiary institutions spread around the country. The educational
system is also quite flexible, and credits can easily be transferred between institu-
tions and programs. The influence of one's family of origin on one's educational
decision-making may be lower than in e.g. the United States, leading to a hig-
her concordance between ambitions, motivation and talent on the one hand and
actually attained education on the other.
     What are the implications of these societal features, a wide social safety net
and an egalitarian oriented educational system, for our analysis? For one, we
expect to find the degree of genetic confounding in Norway to be larger than what
is found in more market-oriented societies such as the United States. Second, we
expect to find weak or no Scarr-Rowe interactions, as the institutional differen-
ces should make life less precarious for parents and level the playing field with
benefits for children from disadvantaged families in countries like Norway.

Possible interaction effects
Thus far, we have only considered separate additive effects of socioeconomic
status and genetics on educational achievement. Gene-environment correlations
add another layer of complexity. An important entry point to GxE-correlations
has been the seminal work by Sandra Scarr (1971), leading to what has become
known as the Scarr-Rowe hypothesis. This idea posits that family socioecono-
mic status affects the realization of offspring's intellectual potential, and that as
a consequence the variance explained by genetics is lower in families with lower
socioeconomic status. The original hypotheses linked poverty and serious econo-
                                                                                    8


mic deprivation to intelligence, but the hypothesis has inspired a whole literature
considering social gradients in genetic effects in not only cognitive outcomes but
also school performance and adult educational attainment (Baier and Lang 2019).
Results consistent with the hypothesis has been found in a highly cited study of
twins from the United States (Turkheimer et al. 2003),
    Generally, the empirical support for Scarr-Rowe-derived hypotheses in edu-
cational achievement is mixed, and a large study using administrative data on
same-sex twins from Florida found no support for the hypothesis (Figlio et al.
2017). Conley et al. (2015) found no corresponding gradient in the PGS predic-
ting educational attainment, but the available data were limited in sample size
and the PGS predictive power was low relative to the present study.
    Finally, the mechanisms linking family socioeconomic status and children's
educational achievement typically involve parents and children interacting, as
when parents help children with homework, support them financially or in ot-
her ways improve environments. A dimension of these interactions that thus far
has garnered very little attention is the possibility of genotype-genotype interac-
tions. A parent and child can be more or less similar in their genetically anchored
dispositions for education. Such similarity could in principle lead to a synergy
effect emerging from parent-child interactions. The synergy effect would mean
that a child's educational achievement would be higher if both the parents and
the child have high polygenic scores for education. Little is known about such
genotype-genotype interactions, but a recent paper point towards the opposite
situation, wherein there evinces compensating effects of more intense parenting
if one sibling has a lower PGS than the other (Fletcher et al. 2020).

Study aims and analysis plan
The aim of this study is to improve our understanding of the role of parents' in-
fluences and the importance of genetics and social advantages by modeling the
relationships between child's genotype, parents' genotypes, and parents' educa-
tions one the one hand and child educational performance outcomes, on the other
hand, across three stages of adolescence. The target population is children born
in Norway 1999-2008, and our main quantities of interest are the direct effect of
child's genotype, the total effects of parents' genotype, and the conditional effect
of parents' education given child's genotype.
    We are able to contribute to the literature in several ways. First, the sheer size
of our sample, more than 26000 families, is larger than the largest of recently re-
viewed studies with "genetic nurture" designs, and in contrast to many previous
                                                                                   9


studies we have genotype information on children and both parents. This pro-
vides much more statistical power than previous studies. Second, some of the
previous studies are based on iteration one or two of the educational attainment
GWAS series. We use the latest iteration, which improves PGS' predictive power
considerably (the EA PGS R² has gone from 3% through 7% to 13%-15%). Third,
very little work has been done on educational achievement in adolescence using
such data. Most studies study educational attainment in adulthood, but our study
address genetic and environmental intergenerational transmission processes ear-
lier in the life course, around ages 10 through 15. Fourth, we examine intergene-
rational transmission in a different social context than most recent studies. Most
of the genetically informed literature uses data from the United States (e.g. the
Health and Retirement Study) or other liberal welfare states countries (e.g. the
UK BioBank). Norway is a Scandinavian welfare state, where policies have expli-
citly targeted transmission of intergenerational inequalities, and sought to limit
the influence of family background on children's outcomes and opportunities.
Little research using molecular genetic data has been conducted thus far in soci-
al democratic welfare states such as Norway (but see Kong et al. (2018) for an
exception wtih data from Iceland). Fifth, we test whether there are interactions
between parents' educational attainments and genetics and child's genetics, pro-
bing the existence of both Scarr-Rowe-type mechanisms (Scarr-Salapatek 1971)
and genotype-genotype interactions (Conley et al. 2015).


data
The data used in the study were assembled from two different data sources: the
Norwegian Mother-Father-and-Child Study (MoBa) and register data from sever-
al Norwegian national administrative registration systems. MoBa is a population-
based pregnancy cohort study conducted by the Norwegian Institute of Public
Health (Magnus et al. 2016). Participants were recruited from all over Norway
from 1999-2008. The women consented to participation in 41% of the pregnan-
cies. The cohort now includes 114.500 children, 95.200 mothers and 75.200 fat-
hers. The current study is based on version 12 of the quality-assured data files. The
establishment of MoBa and initial data collection was based on a license from the
Norwegian Data Protection Agency and approval from The Regional Committees
for Medical and Health Research Ethics. The MoBa cohort is now based on regu-
lations related to the Norwegian Health Registry Act. We obtained genetic data on
the children and their parents through MoBa Genetics v1.0, an infrastructure for
                                                                                 10


genomic data in MoBa. Blood samples were obtained from both parents during
pregnancy and from mothers and children (umbilical cord) at birth. The genomic
data were used to calculate polygenic scores for children and their parents within
each family.
    The register data were collected from several different administrative registers
(Lyngstad and Skardhamar 2011; Røed and Raaum 2003). Basic demographic data
and kinship links are taken from the Norwegian central population register, and
both information on parents' education and children's results on national stan-
dardized tests are taken from the National Educational database (NuDB). The
linkage between MoBa and register sources was done using the Norwegian na-
tional ID number system , with minimal loss of information. The register data
generally suffer no attrition and little, if any, error in registration.

Variable definitions
Parents' education Both parents' educational attainments were taken from re-
gister data. The data on educational attainment cover the years 1970 and 1980-
2018. We choose the measure that is closest in time to when the parents were aged
30. Originally coded on the NUS2000-standard, a taxonomy of educational pro-
grams similar to ISCED (Barrabés and Østli 2016), the levels were converted to the
expected number of years needed to achieve that level and then z -standardized.

Polygenic scores for educational attainment (EA3)  We use polygenic scores for
both the child and the parents. The scores are based on the results from the 3rd
version of the educational attainment GWAS (Lee et al. 2018). From the availab-
le SNP data, polygenic scores were calculated under standard procedures (Mills,
Barban, and Tropf 2020), using the PRSice software (Choi, Mak, and O'Reilly
2020). After removing SNPs in linkage disequilibrium by clumping, we use infor-
mation from all available SNPs when calculating the scores (i.e. a p-value thre-
shold of 1.00). Documentation on the quality control and filtering of SNPs for
creating the polygenic scores are included in the supplementary materials. Du-
ring this process, approximately 5% of the genotyped samples were excluded. Fi-
nally, the scores were Z-standardized separately for each role (mothers, fathers,
children).

Scores from National Standardized Tests The outcome variables are individual
student scores on national standardized tests. As of 2007, all students in Nor-
way are supposed to take nationwide standardized tests in mathematics, reading
                                                                                        11


comprehension and English (Utdanningsdirektoratet 2010). All three tests are ad-
ministered in 5th, 8th, and 9th grades, while English is administered in 5th and
8th grade only. The youngest children in our sample have not passed through all
three grades, which implies that the number of children with valid observations
vary over these test outcomes. We have z -standardized the scores within each test
and year combination, so that our outcome variables measure where in the dis-
tribution of scores the student places within his/her own cohort on a specific test.
The supplement show the distributions of the outcome variables (figure S1).

Common control variables       In all models, we include a set of common control
variable. We include the child's birth cohort as dummy variables (to absorb any
secular trend) and, when using the full sample, the child's sex. We also include
a few technical variables from the genotyping process, that are conventional to
include when using polygenic scores and necessary for correctly interpreting the
results for the scores. These variables are the ten first principal components of the
SNP genotype dataset and categorical variables indicating which batch of biolo-
gical samples that were genotyped (for more details on using genotype data cf. for
example Mills et al. 2020).

The Analysis-Ready Sample
Our sample is delineated in several ways. The final sample consists of participant
families from MoBa ­ children and their parents ­ who meet the following cri-
teria. First, both parents must have consented to participate in MoBa and must
all have been genotyped. The second criterion we use is that the child and both
parents must have a valid polygenic score, i.e. that their genotype information
is complete enough to produce a score. Third, the child must have a valid result
on at least one of the set of eight standardized test scores we study. The basic
demographic information and polygenic scores have no missing information af-
ter these criteria are applied. After all the criteria are applied, we are left with 26518
complete child-mother-father trios in the sample ready for analysis.

Descriptive statistics


Variable                    N       Mean Std.Dev.             P25     Median          P75
Math 5th                 24730       0.24        0.98       -0.50         0.30       0.97
                                                                               12


Variable                    N       Mean Std.Dev.        P25   Median         P75
Math 8th                12771   0.22         0.96    -0.51    0.24   0.97
Math 9th                 8693   0.22         0.94    -0.43    0.33   0.96
Reading 5th            24438    0.24         0.97   -0.46     0.37    1.02
Reading 8th             12745   0.21         0.97   -0.49     0.30   0.98
Reading 9th              8726   0.22         0.93    -0.36    0.39   0.99
English 5th            24536    0.08         0.98   -0.69     0.05   0.88
English 8th            12691    0.10         0.98    -0.72    0.17   0.91
Child's YoB            26518 2005.48         1.89 2004.00 2006.00 2007.00
Father's YoB           26514 1972.48         5.40 1969.00 1973.00 1976.00
Mother's YoB           26518 1974.93         4.71 1972.00 1975.00 1978.00
Child's PGS            26518    0.00         1.00   -0.67    0.00    0.67
Mother's PGS           26518    0.00         1.00   -0.67    -0.01   0.67
Father's PGS           26518    0.00         1.00   -0.68    -0.01   0.67
Father's education     26369   14.14         2.93   12.00   14.00   16.00
Mother's education     26419   14.79         2.64   12.00   16.00   16.00


Data availability and replication This work was approved by the Norwegian Na-
tional Center for Research Data, the Regional Committee on Medical Ethics, data
owners and Statistics Norway.Norwegian privacy regulations limit our ability to
share our register data, and the consent given by the MoBa participants does not
open for storage of data from MoBa on an individual level in repositories or jour-
nals. Individual researchers may apply to obtain permissions and subsequently
access the data. Researchers who want access to MoBa data sets for replication
should submit an application to datatilgang@fhi.no. Access to data sets requires
approval from The Regional Committee for Medical and Health Research Ethics
in Norway and an agreement with MoBa. In the supplementary materials, we
provide a description of the procedure used to clean the genomic data and calcu-
late the polygenic scores, the code used to link all the data sources together and
analyze the data.

Statistical approach
Our analysis consists of four steps. For each of these steps, we estimate a set of
linear regression models on our outcomes. This is the standard approach, and
seems reasonable given the distribution of our outcome measures. We have eight
outcomes, and use 7 different model specifications. We estimate models for both
                                                                                    13


sexes together, boys only, and for girls only. In total, we estimated 168 regression
models in order to obtain the results for this main analysis. In all these models, we
include the set of common control variables. As the amount of numeric material
is too large to efficiently display in tables, we present all our results here in the
form of graphs. Complete tables are available in the supplementary materials.


results
In the first step, we consider the role of child polygenic score as a confounder
of the relationship between parents' education and the child's test scores. In the
second, we ask to what extent children's test scores are affected by so-called "gen-
etic nurture" effects, i.e. effects of parents' genotypes, above and beyond the child's
genetic inheritance of DNA from parents to children. Third, we consider the ro-
le of gene-environment interactions, as suggested by the literature inspired by
the Scarr-Rowe hypothesis. The fourth step is to consider interactions between
parents' genotype and children's genotype, in effect synergies of parent-child si-
milarity in genetically anchored traits.

What is the role of genetic confounding in the association between parents' education
and children's test scores?
We want to establish the magnitude of genetic confounding in the association
between parents' education and children's test scores. To this end, we first esti-
mate a zero-order model of the association between parents' education and child
test scores (denoted "Parents' EA"), a model of the effect of child PGS alone on
test scores (denoted "Child PGS"), and then a third model (denoted "Child PGS
controlled"), where both parents' education and child polygenic score are inclu-
ded. By comparing results across these models, we can assess the importance of
genetic confounding. Figure 1 has eight panels, one for each of the eight standar-
dized tests outcomes. In each panel we plot regression coefficients and their 95%
confidence intervals from the three models: On the left the zero-order correlation
with parents' education on the left, in the middle the coefficient for the child's po-
lygenic score, and on the right coefficients from the third, combined model.
                                                                                   14




     The model labelled "Parents' education" shows the coefficients for parents'
education in a simple model of test scores where no other variables are inclu-
ded (i.e. a zero-order correlation). It shows, in correspondence with the extant
literature, that parents' educations have strong associations with child test sco-
res. The results are quite similar across grades and subjects, and the importance
of mothers and fathers also seem to be similar in magnitude. Separate figures
for analyses done separately for girls and boys are available in the supplementary
materials, but we note that there are no major substantively important differences
between boys and girls in the effects of own PGS and parents' education on their
test performance.
     Second, it is clear that the PGS has a strong association with test scores. The
estimated coefficient for the child's own PGS is on average 0.18, which means that
a one std.dev. increase in the PGS results in 0.24 std.dev. increase in the test score
­ and the range across subjects/grades is .14­.28. Considered independently, the
child's polygenic score is the strongest individual predictor of test performance.
But as there are two parents, the total parents' education effect is larger than the
effect of the child's polygenic score.
     As can be seen from the plot, there are relatively minor changes in the co-
efficients for parents' education once the child polygenic score for education is
controlled. A fairly small fraction of the zero-order effect of parents' education
on test scores is confounded by child genetics. The magnitude of the confoun-
                                                                                     15


ding is similar to what has been reported previously (see e.g. Liu 2018; Conley et
al. 2015). Most of the association with parents' education remain after taking the
genetic similarities between parents and the child into account.

Are there genetic nurture effects on test scores, and do they persist after controlling
for parents' education?
Our second step is to probe the existence of so-called "genetic nurture" effects
(Kong et al. 2018). These are effects of parents genotypes above and beyond the di-
rect transmission of DNA from parents to children at conception. In this step, we
first model both child's own polygenic score and parents' polygenic scores (mo-
del "Genetic nurture"), to assess the magnitude of any genetic nurture effects on
test scores. Subsequently, in the "Parents EA controlled" model, we add parents'
education measures to assess whether the genetic nurture effects are mediated by
parents' educational attainment and whether associations between parents' edu-
cations and test scores remain once the genetic profile of child, mother and father
all are adjusted for.




   We do find "genetic nurture" effects on children's educational achievement.
The coefficients for the mother's and father's polygenic scores are statistically sig-
                                                                                  16


nificant and of a measurable, but not large, magnitude. All coefficients are esti-
mated at below a tenth of a standard deviations, and these associations are thus
markedly smaller than the coefficient for child's polygenic score. A one standard
deviation increase in the a parent's polygenic score is associated with approxi-
mately a .06 standard deviation increase in test performance. Again, this pattern
is similar across test subjects and grades. Taken at face value, these associations
would mean that parents' with high polygenic scores for education shape their
children's rearing environments in ways that in turn contribute to their children's
improved learning and ultimately higher test score results.
     In the next model, labelled "Parents EA controlled", we add parents' actual-
ly realized education to the equation. Parents' education is of course a mediator
in the causal path from parents' genetics to children's achievement, and thus in
principle breaks the causal interpretation of the estimates of parents' PGS. The
"genetic nurture" associations between parents' polygenic scores and child test
scores are washed out once parents' educations are included. Strong associations
between parents' education and test scores remain, when polygenic scores for all
three family members are included.
     Kong et al. (2018) found that mothers' genetic nurture were more important
than fathers' genetic nurture. We examined the importance of mothers relative to
fathers, for boys and girls respectively, and found no robust tendency for a base-
line difference in nurturing effects between mothers and fathers nor any systema-
tic change over grades. The results are available in the supplementary materials
(figure S2).

Interactions: Does the effect of child genotype depend on parental education or geno-
type?
Our third step is to estimate the strength of any interactions between child geno-
type and parents' education. The expectation formed by the generalized Scarr-
Rowe hypothesis is that effects of a child's genetic dispositions should be stronger
in education-rich environments. To test the hypothesis, we interact parental actu-
al (phenotypic) educational attainment with the child's polygenic score. These in-
teraction effects between parents' educational attainments and child PGS would
be positive under the generalized Scarr-Rowe hypothesis.
                                                                                    17




     Figure 3 show the interaction coefficients (shown for models for both gen-
ders below), which are all hovering around zero with large confidence intervals.
Only one of the interaction terms are measurably different from zero, nor are the
coefficients of a magnitude that would entail meaningful support for the hypothe-
sis. Moreover, the coefficient is negative, the opposite of what is predicted by the
Scarr-Rowe hypothesis. Thus, interactions predicted by the Scarr-Rowe hypothe-
sis between parents' educational attainment and the child's polygenic score are
unimportant for children's test scores. The differences between main effects mo-
dels and the interaction model are also negligible (cf. supplementary materials).
     Our fourth and final step is to test for interactions between parents' genetics
and their child's genetics. Such interactions have been alluded to earlier (cf. Con-
ley et al. (2015)). If such interactions are found, this is evidence of synergy effects
between the genetically shaped traits and interests of parents and children. For
example, learning-oriented children would under this hypothesis learn more if
they also have learning-oriented parents, above and beyond their already similar
genetics.
                                                                                18




     We estimated models interacting the child PGS with the parents' PGSs. Re-
sults for these interaction terms are non-significant with confidence intervals
overlapping zero, as can be seen from Figure 4. There is no robust evidence of
cross-generation genotype-genotype interaction effects. Our results suggest that
being a child with education-friendly genetics of a parent with similar dispo-
sitions may not create any additional effect on the child's test scores.


discussion
Our analysis set out to answer four research questions on parents' education, gen-
etics and child educational achievement:
   1. What is the role of genetic confounding in the association between parents'
      education and children's test scores?
   2. Are there genetic nurture effects on test scores, and do they persist after
      controlling for parents' education?
   3. Does the effect of child genotype depend on parental education?
   4. Are there meaningful child-parent genotype synergies for children's test
      scores?
    Here, we discuss our finding and their implications one by one. First, the role
of genetic confounding in the association between parents' education and child-
                                                                                  19


ren's test scores is small, as only a fraction of the zero-order correlation could
be explained by the child's polygenic score for educational attainment. There are
"genetic nurture" effects on test scores, effects of parents' genetics above and
beyond the child's own genetics. These effects are in turn in their entirety channe-
led through parents' actually attained educations.
     How can we understand these results? If one pits the behavior genetic para-
digm (cf. e.g. Polderman et al. 2015; Turkheimer 2000) against the social stratifi-
cation literature (cf. e.g. Breen and Jonsson 2005), our analysis suggests a draw.
The genetic perspective is well supported, as the child's PGS is consistently the
strongest single predictor of test scores. The social background perspective, and
the idea of parents' (consciously or not) nurturing children to perform well in
school, is also supported by the limited role of genetic confounding and the large
remaining effect of parents' education. In fact, as there are two parents, the two
coefficients for mother's and father's education is in combination larger than the
coefficients for the child polygenic score. Comparing our results to sociogenomic
literature using twins to investigate the influence from genes and environments,
our results fit reasonably well. For education-related outcomes, family environ-
ments and additive genetics explain approximate equal parts of the variance (Bra-
nigan et al. 2013; Silventoinen et al. 2020).
     The associations between parents' educational attainment and children's test
scores that remain once all three polygenic scores are controlled, can be inter-
preted as a result of socioeconomic or sociocultural factors that are socially in-
herited. This is not to say that parents' genetic dispositions do not matter for test
scores. To unlock the advantages of having parents with relatively high polygenic
scores for education, the parents' should also have completed such educations.
As such, our findings indicate that parental educational attainment have inter-
generational effects on children's outcomes. The major remaining caveat to this
conclusion lies with the relatively low explanatory power of polygenic scores, as
the scores are based on common genetic variants and still pick up only parts of
the genetic variation.
     Much of the existing literature connecting genetics to educational outcomes is
based on data from the United States or other anglophone industrialized countries.
Our data comes from Norway, a small Northern European country characterized
by a social democratic political economy (Esping-Andersen 1999), relatively mar-
ginal differences in school and neighborhood quality (Hermansen et al. 2020)
and a strong support system for families. All in all, these macrosocial differences
could lead to a stronger genetic confounding of the parent-child correlation and
weaker parental education effects on outcomes. That is not what we find. Our re-
                                                                                   20


sults instead provide evidence for rather important effects of parents' education
on children's test scores, and little confounding by children's genotype. In fact, our
results correspond well with those reported in the studies that have examined this
question previously on educational attainment in the United States (Conley et al.
2015; Liu 2018).
     We also found that the effects of child genotype on test scores do not depend
on parents' educational achievement, providing no support for the Scarr-Rowe
hypothesis in these data. This stands in contrast to some, but not all, of the pre-
vious research from the United States (Turkheimer et al. 2003). Norway represents
a context where we would expect weak or no such interactions, as both the level of
socioeconomic inequalities and institutional differences between these countries
point to a less precarious existence for disadvantaged families in Norway.
     In sum, our results outlines a world that is simple, linear and independent:
Parents' own education affect children's educational performance. Although the
effect of the child's own genetically anchored dispositions is the strongest indivi-
dual predictor, parents' education effects are stronger when we consider the com-
bined effects of the mother and the father. Our findings thus support the idea that
even in a universal welfare state with relatively low levels of inequality there are
two systems of ascription, one genetic and one social, and these are largely unre-
lated. The welfare state may be a hindrance to processes where social advantage
and genetic advantage overlaps, and thus help keep the two systems of ascription
separate.
     The findings in the study may lead some to infer that scholars engaged in soci-
al stratification do not need to engage with genetics, as genetic and social ascrip-
tion seems to be fairly independent of each other. However, the child's polygenic
score is the strongest individual predictor of test scores, and any analysis leaving
out genetics misses a large part of the picture. This alone should spark interest
in genetics from scholars of individuals' educational careers and social mobili-
ty. The mechanisms linking the child's genetic dispositions towards education to
higher actual achievement may well allow a role for parents, for example if they
adapt their parenting to their children's talents and orientations. Similarly, other
siblings may also be involved if high-PGS children for example act as informal
teachers for their siblings. Of such mechanisms, we still know every little.
     Our study concerns a specific life course stage: early adolescence. The inter-
play of genetics and social background may well change over the life course, as
children increasing operate independently of their parents and eventually reach
adulthood. In early adolescence there is a lot of direct monitoring by parents, and
parents may try to assist their children with schoolwork and this may spill over
                                                                                  21


into the standardized test results. Once children age they will have to rely to a
larger degree on their own talents, and there will be less room for parents' active
assistance. It It is conceivable that the social background effects we observe may
"wear off " at higher ages. Future research should look into these issues by taking
advantage of the current abundance of genomic data sources.

Limitations of the study
Our study has multiple strengths, such as the large genotype trio sample and
high quality outcome measures, but it also have some limitations. Our main data
source, MoBa, has a response rate of 41%, and there is selection into the sample
on socioeconomic variables such as education (Magnus et al. 2006). Earlier in-
vestigations have found self-selection and underlined the possibility of resulting
bias (Biele et al. 2019), and we can see some evidence of it in our own data. Tab-
le 1 shows sample means, and the means of the outcome variables are somewhat
higher than zero. As these outcome variable are z -standardized over the complete
population of test takers, this indicates that the children who participate in MoBa
are performing better than the average child on the national standardized tests.
When interpreting our results, one should keep in mind that the external validity
may be limited to families that are above average in socioeconomic resources.
This is a particular challenge to our findings of no Scarr-Rowe interactions. The
original Scarr-Rowe hypothesis concerned the effects of deep poverty and depri-
vation on children's cognition. Our results may not support a strong judgment
on the original version of the hypothesis, but can at least offer a conservative test
of the extended Scarr-Rowe hypothesis and its relevance in functioning families.
     We use polygenic scores, and even though their explanatory power have in-
creased over the last fews and likely will continue to do so, it is still markedly
lower than what can be expected from pedigree-based models. The accuracy of
a polygenic score depends on the heritability of the trait, the size of the GWAS
discovery sample, the degree to which the trait is polygenic and whether the gen-
etic architecture of the trait varies across different environments. Education is a
highly polygenic trait. The EA3 GWAS was very large with 1.1. million genomes
included, but pooled genomes from societies that diverge quite significantly in
terms of their educational systems and political economies, which may affect the
set of alleles associated with educational attainment. The polygenic scores we use
should be consider incomplete control variables, as they only adjust for the com-
mon genetic variants associated with educational attainment, and it may well be
that genetic confounding increases when the accuracy of the scores increase.
                                                                                 22


Conclusions
Using one of the world's largest genotyped trio samples in combination with ad-
ministrative register data on children's standardized test results in multiple sub-
jects and school grades, this study considered the role of genetics in the parents'
education­child test score correlation, the role of genetically-anchored social back-
ground effects (or "genetic nurture"), the potential of Scarr-Rowe-type child genetics-
parents' education interactions as well as child genotype-parents' genotype inte-
ractions. The bulk of the results suggests that a child's genetics is the most impor-
tant predictor of how well he or she does on standardized tests. Parents' educa-
tion also has a strong association with test scores, even when both the child's and
the parents' genetics are accounted for. We identified no important interactions
between child education polygenic score on the one hand and parents' education
polygenic score actually attained education on the other hand.
    The main conclusion of our study is thus, limitations of the study aside, that
there are two independent sources of advantage in children's early educational
careers. One source is biological in the sense that it is rooted in the child's gen-
etic dispositions, and the other is social and rooted in environmental factors as-
sociated with parents' own actual educational attainments. These two systems of
ascription seem largely independent of each other. Social inequalities, poverty
and variation in school quality is less in Norway than in most other countries.
The Scandinavian welfare state provides a relatively level playing field for child-
ren from different socioeconomic backgrounds in the educational system and al-
leviates many negative consequences of low SES for parents. We would expect the
association between parents' educations and children's test scores to be smaller
in Norway, but the association remains even when accounting for genetic trans-
mission. Both genetic and social background matters for children's educational
performance in early adolescence, showing the continued relevance of the "social
background paradigm" for intergenerational transmission of educational outco-
mes.


references
                                                                                    23


references
Ayorech, Ziada, Eva Krapohl, Robert Plomin, and Sophie von Stumm. 2017. "Genetic In-
    fluence on Intergenerational Educational Attainment." Psychological Science 28(9):1302­
    10.
Baier, Tina, and Volker Lang. 2019. "The Social Stratification of Environmental and Gen-
    etic Influences on Education: New Evidence Using a Register-Based Twin Sample."
    Sociological Science 6:143­71.
Barban, Nicola, Rick Jansen, Ronald De Vlaming, Ahmad Vaez, Jornt J. Mandemakers,
    Felix C. Tropf, Xia Shen, James F. Wilson, Daniel I. Chasman, and Ilja M. Nolte. 2016.
    "Genome-Wide Analysis Identifies 12 Loci Influencing Human Reproductive Beha-
    vior." Nature Genetics 48(12):1462­72.
Barnes, J. C., John Paul Wright, Brian B. Boutwell, Joseph A. Schwartz, Eric J. Connolly,
    Joseph L. Nedelec, and Kevin M. Beaver. 2014. "Demonstrating the Validity of Twin
    Research in Criminology." Criminology 52(4):588­626.
Barrabés, Nuria, and Greta Kjølstad Østli. 2016. "Norsk Standard for Utdanningsgruppe-
    ring 2016. Revidert 2000 Dokumentasjon Oppdatert 2016."
Bates, Timothy C., Brion S. Maher, Sarah E. Medland, Kerrie McAloney, Margaret J.
    Wright, Narelle K. Hansell, Kenneth S. Kendler, Nicholas G. Martin, and Nathan A.
    Gillespie. 2018. "The Nature of Nurture: Using a Virtual-Parent Design to Test Pa-
    renting Effects on Children's Educational Attainment in Genotyped Families." Twin
    Research and Human Genetics 21(2):73­83.
Belsky, Daniel W., Terrie E. Moffitt, David L. Corcoran, Benjamin Domingue, HonaLee
    Harrington, Sean Hogan, Renate Houts, Sandhya Ramrakha, Karen Sugden, and Ben-
    jamin S. Williams. 2016. "The Genetics of Success: How Single-Nucleotide Polymorp-
    hisms Associated with Educational Attainment Relate to Life-Course Development."
    Psychological Science 27(7):957­72.
Bernardi, Fabrizio, and Ilze Plavgo. 2020. "Education as an Equalizer for Human Devel-
    opment?"
Biele, Guido, Kristin Gustavson, Nikolai Olavi Czajkowski, Roy Miodini Nilsen, Ted Reichborn-
    Kjennerud, Per Minor Magnus, Camilla Stoltenberg, and Heidi Aase. 2019. "Bias
    from Self Selection and Loss to Follow-up in Prospective Cohort Studies." European
    Journal of Epidemiology 34(10):927­38.
Blau, Peter M., and Otis D. Duncan. 1967. The American Occupational Structure. New
    York, NY: Wiley.
Boudon, Raymond. 1974. "Education, Opportunity, and Social Inequality: Changing Pro-
    spects in Western Society."
Branigan, Amelia R., Kenneth J. McCallum, and Jeremy Freese. 2013. "Variation in the
    Heritability of Educational Attainment: An International Meta-Analysis." Social For-
    ces 92(1):109­40. doi: 10.1093/sf/sot076.
                                                                                         24


Breen, Richard, and Jan O. Jonsson. 2005. "Inequality of Opportunity in Comparative
    Perspective: Recent Research on Educational Attainment and Social Mobility." An-
    nual Review of Sociology 31:223­43. doi: 10.1146/annurev.soc.31.041304.122232.
Burks, Barbara Stoddard. 1928. "Statistical Hazards in Nature-Nurture Investigations."
    Yearbook of the National Society for the Study of Education.
Cheesman, Rosa, Avina Hunjan, Jonathan RI Coleman, Yasmin Ahmadzadeh, Robert
    Plomin, Tom A. McAdams, Thalia C. Eley, and Gerome Breen. 2019. "Comparison
    of Adopted and Non-Adopted Individuals Reveals Gene-Environment Interplay for
    Education in the UK Biobank." BioRxiv 707695.
Choi, Shing Wan, Timothy Shin-Heng Mak, and Paul F. O'Reilly. 2020. "Tutorial: A Guide
    to Performing Polygenic Risk Score Analyses." Nature Protocols. doi: 10.1038/s41596-
    020-0353-1.
Conley, Dalton. 2016. "Socio-Genomic Research Using Genome-Wide Molecular Data."
    Annual Review of Sociology 42(1):275­99. doi: 10.1146/annurev-soc-081715-074316.
Conley, Dalton, Benjamin W. Domingue, David Cesarini, Christopher Dawes, Corne-
    lius A. Rietveld, and Jason D. Boardman. 2015. "Is the Effect of Parental Education
    on Offspring Biased or Moderated by Genotype?" Sociological Science 2:82­105. doi:
    10.15195/v2.a6.
Conley, Dalton, and Jason Fletcher. 2017. The Genome Factor: What the Social Genomics
    Revolution Reveals About Ourselves, Our History, and the Future. Princeton University
    Press.
Daw, Jonathan, Guang Guo, and Kathie Mullan Harris. 2015. "Nurture Net of Nature: Re-
    Evaluating the Role of Shared Environments in Academic Achievement and Verbal
    Intelligence." Social Science Research 52:422­39. doi: 10.1016/j.ssresearch.2015.02.011.
Duncan, Greg J., and Richard J. Murnane. 2014. Restoring Opportunity: The Crisis of
    Inequality and the Challenge for American Education. Harvard Education Press.
Eckland, Bruce K. 1967. "Genetics and Sociology: A Reconsideration." American Sociolo-
    gical Review 32(2):173­94. doi: 10.2307/2091810.
Engzell, Per, and Felix C. Tropf. 2018. "Heritability of Education Rises with Intergenera-
    tional Mobility." SocArXiv. October 7.
Esping-Andersen, Gøsta. 1999. Social Foundations of Postindustrial Economies. Oxford
    University Press.
Felson, Jacob. 2014. "What Can We Learn from Twin Studies? A Comprehensive Evalua-
    tion of the Equal Environments Assumption." Social Science Research 43:184­99.
Fergusson, David M., L. John Horwood, and Joseph M. Boden. 2008. "The Transmission
    of Social Inequality: Examination of the Linkages Between Family Socioeconomic
    Status in Childhood and Educational Achievement in Young Adulthood." Research
    in Social Stratification and Mobility 26(3):277­95. doi: 10.1016/j.rssm.2008.05.001.
Figlio, David N., Jeremy Freese, Krzysztof Karbownik, and Jeffrey Roth. 2017. "Socioeco-
    nomic Status and Genetic Influences on Cognitive Development." Proceedings of the
                                                                                    25


    National Academy of Sciences 114(51):13441. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1708491114.
Fletcher, Jason, Yuchang Wu, Zijie Zhao, and Qiongshi Lu. 2020. "The Production of
    Within-Family Inequality: Insights and Implications of Integrating Genetic Data."
    bioRxiv.
Freese, Jeremy. 2008. "Genetics and the Social Science Explanation of Individual Outco-
    mes." American Journal of Sociology 114(S1):S1­S35.
Freese, Jeremy. 2018. "The Arrival of Social Science Genomics." Contemporary Sociology
    47(5):524­36.
Hermansen, Are Skeie, Nicolai T. Borgen, and Arne Mastekaasa. 2020. "Long-Term Trends
    in Adult Socio-Economic Resemblance Between Former Schoolmates and Neigh-
    bouring Children." European Sociological Review 36(3):366­80.
Judd, Nicholas, Bruno Sauce, John Wiedenhoeft, Jeshua Tromp, Bader Chaarani, Alex-
    ander Schliep, Betteke van Noort, Jani Penttilä, Yvonne Grimmer, Corinna Insensee,
    Andreas Becker, Tobias Banaschewski, Arun L. W. Bokde, Erin Burke Quinlan, Syl-
    vane Desrivières, Herta Flor, Antoine Grigis, Penny Gowland, Andreas Heinz, Bernd
    Ittermann, Jean-Luc Martinot, Marie-Laure Paillère Martinot, Eric Artiges, Frauke
    Nees, Dimitri Papadopoulos Orfanos, Tomás Paus, Luise Poustka, Sarah Hohmann,
    Sabina Millenet, Juliane H. Fröhner, Michael N. Smolka, Henrik Walter, Robert Whe-
    lan, Gunter Schumann, Hugh Garavan, and Torkel Klingberg. 2020. "Cognitive and
    Brain Development Is Independently Influenced by Socioeconomic Status and Po-
    lygenic Scores for Educational Attainment." Proceedings of the National Academy of
    Sciences 117(22):12411­8. doi: 10.1073/pnas.2001228117.
Jæger, Mads Meier. 2009. "Equal Access but Unequal Outcomes: Cultural Capital and
    Educational Choice in a Meritocratic Society." Social Forces 87(4):1943­71.
Jæger, Mads Meier. 2011. "Does Cultural Capital Really Affect Academic Achievement?
    New Evidence from Combined Sibling and Panel Data." Sociology of Education 84(4):281­
    98.
Koellinger, Philipp D., and K. Paige Harden. 2018. "Using Nature to Understand Nurture."
    Science 359(6374):386­87.
Kong, Augustine, Gudmar Thorleifsson, Michael L. Frigge, Bjarni J. Vilhjalmsson, Alex-
    ander I. Young, Thorgeir E. Thorgeirsson, Stefania Benonisdottir, Asmundur Odds-
    son, Bjarni V. Halldorsson, Gisli Masson, Daniel F. Gudbjartsson, Agnar Helgason,
    Gyda Bjornsdottir, Unnur Thorsteinsdottir, and Kari Stefansson. 2018. "The Nature
    of Nurture: Effects of Parental Genotypes." Science 359(6374):424. doi: 10.1126/scien-
    ce.aan6877.
Lareau, Annette. 2011. Unequal Childhoods: Class, Race, and Family Life. 2nd ed. Berkeley,
    CA: University of California Press.
Lee, James J., Robbee Wedow, Aysu Okbay, Edward Kong, Omeed Maghzian, Meghan
    Zacher, M. Johannesson, PD Koellinger, P. Turley, and PM Visscher. 2018. "Gene
    Discovery and Polygenic Prediction from a 1.1-Million-Person GWAS of Educatio-
                                                                                       26


    nal Attainment." Nat Genet, in Press.
Liu, Hexuan. 2018. "Social and Genetic Pathways in Multigenerational Transmission of
    Educational Attainment." American Sociological Review 0003122418759651.
Lyngstad, Torkild Hovde, and Torbjørn Skardhamar. 2011. "Nordic Register Data and
    Their Untapped Potential for Criminological Knowledge." Crime & Justice-A Review
    of Research 40:613­45.
Magnus, Per, Charlotte Birke, Kristine Vejrup, Anita Haugan, Elin Alsaker, Anne Kjersti
    Daltveit, Marte Handal, Margaretha Haugen, Gudrun Høiseth, Gun Peggy Knudsen,
    and others. 2016. "Cohort Profile Update: The Norwegian Mother and Child Cohort
    Study (MoBa)." International Journal of Epidemiology 45(2):382­88.
Magnus, Per, Lorentz M. Irgens, Kjell Haug, Wenche Nystad, Rolv Skjærven, and Camilla
    Stoltenberg. 2006. "Cohort Profile: The Norwegian Mother and Child Cohort Study
    (MoBa)." International Journal of Epidemiology 35(5):1146­50.
Marks, Gary N. 2013. Education, Social Background and Cognitive Ability: The Decline of
    the Social. Routledge.
Mills, Melinda C., Nicola Barban, and Felix C. Tropf. 2020. An Introduction to Statistical
    Genetic Data Analysis. MIT Press.
Mills, Melinda C., and Felix c. Tropf. 2020. "Sociology, Genetics, and the Coming of Age
    of Sociogenomics." Annual Review of Sociology 46.
Morris, Tim T., Neil M. Davies, Gibran Hemani, and George Davey Smith. 2020. "Po-
    pulation Phenomena Inflate Genetic Associations of Complex Social Traits." Science
    Advances 6(16):eaay0328. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.aay0328.
Nielsen, François. 2006. "Achievement and Ascription in Educational Attainment: Gen-
    etic and Environmental Influences on Adolescent Schooling." Social Forces 85(1):193­
    216.
Okbay, Aysu, Jonathan P. Beauchamp, Mark Alan Fontana, James J. Lee, Tune H. Pers,
    Cornelius A. Rietveld, Patrick Turley, Guo-Bo Chen, Valur Emilsson, and S. Fleur W.
    Meddens. 2016. "Genome-Wide Association Study Identifies 74 Loci Associated with
    Educational Attainment." Nature 533(7604):539.
Pokropek, Artur, and Joanna Sikora. 2015. "Heritability, Family, School and Academic
    Achievement in Adolescence." Social Science Research 53:73­88.
Polderman, Tinca JC, Beben Benyamin, Christiaan A. De Leeuw, Patrick F. Sullivan, Ar-
    jen Van Bochoven, Peter M. Visscher, and Danielle Posthuma. 2015. "Meta-Analysis
    of the Heritability of Human Traits Based on Fifty Years of Twin Studies." Nature
    Genetics.
Rimfeld, Kaili, Eva Krapohl, Maciej Trzaskowski, Jonathan R. I. Coleman, Saskia Selzam,
    Philip S. Dale, Tonu Esko, Andres Metspalu, and Robert Plomin. 2018. "Genetic Influ-
    ence on Social Outcomes During and After the Soviet Era in Estonia." Nature Human
    Behaviour 2(4):269­75. doi: 10.1038/s41562-018-0332-5.
                                                                                         27


Roksa, Josipa, and Daniel Potter. 2011. "Parenting and Academic Achievement: Interge-
    nerational Transmission of Educational Advantage." Sociology of Education 84:299­
    321. doi: 10.1177/0038040711417013.
Røed, Knut, and Oddbjørn Raaum. 2003. "Administrative Registers­Unexplored Reser-
    voirs of Scientific Knowledge?" The Economic Journal 113(488):F258­F281.
Scarr-Salapatek, Sandra. 1971. "Race, Social Class, and IQ." Science 174(4016):1285­95. doi:
    10.1126/science.174.4016.1285.
Silventoinen, Karri, Aline Jelenkovic, Reijo Sund, Antti Latvala, Chika Honda, Fujio Inui,
    Rie Tomizawa, Mikio Watanabe, Norio Sakai, Esther Rebato, and others. 2020. "Gen-
    etic and Environmental Variation in Educational Attainment: An Individual-Based
    Analysis of 28 Twin Cohorts." Scientific Reports 10(1):1­11.
von Stumm, Sophie, Emily Smith-Woolley, Ziada Ayorech, Andrew McMillan, Kaili Rim-
    feld, Philip S. Dale, and Robert Plomin. 2020. "Predicting Educational Achievement
    from Genomic Measures and Socioeconomic Status." Developmental Science 23(3):e12925.
    doi: 10.1111/desc.12925.
Teachman, Jay D. 1987. "Family Background, Educational Resources, and Educational
    Attainment." American Sociological Review 548­57.
Turkheimer, Eric. 2000. "Three Laws of Behavior Genetics and What They Mean." Cur-
    rent Directions in Psychological Science 9(5):160­64.
Turkheimer, Eric, Andreana Haley, Mary Waldron, Brian D'Onofrio, and Irving I. Gottesman.
    2003. "Socioeconomic Status Modifies Heritability of IQ in Young Children." Psycho-
    logical Science 14(6):623­28.
Utdanningsdirektoratet. 2010. "Rammeverk for nasjonale prøver." Retrieved December 9,
    2020 (http://www.udir.no/Upload/Nasjonale_prover/2010/5/Rammeverk_NP_22122010.pdf?epslanguag%
    20e=no%20().
Van de Werfhorst, Herman G., and Saskia Hofstede. 2007. "Cultural Capital or Relative
    Risk Aversion? Two Mechanisms for Educational Inequality Compared 1." The British
    Journal of Sociology 58(3):391­415.
Wang, Biyao, Jessie R. Baldwin, Tabea Schoeler, Rosa Cheesman, Wikus Barkhuizen,
    Frank Dudbridge, David Bann, Tim T. Morris, and Jean-Baptiste Pingault. 2021. "Gen-
    etic Nurture Effects on Education: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis." bioRxiv
    2021.01.15.426782. doi: 10.1101/2021.01.15.426782.
Young, Alexander I., Stefania Benonisdottir, Molly Przeworski, and Augustine Kong. 2019.
    "Deconstructing the Sources of Genotype-Phenotype Associations in Humans." Scien-
    ce 365(6460):1396­1400.
de Zeeuw, Eveline L., Eco JC de Geus, and Dorret I. Boomsma. 2015. "Meta-Analysis
    of Twin Studies Highlights the Importance of Genetic Variation in Primary School
    Educational Achievement." Trends in Neuroscience and Education 4(3):69­76.
