                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            CONTRACTUAL RIGIDITY AND POLITICAL CONTESTABILITY:
                REVISITING PUBLIC CONTRACT RENEGOTIATIONS

                                        Jean Beuve
                                     Marian W. Moszoro
                                      Pablo T. Spiller

                                     Working Paper 28491
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28491


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   February 2021




We are thankful to Fritz Bachmair, Mikhail Freer, and Lorena Rivero del Paso for valuable
comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and should not be
attributed to the IMF, its Executive Board, its management, or the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Jean Beuve, Marian W. Moszoro, and Pablo T. Spiller. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Contractual Rigidity and Political Contestability: Revisiting Public Contract Renegotiations
Jean Beuve, Marian W. Moszoro, and Pablo T. Spiller
NBER Working Paper No. 28491
February 2021
JEL No. D23,D72,D73,D78,H57

                                          ABSTRACT

We present a model of public procurement in which both contractual flexibility and political
tolerance for contractual deviations determine renegotiations. In the model, contractual flexibility
allows for adaptation without formal renegotiation while political tolerance for deviations
decreases with political competition. We then compare renegotiation rates of procurement
contracts in which the procurer is either a public administration or a private corporation. We find
robust evidence consistent with the model predictions: public-to-private contracts are
renegotiated more often than comparable private-to-private contracts, and that this pattern is more
salient in politically contestable jurisdictions. The frequent renegotiation of public contracts
results from their inherent rigidity and provides a relational quality of adaptability to
contingencies in politically contestable environments.

Jean Beuve                                       Pablo T. Spiller
Centre d'Economie de la Sorbonne                 University of California, Berkeley
Bureau 226                                       Walter A. Haas School of Business
106-112 boulevard de l'Hôpital                   Faculty Bldg. 593
Paris 75013                                      Berkeley, CA 94720
France                                           and NBER
jean.beuve@univ-paris1.fr                        spiller@haas.berkeley.edu

Marian W. Moszoro
International Monetary Fund
1900 Pennsylvania Ave NW
Washington, DC 20431
United States
and George Mason University
and SGH Warsaw School of Economics
mmoszoro@imf.org
1    Introduction

Why are public contracts so often renegotiated? Guasch (2004) provides numerous examples of
renegotiations in public-private agreements. By studying more than 1,000 public-private long-
term contracts signed in Latin American countries between the mid-1980s and 2000, he found
that 78 percent of transportation contracts and 92 percent of water and sewage contracts were
renegotiated. Guasch's findings also show that renegotiations occur shortly after the award (on
average, after 2.2 years) and often, at first glance, favor the private party.
    Guasch (2004) suggests that renegotiations are a consequence of aggressive bidding. Be-
cause the government cannot credibly restrain from renegotiation and firms learn their type
vis-`
    a-vis competitors (i.e., cost structure, capabilities) after bidding, bid winning firms will be
prone to renegotiate loss-bearing contracts (Laffont and Tirole 1993). Decarolis and Palumbo
(2015) shows that design-and-build contracts--which are associated with less project specifica-
tion detailing during the tender--reduce time-to-completion renegotiations, but increase price
renegotiations. Coviello and Gagliarducci (2017) find that time-to-completion renegotiations
increase with the mayor's tenure in office, which increases the likelihood of collusion between
government officials and local bidders. Alternative explanations of frequent renegotiations point
to government-led renegotiations (Guasch, Laffont, and Straub 2007) and renegotiations with-
out hold-up that enable incumbent governments to circumvent budgetary rules before elections
(Engel, Fischer, and Galetovic 2019).
    Regardless of the framework mobilized to analyze public-private contracts, the high rate
of renegotiation always comes as bad news and have raised doubts about the viability of the
public-private partnership model in developing countries (Guasch, Laffont, and Straub 2008).
High rates of renegotiation, however, are not specific to developing countries. Other studies
have reported very high renegotiation rates in the United States (Engel, Fischer, and Galetovic
2011), the United Kingdom (NAO 2003), and France (Athias and Saussier 2007).
    We challenge the industrial organization view on public contract renegotiation. As argued
by Spiller (2009, 2010), public contracts are characterized by intrinsic differences stemming from
a substantial amount of supervision and control by political opponents and interest groups,
who hold a stake in challenging and disrupting a contractual relationship. Consequently, unlike
private contracting, a grasp on politics becomes paramount in understanding public contracting.



                                                 2
    Public contracts are awarded through a set of rule-based bureaucratic procedures. Rigid
bureaucratic proceduralization imposes ex post stringent enforcement, intolerance to adapta-
tion, and penalties for deviation. Moszoro and Spiller (2019) and Beuve, Moszoro, and Saussier
(2019) showed that public contracts tend to be more rigid when public agents face tighter po-
litical competition and fear opportunistic challenges to their contractual decisions. From the
public agent's perspective, contractual rigidity minimizes the risk of politically motivated chal-
lenges (Moszoro and Spiller 2012, 2014). From the contractor's perspective, contractual rigidity
minimizes the risk of governmental opportunism, including unfair administrative treatment and
creeping expropriation (Spiller 2013; Moszoro and Spiller 2014, 2016).
    We conjecture that tight political competition, by increasing rigidity, leads to more frequent
formal renegotiation of public contracts. When faced with unexpected circumstances, private-
to-private contractees tend to adapt through informal adaptation. Because relational (informal )
adaptations (Macaulay 1963) will normally lead to political (and potential judicial) challenges--
particularly in jurisdictions of the type just described (Spiller 2009, 2010; Moszoro and Spiller
2019)--renegotiations of public contracts will tend to take the form of formal amendments.
In other words, the political hazards--third-party and governmental opportunism--that induce
higher rigidity in public contracts may also be conducive to more frequent formal renegotiations.
The frequent renegotiation of public contracts, instead of being a sign of weakness (Guasch 2004),
provides a "relational quality" (Spiller 2008; Spiller 2013) and indicates that the contractees are
willing to adapt through time.
    Previous studies on contract renegotiations (Bajari, McMillan, and Tadelis 2009; Bajari,
Houghton, and Tadelis 2014; Crocker and Reynolds 1993; Hart and Moore 1988; Hart, Shleifer,
and Vishny 1997; Hart 2003; Saussier 2000) have stressed complete versus incomplete contract-
ing, where a complete contract precisely describes all possible states of the world and the ex-
pected outcomes and an incomplete contract vaguely describes the possible states of the world
and expected outcomes. In contrast, we focus on the rigidity versus flexibility dimension of
contracts--i.e., a flexible contract leaves room for possible deviation and ex-post adaptation,
whereas a rigid contract does not--under political scrutiny. As a result, contractual rigidity and
completeness (analogously, contractual flexibility and incompleteness) covary but do not equate
(e.g., a contract may foresee all states of the world and still leave the parties to flexibly agree
on the expected outcomes once the states of the world materialize).


                                                3
        In this paper, (a) we model the public agent's choice whether to informally adapt through
contractual flexibility or renegotiate in politically contestable jurisdictions and--accordingly--
(b) we revisit the empirical evidence on public contract renegotiations. Our study contributes to
the public contracting literature by advancing a novel set of hypotheses based on political hazards
specific to public procurers. The results are indicative that previous empirical studies pointing
to the inefficiencies of public contracts related to high renegotiation rates may have overlooked
part of the story. In fact, such inefficiencies may not be remediable (Williamson 1999), as the
frequent renegotiations observed in public contracts can be understood as a consequence of their
specific rigid nature instead of a manifestation of governmental opportunism or government
incapacity to avoid renegotiation when dealing with opportunistic private corporations.


2       Contract Flexibility and Political Tolerance

Let XC  R+ be the set of contractual terms at t0 (e.g., cost, quality, attributes, and delivery
time) and S  R+ be the set of possible states of the world upon contract delivery at t1 .
The reference point s
                    ¯ is the first-best contract in the absence of uncertainty. Without loss
of generality, let XC = [0, xC ] and S = [0, s], where xC and s are the measures of the sets.
Complete contracting--i.e., a contract with contingency clauses mapping all possible states of
the world--is not possible due to the contractees' boundary rationality, thus XC  S.
        Let us further define contractual flexibility XF = [0, xF ] = [0, xC ] as the tolerance deviation
from XC , where  > 1 is a constant denoting flexibility.1 Contract renegotiation is costly for the
public agent. As long as the realized state of the world si  S is contained within the vicinity
of the reference point of the contract, the status quo remains valid (i.e., contract continuation,
with eventual informal adaptations). Technical contract renegotiation ( = 0) happens when
the realized state of the world s is outside the contractual terms and tolerated deviations, i.e.:

                                        1    if s  XF (contract continuation)
                                 =                                                                                (1)
                                        0    if s / XF (contract renegotiation)

        Contractual flexibility accommodates contingencies not contained explicitly in the contract,
and allows to avoid costly renegotiation. Moreover, when renegotiations do not conclude satis-
factorily for both sides, the contract is terminated and tendered anew at a high cost. Contractual

    1
        E.g.,  = 1.2 means that there is 20 percent technical deviation tolerance before the contract is renegotiated.



                                                           4
flexibility, thus, preserves the contractual relationship as long as it is beneficial for the parties
(Macaulay 1963).
       Contractual flexibility, however, makes public contracts susceptible to (the whiff of) corrup-
tion. Neither the voters (i.e., the super-principal who gives the mandate to the public agent) nor
the political opponents have perfect information about the public agent's actions and motiva-
tions. The information asymmetry regarding the public agent's actions is conducive to probity
challenges from political opponents--sometimes in good faith, but often opportunistically. In
anticipation, the public agent will deliberately self-constrain her contractual flexibility and adopt
rigid procedures to reduce the information asymmetry between her perceived and actual actions
and to prove probity (Moszoro and Spiller 2019), even when it is not her intent to so behave.
       Let XP = [0, xP ] be the political tolerance for deviations from the contractual reference
point s
      ¯. Political tolerance is given by the cultural setup (including trust in institutions), the
rule of law, and foremost political contestability: high political competition correlates with low
political tolerance, as political opponents will take advantage to overturn the incumbent public
agent. If the realized state of the world s is outside the political tolerance XP , the incumbent
public agent is replaced ( = 0), i.e.:

                                   1    if s  XP (public agent continuation)
                            =                                                                    (2)
                                   0    if s / XP (public agent turnover)

with   : i.e., if the public agent's turnover is due to a politically-motivated challenge to the
contract, that contract will likely be renegotiated by the challenger once she is in office.
       Uncertainty over the states of the world S may result in technically-triggered renegotia-
tions ( = 0) if contractual flexibility XF is low. Likewise, political opportunism may lead to
politically-triggered renegotiations ( = 0) if political tolerance XP is low, e.g., in politically
contestable jurisdictions where political scrutiny and competition is salient.
       We advance the following propositions:2

Proposition 1 The probability of contract continuation rises in the set of contractual terms:
i.e.,  E(Pr[ = 1])/xC > 0.

Proposition 2 The probability of contract continuation rises in contractual flexibility: i.e.,
 E(Pr[ = 1])/xF > 0.

   2
       See Appendix A for the proofs.


                                                    5
Proposition 3 The probability of a politician's continuation in office rises in contractual
rigidity: i.e.,  E(Pr[ = 1])/xC < 0.

Proposition 4 The probability of a politician's continuation in office rises in political toler-
ance: i.e.,  E(Pr[ = 1])/xP > 0.

     A manager benefits from office tenure and contract continuation. Calling O the benefits from
office tenure and Q the benefits from contract performance,3 and assuming that the manager's
utility is linear in both terms--i.e., without loss of generality, she cares equally about both
terms--she will maximize her expected utility U by strategically choosing contractual terms
XC . Formally:
                             max E(U ) = u [E()O + E() E( )Q] - C (xC )                                       (3)
                               xC

where C is the contracting cost which rises in the set of contractual terms (i.e., C/xC > 0).
     Figure 1 depicts a graphical representation of the contractual space R2
                                                                           + . The left graph

shows a contractual environment with large political tolerance (e.g., private-to-private contract-
ing). Realized state of the world s1,2,3 at t1 are within XC , thus contractually safe; s4 is outside
the contractual space but within the contractual tolerance XF . If state s5 is realized, albeit
politically tolerable, the contract will be subject to renegotiation.
     The right graph shows a contractual environment with political scrutiny (e.g., public-to-
private contracts). As political tolerance XP shrinks, managers will prefer more rigid contracts,
decreasing the contractual XC and flexibility XF spaces, and increasing the states of the world
subject to renegotiation. If the realized state of the world at t1 is s1  XP , the contract is
technically and politically safe (,  = 1), and will continue. If s2 is realized, the contract is
within the technical contractual terms ( = 1), but politically contestable ( = 0), and the
incumbent policymaker may be under political pressure to renegotiate the contract. If s3 is
realized, the contract is still technically viable (the contractor is willing to adapt,  = 1), but
politically contestable ( = 0): the incumbent policymaker will be under political pressure to
renegotiate the contract. If s4 or s5 is realized, the contract is technically and politically unviable
(,  = 0) and will be renegotiated.

    3
      In management parlance, O are the extrinsic incentives from office tenure, including perquisites and cor-
ruption rents (Kwon 2014; Liu and Tang 2011; Wright 2007) and Q are the intrinsic incentives from contract
continuation, e.g., stable and reliable service for the constituencies (Dur and Zoutenbier 2015; Friebel, Kosfeld,
and Thielmann 2019).


                                                        6
     Contractual flexibility  and political tolerance XP are exogenous to the contractual parties
(i.e., long-term path dependent). The parties negotiate over XC . The set of contractual terms
increases as XC expands, thus lowering the likelihood of technical renegotiation as more states
of the world are contemplated in the contract. On the other hand, contract rigidity increases as
XC shrinks towards the reference point, lowering the likelihood of political challenges.
Figure 1: This figure presents a two-dimensional contractual space R2       + . S is the set of all possible states
of the world upon contract delivery at t1 and s1,2,... are examples of realizations of states of the world at
t1 . XC (grey and red areas) is the set of contractual terms at t0 (e.g., cost, quality, attributes, and delivery
time). XF (green area) is the contractual flexibility, i.e., the tolerance deviation from XC . XP (red area) is
the political tolerance for deviations from the contractual reference point. XF and XP are exogenous, and
the parties negotiate over XC . The set of contractual terms increases as XC expands (green solid arrow).
Contract rigidity increases as XC shrinks towards the reference point (red dotted arrow). The left graph
shows a contractual environment with large political tolerance (e.g., private-to-private contracting). The
right graph shows a contractual environment with political scrutiny (e.g., public-to-private contracts).




       S                                                         S
                    XP
                                           s4                                                                s4
              XF                                                              XF
      Flexibility   XC                                          Flexibility
                                                                                   XC
                                     s1                                       Rigidity    XP       s1
                                 s
                                 ¯                                                             s
                                                                                               ¯
                         Reference point                                             Reference point
        s5                                                        s5
                          s2                                                             s2
                                      s3                                                                s3




     This simple framework yields two testable hypotheses. Political scrutiny is irrelevant for
most private-to-private contracts (i.e., in private-to-private setups XP is large or nonapplicable).
Conversely, public agents will trade the set of contractual terms for contractual rigidity (i.e.,
lower XC ) to keep political challenges at bay. From Propositions 2 and 3, therefore:

Hypothesis 1 For comparable goods, public-to-private contracts are formally renegotiated more
often than private-to-private contracts.

     Political contestability increases third-party opportunistic challenges (Moszoro and Spiller
2019), thus decreases political tolerance XP . Managers respond to lower political tolerance with

                                                        7
higher rigidity. Consequently, from Propositions 1 and 4:

Hypothesis 2 Political contestability leads to higher renegotiation rates in public-to-private
contracts, while it has no impact on private-to-private contracts.


3     Data

We focus on the car park sector in France which is particularly suitable for our purposes. First,
parking management is a standard service with verifiable quality. Second, France displays a
homogenized legal and administrative regime at the subnational level. Thus, car park contracts
in France are comparable across providers and contracting administrations.

3.1    Sector Characteristics

Throughout the world, cities are normally tasked with providing on-street and off-street parking
spaces. The positive externalities and social benefits (e.g., intermodality and urban development)
derived from high-quality construction and efficient parking management as well as the negative
externalities resulting from increased traffic volumes justify their remittance to local authorities.
While the public authorities are legally obliged to retain ownership of parking spaces, they can
outsource the provision of infrastructure and services through public-private arrangements.
      In France, outsourcing the construction and management of parking lots to private operators
is widespread. According to the French Ministry of Sustainable Development, in 2019 about
72 percent of parking lots were organized through outsourced management and 28 percent were
provided in-house through public provision.
      The French car park sector is characterized by a growing level of competitive pressure
between French firms (local operators as well as larger companies) and, more recently, between
national and foreign operators (ANFA 2019).4 Additionally, the competitive pressure also comes
from the threat of municipalization when contracts end (i.e., contracting parties are not locked
in through specific investments at the contract renewal). The absence of bilateral dependency
between municipalities and operators is possible because parking management is a standard
product. According to a survey of public managers' perceptions, parking lots appear among the

   4
     Indigo (formerly Vinci Park), Q-Park, Epolia, Efia, Interparking, Parking de France, UrbisPark, AutoCit´
                                                                                                            e,
and SAGS are the most frequent bidders in France.




                                                      8
least asset-specific activities in the public management domain (Brown and Potoski 2003).5
       On the other hand, recent studies on public procurement highlight that parking services are
associated with a medium level of resident sensitivity and the price of public parking is one of the
front-page topics before local elections in France (Beuve and Le Squeren 2016). Consequently,
the parking sector is susceptible to political interference. For example, in June 2015 the daily
regional press reported that the city council majority in Saint-Etienne, France, raised prices
by renegotiating underground parking contracts entrusted to private partners to comply with
a new legislative framework--the "Hamon Law" on consumption adopted in March 18, 2014--
which required pricing for every 15 minutes to allow car drivers to pay amounts closer to their
actual consumption. The new price schedule was then submitted to the vote of the city council.
The motion was rejected by the opposition, which publicly blamed the city council majority
for conducting negotiations as "surrogates." A political opponent of the mayor even declared
that the contract was "either a gift or poorly negotiated." The city counsel majority replied by
blaming the former mayor about the absence of contract enforcement in the past.6
       In sum, the car park sector is a suitable arena to investigate the impact of the political
dimension of public contracts.

3.2     Contract Characteristics

Three main contractual arrangements encompass the parking sector in France: concession con-
tracts, operating contracts, and provision-of-services contracts.
       Concession Contracts are used for greenfield (new) and brownfield (renovated) parking de-
velopments. These are long-term contracts (30 years on average in our dataset), which provide
sufficient time for private operators to invest and pay off debt. In such contracts, the operator
bears the demand risk and collects user fees. In our dataset as well as in real life, concession
contracts are utilized by municipalities and not by private procurers. We have only two con-
cession contracts among the private contracts in our data, and hence we excluded concession
contracts from our sample to avoid overidentification.

   5
      For reference, the asset specificity associated with parking lots was 2.36/5, whereas the asset specificity
associated with urban transport and water sectors was equal to 3.35 and 3.94, respectively (Brown and Potoski
2003). Levin and Tadelis (2010) and Hefetz and Warner (2012) replicate similar levels of asset specificity for the
US using the same type of survey.
    6
      See: Xavier Alix, "Parkings st´  ephanois: une ren´ egociation plus ou moins bonne?", L'Essor, June 10,
2015. Available at: https://www.lessor42.fr/parkings-une-renegociation-plus-ou-moins-bonne-10303.html, ac-
cessed June 26, 2018.


                                                        9
      Operating Contracts are used when parking infrastructure is already built but requires a
significant level of investment to renovate and maintain. These contracts are shorter in time than
concession contracts (18.2 years on average in our dataset). The operator bears the demand risk
and collects user fees. Operating contracts are also subject to the political, economic, social,
and technological changes that may occur during execution of the contract.
      Provision-of-Services Contracts manage existing on-street parking lots, which require no
investments. These contracts are the shortest in time (3.2 years on average in our dataset).

3.3    Contractual and Political Data

The French car park sector is not regulated by a national authority and data is not centralized.
To generate the dataset used in this study, we gathered all contracts signed by the leading
company in the French car parking sector (42 percent of market share among private opera-
tors and 31 percent of total market share). The entire dataset is composed of almost 1,000
contracts signed between 1963 and 2008. This leading company has been in the market for a
long time which helps our identification of public versus private contractees and partials out
the confounding effects of contractual dynamics of newer companies with different corporate
governance.
      As mentioned earlier, we excluded concession contracts: focusing on operating and provision-
of-services contracts allows for a fairer comparison among different levels of contract rigidity.
Municipal election data are available since 1983, which further narrowed our sample. Finally, we
also excluded observations from very small cities for which the elections data are not available
and metropolitan areas--i.e., Paris, Lyon, and Marseille--where the electoral system is orga-
nized in administrative districts (i.e., arrondissements ), thus precluding the univocal mapping
of contractual and electoral data.
      We ended with 279 contractual arrangements signed by the leading parking service provider
across 58 departments (out of 96) in metropolitan France. The procurers include 132 public
administrations and 24 private companies (clinics, shopping malls, airports).
      The political data we gathered concern the outcomes of all municipal elections from 1983
through 2008.7 Elections are organized (in principle) every six years to elect the mayor and

    7
      Municipal elections in France were held in 1983, 1989, 1995, 2001, and 2008. The data were obtained
through the Center for Socio-Political Data (CDSP).



                                                   10
the members of the city council by a majority vote. If a majority vote is not achieved in the
first round, a second round takes place. Each mayoral candidate presents a list of potential
deputies (as many deputies as the number of seats on the city council). The list that obtains
the most votes obtains 50 percent of the seats on the city council. The remaining seats are
distributed among all lists of potential deputies (including the majority list) which received at
least 5 percent of the votes cast.
      The city council, chaired by the mayor, collectively has the legislative authority to manage
the affairs of the municipality through its decisions. Her scope of authority spans from approv-
ing budgets, determining local tax rates, creating or canceling communal jobs, acquiring and
disposing of communal property, approving loans, grants, and subsidies, to setting tariffs for
communal services and on-street parking.


4     Empirical Strategy

Our sample presents the ideal characteristics to test our hypotheses, as there is only one con-
tractor and parking represents a standard product. Therefore, a large part of the heterogeneity
in our dataset comes from the procurer's organizational type (public versus private), as well as
the cross-sectional and time-varying political contestability in the public administrations.

4.1    Dependent Variables

Renegotiation refers both to the process and outcome that changes the original agreed contrac-
tual terms. Long-term contracts generally define ex ante the triggers, scope, and manner in
which eventual changes to agreed terms take place. In this study, we do not report the renegoti-
ation terms embedded in original contracts, nor the talks the contractees held after the contract
was signed.
      Instead, we focus on the ex post outcomes of renegotiations formalized in written amend-
ments to the original contracts. Specifically, we define the frequency of formal renegotiations as
the sum of amendments of a particular contract divided by its length in years (if expired) or the
time elapsed since closing the contract (if still active) in years, which yields average number of
formal renegotiations per year per contract.




                                                11
4.2    Public versus Private Contracts

Moszoro, Spiller, and Stolorz (2016) showed that political contestability leads to rigidity and
also to more renegotiations using contracts filled through the SEC's Edgar system. They studied
contracts in regulated versus non-regulated industries, both in the private-sector domain, thus
blurring their measure of "publicness." In the dataset used in this paper, the public-sector
versus private-sector domains are clearly identified.
      To ensure that we correctly classified public versus private contracts, we hand-coded a
dummy variable public that equals one when the contract is signed between a private contractor
and a public administration, and zero when the contract is signed between a private contractor
and a private procurer. Consequently, a private contract does not involve elected officials, and
public accountability is delimited by the standard regulations of the industry.
      Public-private and private-private contracts may differ along many unobserved dimensions,
including: the nature of services, location, type and history of clients, pricing schemes, subsidies,
etc. Our methodology addresses these concerns. First, comparability is validated by the fact
that parking agreements correspond to a standard product (cf. section 3.1). It is similar to
manage a car park for a public hospital and a private clinic, or to manage private and public
car parks located near airports. Moreover, parking lots located close to shopping centers are
alternately managed through public and private contracts. Second, our sample is relatively well
distributed geographically, covering half of the French departments (see Figure 2). Lastly, given
the competitiveness of the industry the assignment of the procurer's type--public or private--is
random: i.e., from the contractor's perspective the arrival of contracts from public or private
procurers is independent from the contractor.

4.3    Contract Rigidity

To assess the rigidity levels of our contracts we follow Moszoro, Spiller, and Stolorz (2016) and
construct "dictionaries" by which we machine-read rigidity categories: arbitration, certification,
evaluation, litigation, penalties, termination, and contingencies.
      The rigidity categories capture relevant contractual clauses intended to signal probity and
lower the likelihood of challenges by third parties. Table 1 presents the list of search terms




                                                 12
Figure 2: This figure presents the number of public and private contracts by department in our sample.
The left graph plots pie charts for all France. The right graph zooms in ^ Ile-de-France, the most populous
French region located in the North-center and often called r´  egion parisienne ("Paris region") because of
its proximity to the city of Paris. The red color in the pie charts correspond to public contracts, the blue
color corresponds to private contracts, and the size of the pie corresponds to the number of contracts by
department in our sample.




   Public contracts
   Private contracts                                           Public contracts
          39                                                   Private contracts
          30
                                                                      39
          20
                                                                      30
          10
                                                                      20
                                                                      10




clustered into seven rigidity categories8 and their total count.
        These terms univocally relate to their corresponding categories. Arbitration clauses submit
plausible disputes to an arbitrator instead of a court.9 Certification clauses regulate the contrac-
tor regarding certification requirements. Evaluation clauses introduce duties regarding delivery.
Litigation clauses appear as triggers to a lawsuit. Penalty clauses describe the damages and
sanctions for contract breaching. Termination clauses signal ways to resolve intractable con-
tract disruption. Finally, contingency clauses make provisions for future possible, but uncertain
events and circumstances. We created as many variables as rigidity dimensions.
        Then, we used the normalized frequencies (i.e., z -values) of the total count of search terms
in each category to measure the degree of difference between contracts. For example, we trans-

    8
       We machine-read "stemmed" words, i.e., plurals (e.g., penalties) and variations (e.g., penalized) are also
included.
    9
       Contracts submitting to arbitration have more details because there will be fewer deposition opportunities.
Public contracts may have more arbitration clauses to minimize the risks of (unfavorable) court decisions. Public
managers may also prefer arbitration because it is faster and more confidential than litigation, so they are less
exposed to third parties.
   10
      See Schwartz and Watson (2012) for an explanation of the appropriateness of "whereas" as an arbitration
keyword.




                                                       13
            Table 1: This table presents the search terms grouped into rigidity categories.

  Arbitration        appeal, arbitration, conciliation, guarantee, intervention, mediation, set-   10,241
                     tlement, warranty, whereas10
  Certification      certification, permit, regulation                                              3,263
  Evaluation         accountability, control, covenant, obligation, quality, specification,         8,090
                     scrutiny
  Litigation         court, dispute, indictment, jury, lawsuit, litigation, pleading, prosecu-      2,479
                     tion, trial
  Penalties          damage, fine, indemnification, penalty, sanction                               5,431
  Termination        breach, cancel, dissolution, separation, termination, unilateral                580
  Contingencies      contingent, if, provided that, providing that, subject to, whenever,           4,488
                     whether
  Total                                                                                            34,572


formed the total word count of search terms in the Arbitration category by calculating:

                                                    Arbitration - µ
                                  zArbitration =                                                       (4)
                                                           

where µ is the mean and  is the standard deviation of the count of Arbitration search terms
across all contracts. This gives us a global rigidity measure, zRigidity :

           zRigidity = zArbitration + zCertif ication + zEvaluation + zLitigation
                                                                                                       (5)
                                       +zP enalties + zT ermination + zContingencies

4.4    Political Contestability

In their seminal contributions about the effect of political competition on policy in US states,
Besley and Case (2003) and Besley, Persson, and Sturm (2010) measure the distance fraction of
seats held by one party to 0.5. This measure fits well in bipartisan political setups. In France,
political fragmentation is usually higher: even if two parties can be legitimately defined as dom-
                                                                                  epublicains ),11
inant (i.e., the left-wing party Parti Socialiste and the right-wing parties Les R´
other political forces--extremist, centrist, and green parties--play an important role and it is
common to have city mayors who belong to one of these not-dominant parties. Consequently,
we adopt different measures of political competition to capture party fragmentation.

  11
     The name of the actual party Les R´
                                       epublicains had changed many times during the period under study:
Rassemblement Pour la R´
                       epublique, Union Pour la Majorit´
                                                       e Pr´
                                                           esidentielle, Les R´
                                                                              epublicains.




                                                   14
      Following Laakso and Taagepera (1979), Ferraz and Finan (2011), and Berliner and Erlich
(2015), we base our measure on the Herfindhal-Hirschman Index (HHI ) and effective number of
parties. The Number of Effective Parties (N EP ) is defined as the inverse of the sum of squared
vote shares for each party (HHI ):
                                                       n
                                         HHI m,t =           Pi,m,t 2                         (6)
                                                      i=0

                                                       1
                                       N EP m,t =                                             (7)
                                                     HHI m,t
where Pi,m,t is the vote share of each party i in municipality m at time t during the first round
of municipal elections preceding the date of signature. N EP lower than two corresponds to a
single-party domination, while increasing values beyond that reflect the extent to which effective
competition is between two or more than two parties. N EP is an intuitive measure of political
concentration and displays a normal distribution, whereas HHI is right-skewed. According to
our Hypothesis 1, we expect politically competitive municipalities to utilize more rigid contracts
and renegotiate them at a higher rate.
      The N EP index does not take into account that the party with the highest vote share in the
first round may not win of the election in the second round. Moreover, political contestability
could be higher in the case of a dominant party but multiple political contenders, facilitating
scrutiny and hampering collusion. To address this issue, we define a second variable to capture
the opposition's strength. We exclude the winning party W Pm,t and look at the concentration
of all non-winning parties N W Pj,m,t , where j stands for all the non-winning parties during the
first round of elections. Analogously to N EP , the variable Number of Residual Effective Parties
(N REP ) is defined as the inverse of Residual HHI m,t in municipality m at time t and allows
to measure the strength of political opposition:
                                                       n
                                                             N W Pj,m,t 2
                                                      j =0
                               Residual HHI m,t =                                             (8)
                                                      (1 - W Pm,t )2
                                                   1
                              N REP m,t =                                                     (9)
                                            Residual HHI m,t

4.5    Control Variables

We include a set of control variables that can affect contractual rigidity. First, we take into
account two different contract types described in section 3.2: Operatingi,t , and Provision of -

                                                15
Servicesi,t . In the estimations, provision-of-services contracts are compared to operating con-
tracts through a dummy variable. Because these contractual arrangements correspond to differ-
ent levels of investment and complexity, we should observe that provision-of-services less rigid
than operating contracts .
       Second, contractual requirements can also vary among the same contract types. We take
into account the number of parking places (Placesi,t ) and the type of service (On-streeti,t ,
Undergroundi,t , or Both Servicesi,t ) managed by the contract. The type of service is orthog-
onal to the contract types--provision-of-services and operating contracts--thus these variables
add to the strength of our analysis.
       Third, we control for the possible influence of a corrupted environment on public contracts.
The sizable financial flows involved make public procurement particularly susceptible to fraud
and corruption. Our variable Corruption--obtained from Transparency International France--
measures the number of cases of corruption implicating the mayor or a member of the municipal
council in the three years preceding the date the contract was signed. This measure is conditional
on corruption cases being detected and prosecuted, which does not necessarily reflect endemic
corruption.
       Fourth, we control for the city's size (measured by the natural logarithm of the number of
inhabitants, Inhabitantsi,t ) and the political leaning of the city's mayor (Left Wingi,t or Right -
Wingi,t ) where the parking lot was located.
       Fifth, we introduce several variables to control for path dependency arising from cumulative
knowledge or procedural inertia. Renewedi,t is a dummy equal to zero for original contracts and
1 for renewed (follow-up) contracts. Experiencei,t represents the relationship length between the
contractees in years (i.e., the difference between the dates that the contract was signed and their
first bilateral contract). Finally, Past Contractsi,t captures the number of all common contracts
up to the observation date.
       Sixth, since the estimation results may be driven by unobserved characteristics of the sector,
which may had evolved over such a long period (24 years), we control for potential biases by
introducing year fixed effects corresponding to the year in which the contract was signed.12

  12
      Contracts tend to become more rigid over time, which may be indicative of a learning process and "red
tape" inertia by public administrations, where subsequent arrangements replicate the contractual clauses of pre-
vious contracts and add new ones. In unreported regressions, we use a time trend to see whether this learning
process (i.e., cumulative rigidity ) from public administrations could affect our estimates. The results remained



                                                       16
     Finally, we cluster our estimations at departmental level (58 jurisdictions). Descriptive
statistics of the variables used in the empirical tests are provided in Table 2.


5     Identification

Moszoro and Spiller (2019) argue that the specific nature of public contracts lead them to a higher
level of rigidity than private contracts. Due to third-party opportunism that pushes for rigid
contracts at their initial stage, the same political hazards should also make public contracts be
more formally renegotiated: since relational contracting is not an option in for public contracts
in highly contested political environments, each renegotiation should be traduced into a formal
amendment. As a consequence, we should observe two trends: on the one hand, public contracts
are more renegotiated than private contracts; on the other hand, public contracts are more
renegotiated in environments of political contestability.
     At first glance, figure 3 confirms that the frequency of renegotiations is higher for public
contracts than for private contracts.
Figure 3: This figure presents the frequency of renegotiations defined as the number of formal amend-
ments to a contract divided by the time elapsed since its signing. Public are contracts signed between
a municipality and a contractor; private are contracts signed between a private-sector procurer and a
contractor.

                           0.25



                            0.2


                           0.15


                            0.1



                           0.05



                             0
                                  Public (247 contracts)        Private (46 contracts)



     To test Hypothesis 1, we estimate a linear OLS model:

                   F requency of renegotiationsi,t =  + 1 P ublici,t + Yi,t +            i,t     (10)

where Frequency of renegotiations i,t is the number of amendments divided by the duration of


qualitatively the same.


                                                           17
the contract i, P ublici,t is the dummy variable indicating whether contract i signed at date t is
a public contract, and Y is a vector of control variables and        i,t   is the error term.
    Next, we test Hypothesis 2 using a 2SLS system of equations:

       F requency of renegotiationsi,t = 0 + 1 Contractual Rigidityi,t + j Yi,t + i,t
                                                                                                  (11)
       Contractual rigidityi,t = 2 + 3 P ublici,t × P olitical Contestabilityi,t + k Yi,t + i,t

where Contractual rigidityit --i.e., rigidity level of contract i at date of contract signing t--is
instrumented using measures of political contestability described in section 4.4.


6    Results

To test Hypothesis 1 on whether public contracts are renegotiated more often than private
contracts, we regress the frequency of contract renegotiations on a dummy variable equal to 1
for public contracts and zero for private contracts. Table 3 presents the results of OLS regressions
estimating equation (10). On average, public-to-private contracts are renegotiated 7­13 percent
more often than private-to-private contracts.
    The results are economically and statistically significant and robust to the inclusion of
covariates and controls (see models 2­3). Unsurprisingly, renewed (follow-up) contracts are
renegotiated less often than original contracts since renewed contracts may have already been
renegotiated at renewal time. Interestingly, contracts for larger parking lots measured by number
of places are renegotiated less frequently than contracts for smaller parking lots (see model 2);
this relationship, however, vanishes when adding further controls (see model 3).
    To test Hypothesis 2 on whether the frequency of public contract renegotiations rises with
political contestability through contractual rigidity, we instrument contractual rigidity with
measures of public scrutiny and political competition. Beuve, Moszoro, and Saussier (2019)
showed that political contestability causes public (but not private) contractual rigidity. Thus,
political contestability is a suitable instrument for contractual rigidity, since contractual rigidity
cannot cause a contract to become public or increase the number of parties in an electoral race
(i.e., the exclusion restriction holds).
    Table 4 presents the results of 2SLS estimations of equation (11). The first stage esti-
mates contractual rigidity with a dummy variable equal to 1 for contracts in the public domain
(model 1), the number of equal parties in a municipal election race defined as the inverse of
the sum of squared vote shares for each party (model 2), and the number of equal opposition


                                                    18
parties in a municipal election race defined as the inverse of the sum of squared vote shares
for each opposition party, i.e., without the winning party vote share (model 3). The first-stage
estimations show that political contestability is correlated with contractual rigidity for public
contracts.
    Further, second-stage regressions show that the frequency of renegotiations increase with
contractual rigidity. Our contractual rigidity measure is the sum of seven z -scores. Thus, the
point estimates show that an increase in one standard deviation in each category of contractual
rigidity increases contract renegotiation by 7.7­10.5 percent, a substantial increase from an un-
conditional average of 22 percent. In sum, public contracts are renegotiated more often because
their level of rigidity is much higher. The reason why few private contracts get renegotiated is
because their average rigidity is low (as compared to public contracts), and only those contracts
which are rigid get renegotiated.


7    Discussion and Conclusions

We advance a theoretical framework for a novel set of hypotheses regarding the high rate of public
contract renegotiation based on third-party political hazards. We find evidence that public
contracts are renegotiated 7­13 percent more frequently than comparable private contracts due
to their higher procedural rigidity, which is a way by which public agents minimize the risks of
opportunistic challenges from political competitors.
    The model also captures relevant features beyond the scope of our data for further research:
(a) Technology shocks and severe economic crises move the contractual reference point, thus will
    likely induce renegotiations. During the time span of our sample, the car park sector was not
    subject to major supply- or demand-side shocks. The advancement of electro-mobility may
    trigger renegotiations of car park contracts (e.g., to include electric chargers). Likewise, ex-
    tended lockdown periods during the COVID-19 pandemic--when car parks remained largely
    idle--can foster price and land use renegotiations.
(b) Corruption implicates a certain degree of collusion among the political establishment and
    higher tolerance among political opponents, consequently lower contractual rigidity. On the
    other hand, corruption increases graspable rents from tenure O and may trigger government-
    initiated opportunistic renegotiations described by Guasch, Laffont, and Straub (2007). This
    is not a concern for our identification, however, as corruption in France does not seem to


                                                19
    affect contractual features in the car park sector (Beuve, Moszoro, and Saussier 2019).
    The results suggest that previous empirical studies pointing to the inefficiencies of public
contracts related to high renegotiation rates are flawed. Frequent renegotiations observed in
public contracts can be understood in part as a consequence of their non-remediable rigid nature
instead of a manifestation of opportunistic behavior whether by bidders or public agents.




                                              20
References

 ANFA (2019). Autofocus. Les ´
                             etudes de l'observatoire de l'ANFA 76, Association Nationale
    pour la Formation Automobile.

 Athias, L. and S. Saussier (2007). Un partenariat public-priv´
                                                              e rigide ou flexible? Th´
                                                                                      eorie et
    applications aux concessions routieres. Revue Economique 58 (3), 565­576.

 Bajari, P., S. Houghton, and S. Tadelis (2014). Bidding for incomplete contracts: An empirical
    analysis of adaptation costs. American Economic Review 104 (4), 1288­1319.

 Bajari, P., R. McMillan, and S. Tadelis (2009). Auctions versus negotiations in procurement:
    An empirical analysis. Journal of Law, Economics, & Organization 25 (2), 372­399.

 Berliner, D. and A. Erlich (2015). Competing for transparency: Political competition and
    institutional reform in Mexican states. American Political Science Review 109 (1), 110­
    128.

 Besley, T. and A. Case (2003). Political institutions and policy choices: Evidence from the
    United States. Journal of Economic Literature 41 (1), 7­73.

 Besley, T., T. Persson, and D. M. Sturm (2010). Political competition, policy and growth:
    Theory and evidence from the US. Review of Economic Studies 77 (4), 1329­1352.

 Beuve, J. and Z. Le Squeren (2016). When does ideology matter? An empirical analysis of
    French municipalities' make-or-buy choices. Chair EPPP working paper.

 Beuve, J., M. W. Moszoro, and S. Saussier (2019). Political contestability and public contract
    rigidity: An analysis of procurement contracts. Journal of Economics & Management
    Strategy 28 (2), 316­335.

 Brown, T. L. and M. Potoski (2003). Managing contract performance: A transaction costs
    approach. Journal of Policy Analysis & Management 22, 275­297.

 Coviello, D. and S. Gagliarducci (2017). Tenure in office and public procurement. American
    Economic Journal: Economic Policy 9 (3), 59­105.

 Crocker, K. J. and K. J. Reynolds (1993). The efficiency of incomplete contracts: An empirical
    analysis of Air Force engine procurement. RAND Journal of Economics 24 (1), 126­146.

 Decarolis, F. and G. Palumbo (2015). Renegotiation of public contracts: An empirical analysis.
    Economics Letters 132, 77­81.

                                             21
Dur, R. and R. Zoutenbier (2015). Intrinsic motivations of public sector employees: Evidence
   for germany. German Economic Review 16 (3), 343­366.

Engel, E., R. Fischer, and A. Galetovic (2011). Public-private partnerships to revamp U.S.
   infrastructure. The Hamilton Project ­ Brookings , 1­26.

Engel, E., R. Fischer, and A. Galetovic (2019). Soft budgets and endogenous renegotiations
   in transport PPPs: An equilibrium analysis. Economics of Transportation 17, 40­50.

Ferraz, C. and F. Finan (2011). Electoral accountability and corruption: Evidence from the
   audits of local governments. American Economic Review 101 (4), 1274­1311.

Friebel, G., M. Kosfeld, and G. Thielmann (2019). Trust the police? self-selection of motivated
   agents into the german police force. American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 11 (4),
   59­78.

Guasch, J. L. (2004). Granting and Renegotiating Infrastructure Concessions: Doing it Right.
   Washington, DC: World Bank Publications.

Guasch, J. L., J.-J. Laffont, and S. Straub (2007). Concessions of infrastructure in Latin
   America: Government-led renegotiations. Journal of Applied Econometrics 22 (7), 1267­
   1294.

Guasch, J.-L., J.-J. Laffont, and S. Straub (2008). Renegotiation of concession contracts in
   Latin America. Evidence from the water and transport sector. International Journal of
   Industrial Organization 26, 421­442.

Hart, O. (2003). Incomplete contracts and public ownership: Remarks, and an application to
   public-private partnerships. The Economic Journal 113 (486), C69--C76.

Hart, O. and J. Moore (1988). Incomplete contracts and renegotiation. Econometrica 56 (4),
   755­785.

Hart, O., A. Shleifer, and R. W. Vishny (1997). The proper scope of government: Theory and
   an application to prisons. Quarterly Journal of Economics 112 (4), 1127­1161.

Hefetz, A. and M. E. Warner (2012). Contracting or public delivery? the importance of service,
   market, and management characteristics. Journal of Public Administration Research &
   Theory 22 (2), 289­317.



                                             22
Kwon, I. (2014). Motivation, discretion, and corruption. Journal of Public Administration
   Research & Theory Theory 24 (3), 765­794.

Laakso, M. and R. Taagepera (1979). "Effective" number of parties: A measure with appli-
   cation to West Europe. Comparative Political Studies 12 (1), 3­27.

Laffont, J.-J. and J. Tirole (1993). A Theory of Incentives in Procurement and Regulation.
   Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Levin, J. and S. Tadelis (2010). Contracting for government services: Theory and evidence
   from us cities. Journal of Industrial Economics 58 (3), 507­541.

Liu, B.-C. and T. L.-P. Tang (2011). Does the love of money moderate the relationship between
   public service motivation and job satisfaction? the case of Chinese professionals in the
   public sector. Public Administration Review 71 (5), 718­727.

Macaulay, S. (1963). Non-contractual relations in business: A preliminary study. American
   Sociological Review 28 (1), 55­67.

Moszoro, M. W. and P. T. Spiller (2012). Third-party opportunism and the nature of public
   contracts. National Bureau of Economic Research, NBER Working Paper 18636.

Moszoro, M. W. and P. T. Spiller (2014). Third-party opportunism and the theory of pub-
   lic contracts: Operationalization and applications. In E. Brousseau and J.-M. Glachant
   (Eds.), The Manufacturing of Markets: Legal, Political and Economic Dynamics, Chap-
   ter 11, pp. 229­252. Florence: Cambridge University Press.

Moszoro, M. W. and P. T. Spiller (2016). Coase and the transaction cost approach to regu-
   lation. In C. M´
                  enard and E. Bertrand (Eds.), The Elgar Companion to Ronald H. Coase,
   Chapter 19, pp. 262­275. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar Publisher.

Moszoro, M. W. and P. T. Spiller (2019). Political contestability and public contracting.
   Journal of Public Economic Theory 21 (5), 945­966.

Moszoro, M. W., P. T. Spiller, and S. Stolorz (2016). Rigidity of public contracts. Journal of
   Empirical Legal Studies 13 (3), 396­427.

NAO (2003). PFI: Construction performance. Technical report, National Audit Office.

                                                                                   ´
Saussier, S. (2000). Transaction costs and contractual incompleteness: The case of Electricit´
                                                                                             e
   de France. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 42 (2), 189­206.

                                              23
Schwartz, A. and J. Watson (2012). Conceptualizing contractual interpretation. Research
   Paper 447, Yale Law & Economics.

Spiller, P. T. (2008). An institutional theory of public contracts: Regulatory implications.
   National Bureau of Economic Research, NBER Working Paper 14152.

Spiller, P. T. (2009). An institutional theory of public contracts: Regulatory implications. In
   C. M´
       enard and M. Ghertman (Eds.), Regulation, Reregulation, Reregulation: Institutional
   Perspectives, Chapter 3, pp. 45­66. Edward Elgar Publishing.

Spiller, P. T. (2010). Regulation: A transaction cost perspective. California Management
   Review 52 (2), 147­158.

Spiller, P. T. (2013). Transaction cost regulation. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organi-
   zation 89, 232­242.

Williamson, O. E. (1999). Public and private bureaucracies: A transaction cost economics
   perspectives. Journal of Law, Economics, & Organization 15 (1), 306­342.

Wright, B. E. (2007). Public service and motivation: Does mission matter? Public adminis-
   tration review 67 (1), 54­64.




                                             24
Appendix A            Proofs
Appendix A.1        Proof of Proposition 1--Contractual Completeness

Let S be a compact space with full-support (continuous) and s1,2,... be the possible states of the
world uniformly or normally distributed with mean s
                                                  ¯ (reference point).
    Let µ be the probability space such that:

                                µ(X C ) =  (xC )n = E(Pr[ = 1])                                 (12)

where xc is the maximum distance between the reference point s
                                                             ¯ and the states of the world
contemplated in the contract space XC , and n the contract dimensionality.
    The expected probability of contract continuation probability E(Pr[ = 1])--i.e., that the
realized state of the world s is within XC --rises in contractual completeness xc and the contrac-
tual space XC :
                                       E(Pr[ = 1])
                                                   >0                                           (13)
                                          xC
In vernacular terms, the probability of hitting the target rises with the size of the target.

Appendix A.2        Proof of Proposition 2--Contractual Flexibility

X F is a multiple of X C : i.e., XF = [0, xC ], with scalar  > 1. Thus, analogously to the proof
of Proposition 1:
                                       E(Pr[ = 1])
                                                   >0                                           (14)
                                          xF
I.e., hitting the frame of the target is also considered to be a "hit" for contract continuation.

Appendix A.3        Proof of Proposition 3--Contractual Rididity

Holding xP constant, an expansion of the probability space µ(XC ) expands the probability space
µ(XC - XP ) = 1 - E(Pr[ = 1]). Therefore,

                                       E(Pr[ = 1])
                                                   <0                                           (15)
                                          xC

I.e., keeping the political tolerance for deviations from the reference point constant, the prob-
ability of hitting the "donut" space between the actual contractual terms and the politically
tolerated states of the world increases. A risk-averse public agent will increase political safety
by increasing contractual rigidity.



                                                25
Appendix A.4         Proof of Proposition 4--Political Tolerance

Conversely to proof of Proposition 3, holding xC constant and expanding the probability space
µ(XP ) shrinks the probability space µ(XC - XP ) = 1 - E(Pr[ = 1]). Therefore,

                                      E(Pr[ = 1])
                                                  >0                                           (16)
                                         xP

I.e., political tolerance increases the space of hits considered to be close enough to the reference
point.




                                                26
Table 2: This table presents descriptive statistics of the variables used in the empirical tests. Frequency
of renegotiations is the number of formal contract amendments divided by the duration of the contract.
Contractual rigidity is the normalized measure of procedural terms in a contract. Public is a dummy
variable equal to 1 when the contract was signed between a municipality and a private-sector contractor,
and zero when the contract was signed between two private-sector parties. NEP is the number of equal
parties in a municipal election race defined as the inverse of the sum of squared vote shares for each
party. NREP is the number of equal opposition parties in a municipal election race defined as the inverse
of the sum of squared vote shares for each opposition party, i.e., without the winning party vote share.
Provision-of-services is a dummy variable equal to 1 when the contract is for short-term contracts that
do not require investments, and zero when the contract is a medium- or long-term operating contract
where the investor bears demand risk and collects user fees. Contract duration is the intended duration
of the contract in years. Places is the number of parking units in thousands. Corruption is the number of
cases of corruption implicating a municipal official in the three years preceding the date the contract was
signed, registered by from Transparency International France. Renewed is a dummy variable equal to zero
for original contracts and 1 for renewed (follow-up) contracts. Inhabitants is the natural logarithm of the
number of inhabitants in the municipality. Left-wing mayor and right-wing mayor are dummy variables
if the incumbent mayor at the time of renegotiation was left-wing or right-wing leaning, respectively.
Experience is the difference between the dates that the contract was signed and their first contract. Past
contracts is the number of all common contracts up to the observation date. Year of contract signing is
the year the contract was signed.

                   Variables                        Mean       Std      Min      Max
                   Frequency of renegotiations       0.22      0.36       0         2
                   Contractual rigidity               1.90    18.06    -27.62    73.62
                   Public                            0.84      0.36       0        1
                   NEP                                2.93    0.86        1       4.82
                   NREP                               2.23    0.38      1.51      3.11
                   Provision-of-services              0.47    0.50        0         1
                   Contract duration                 12.81    8.36        1        33
                   Places (thousand)                  0.20    1.42      0.00     24.16
                   Corruption                         1.88    1.09        0       9.75
                   Renewed                           0.19      0.39       0        1
                   Inhabitants                       10.51     1.39     8.09     14.08
                   Left-wing mayor                    0.11     0.31       0         1
                   Righ-wing mayor                    0.33    0.47        0         1
                   Experience                         8.46    11.54       0        43
                   Past contracts                     2.99    9.23        0        68
                   Year of contract signing          2002     6.54      1985     2009




                                                    27
Table 3: This table presents results of OLS regressions of the determinants of the frequency of contract
renegotiations. The dependent variable is the frequency of contract renegotiations defined as the
number of formal contract amendments divided by the duration of the contract. Public is a dummy
variable equal to 1 when the contract was signed between a municipality and a private-sector contractor,
and zero when the contract was signed between two private-sector parties. Provision-of-services is a
dummy variable equal to 1 when the contract is for short-term contracts that do not require investments,
and zero when the contract is a medium- or long-term operating contract where the investor bears demand
risk and collects user fees. Contract duration is the intended duration of the contract in years. Places is
the number of parking units in thousands. Corruption is the number of cases of corruption implicating
a municipal official in the three years preceding the date the contract was signed, registered by from
Transparency International France. Renewed is a dummy variable equal to zero for original contracts
and 1 for renewed (follow-up) contracts. Other controls include number of inhabitants, political leaning
of the city's mayor, experience, past contractual relationship, and year fixed effects. The contract sample
period is 1963-2008 and election data period is 1983-2008. Heteroskedasticity-robust t-statistics clustered
at the municipal level are reported in parenthesis;  denotes significance at 10%,  significance at 5%,
and  significance at 1%.

                                                   (1)         (2)          (3)
                       Public                   0.071*       0.071*       0.130**
                                                (0.043)     (0.043)       (0.058)
                       Provision-of-services                 0.053         0.036
                                                            (0.045)       (0.050)
                       Contract duration                     -0.002        -0.004
                                                            (0.003)       (0.004)
                       Places                              -0.013***       -0.005
                                                            (0.003)       (0.004)
                       Corruption                            -0.001        -0.008
                                                            (0.017)       (0.019)
                       Renewed                             -0.218***     -0.213***
                                                            (0.040)       (0.043)
                       Controls                    No          No           Yes
                       Observations               293          293          293
                       R-squared                 0.015        0.066        0.094




                                                    28
Table 4: This table presents results of 2SLS regressions of the determinants of the frequency of contract
renegotiations instrumenting contractual rigidity with measures of political contestability. The depen-
dent variable is the frequency of contract renegotiations defined as the number of formal contract
amendments divided by the duration of the contract. Provision-of-services is a dummy variable equal
to 1 when the contract is for short-term contracts that do not require investments, and zero when the
contract is a medium- or long-term operating contract where the investor bears demand risk and collects
user fees. Contract duration is the intended duration of the contract in years. Places is the number
of parking units in thousands. Corruption is the number of cases of corruption implicating a municipal
official in the three years preceding the date the contract was signed, registered by from Transparency
International France. Renewed is a dummy variable equal to zero for original contracts and 1 for renewed
(follow-up) contracts. As instruments of contractual rigidity we use: Public, NEP, and NREP, where
the baseline is private contracts. Public is a dummy variable equal to 1 when the contract was signed
between a municipality and a private-sector contractor, and zero when the contract was signed between
two private-sector parties. NEP is the number of equal parties in a municipal election race defined as the
inverse of the sum of squared vote shares for each party. NREP is the number of equal opposition parties
in a municipal election race defined as the inverse of the sum of squared vote shares for each opposition
party, i.e., without the winning party vote share. Other controls include number of inhabitants, political
leaning of the city's mayor, experience, past contractual relationship, and year fixed effects. The contract
sample period is 1963-2008 and election data period is 1983-2008. Heteroskedasticity-robust t-statistics
clustered at the municipal level are reported in parenthesis;  denotes significance at 10%,  significance
at 5%, and  significance at 1%.

                                             (1)                            (2)                         (3)
                                   First stage        IV        First stage          IV       First stage       IV
         Contractual rigidity                       0.015**                        0.011**                      0.013*
                                                    (0.008)                         (0.005)                    (0.008)
         Provision-of-services     -10.033***        0.162*     -10.019***           0.127    -10.226***        0.147
                                     (2.507)        (0.093)       (2.469)           (0.081)     (2.803)        (0.095)
         Contract duration            -0.052        -0.007*        -0.102           -0.006*      -0.119        -0.008*
                                     (0.160)        (0.004)       (0.157)           (0.003)     (0.179)        (0.004)
         Places                     2.630***         -0.044      2.616***          -0.034**    11.760***        -0.199
                                     (0.754)        (0.028)       (0.746)           (0.015)     (4.498)        (0.146)
         Corruption                   0.276          -0.013         0.318            -0.011      0.194          -0.004
                                     (0.929)        (0.024)       (0.922)           (0.020)     (0.972)        (0.024)
         Renewed                      -1.067       -0.216***       -0.796         -0.221***      -1.083       -0.171**
                                     (2.634)        (0.069)       (2.607)           (0.057)     (2.937)        (0.072)
         Controls                      Yes            Yes            Yes              Yes         Yes            Yes
         First-stage instruments

         Public                    11.569***
                                    (3.477)
         NEP                                                      -3.017*
                                                                  (1.651)
         NEP × Public                                            4.287***
                                                                  (0.998)
         NREP                                                                                    -1.727
                                                                                                (3.331)
         NREP × Public                                                                         4.835***
                                                                                                (1.579)
         F-statistics                11.07             -          9.25                -         4.89             -
         p-value                     0.001             -          0.001               -         0.008            -
         Observations                 293             293          293               293         259            259
         R-squared                   0.206           0.426        0.226             0.196       0.183          0.313




                                                           29
