                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES


      WHOSE JOB IS IT ANYWAY? CO-ETHNIC HIRING IN NEW U.S. VENTURES

                                        Sari Pekkala Kerr
                                         William R. Kerr

                                      Working Paper 28509
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28509


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2021


Sari Pekkala Kerr is a senior research scientist at the Wellesley Centers for Women (Wellesley
College) and Research Associate at the National Bureau of Economic Research. We thank Kirk
Doran, Isaac Ehrlich, Ben Jones, Iftekhar Hasan, Petra Moser, Neel Rao, Jon Vogel, two
referees, and seminar participants at the American Economic Association meetings, the
National Bureau of Economic Research Productivity Group, the University of Toronto, and
Wellesley College for helpful comments. We thank the National Science Foundation,
Harvard Business School, the Smith Richardson Foundation, and the Ewing Marion Kauffman
Foundation for financial support that made this research possible. The research in this paper was
conducted while the authors were Special Sworn Status researchers of the U.S. Census
Bureau. Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily represent the views of the U.S. Census Bureau. This research was performed at a
Federal Statistical Research Data Center under FSRDC Project Number FSRDC Project
Number 1182 (CBDRB-FY21-P1182-R8413, 8496, 8855) and FSRDC Project Number 1731
(CBDRB-FY21-P1731-R8857). All results have been reviewed to ensure that no confidential
information is disclosed. This research uses data from the Census Bureau's Longitudinal
Employer Household Dynamics Program, which was partially supported by the following
National Science Foundation Grants SES-9978093, SES-0339191 and ITR-0427889; National
Institute on Aging Grant AG018854; and grants from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Sari Pekkala Kerr and William R. Kerr. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Whose Job Is It Anyway? Co-Ethnic Hiring in New U.S. Ventures
Sari Pekkala Kerr and William R. Kerr
NBER Working Paper No. 28509
February 2021
JEL No. F22,J15,J44,J61,J62,J71,L26,M13,M51,R23

                                         ABSTRACT

We explore co-ethnic hiring among new ventures using U.S. administrative data. Co-ethnic hiring
is ubiquitous among immigrant groups, averaging about 22.5% and ranging from <2% to >40%.
Co-ethnic hiring grows with the size of the local ethnic workforce, greater linguistic distance to
English, lower cultural/genetic similarity to U.S. natives, and in harsher policy environments for
immigrants. Co-ethnic hiring is remarkably persistent for ventures and for individuals. Co-ethnic
hiring is associated with greater venture survival and growth when thick local ethnic employment
surrounds the business. Our results are consistent with a blend of hiring due to information
advantages within ethnic groups with some taste-based hiring.


Sari Pekkala Kerr
Wellesley College
106 Central Street
Wellesley, MA 02481
skerr3@wellesley.edu

William R. Kerr
Harvard Business School
Rock Center 212
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
wkerr@hbs.edu
1        Introduction

Immigration has signi...cantly reshaped the workplace in America over the past ...fty years.
Immigrants accounted for about 14% of the U.S. population in 2020, almost triple the 5%
share that existed in 1970 (Migration Policy Institute 2020). In the workplace, immigrants
represented almost 18% of the workforce in the 2018 American Community Survey (ACS).
While immigration to the United States historically centered on inows from Europe, migration
from Latin America and Asia surged after the 1965 Immigration and Nationality Act. The
combination of the growing immigrant share, now representing a stock of more than 40 million
people, and the greater heterogeneity in sending countries has resulted in a signi...cantly more
diverse workforce.
        Entrepreneurship is one domain where the impact of immigration has been particularly
sharp. Using the 2012 Survey of Business Owners, Kerr and Kerr (2020) estimated immi-
grants owned about 25% of new employer businesses during the 2008-2012 period. Similarly,
about 24% of incorporated self-employed individuals in the ACS were foreign-born in 2018. A
growing literature documents similar evidence on the disproportionate role of immigrants in
new business creation.1
        Despite these dramatic trends, we have remarkably little evidence on how immigration in
the workplace connects to the creation and scaling of new ...rms. Azoulay et al. (2020) compare
the ...rm size distributions of immigrant- and native-founded ...rms to assess job creation, and
other important studies document the concentration of immigrants in the workplace-- for ex-
ample, Andersson et al. (2014) for the United States and Åslund et al. (2014) for Sweden, with
more studies discussed below. Greater attention is warranted, however, given that a quarter of
new ...rm births are immigrant-founded. Haltiwanger et al. (2013) describe the vital role that
new businesses play in job creation, which raises the question of how new jobs in the economy
are allocated across ethnic groups. Other studies like Ehrlich and Kim (2015) and Docquier
et al. (2020) note the links of immigration and birthplace diversity to economic growth, but
the degree this happens through di¤erent types of ...rms is less understood.
    1
    Examples include Borjas (1986), Lofstrom (2002, 2011), Clark and Drinkwater (2000, 2006), Fairlie and
Meyer (2003), Schuetze and Antecol (2007), Fairlie et al. (2010), Fairlie and Lofstrom (2013), Lofstrom et al.
(2014), Kerr and Kerr (2011, 2017, 2020), Azoulay et al. (2020), and Brown et al. (2020). Examples of studies
for high-tech immigrant entrepreneurship include Saxenian (1999, 2002), Anderson and Platzer (2006), Monti
et al. (2007), Wadhwa et al. (2007), and Hart and Acs (2011).




                                                      2
   The objective of this paper is to characterize the co-ethnic hiring practices among immi-
grants in newly founded business. We quantify the degree to which new U.S. companies are
comprised of individuals from the same country of birth; the factors that promote this co-ethnic
hiring; the persistence of this concentration as the ...rm ages or as individuals move on to new
ventures; and the connection of high co-ethnic hiring to business survival and employment
growth. Compared to prior work, we focus in greater depth on ethnic-speci...c employments,
vs. immigrants more broadly, and on the dynamics and performance implications of co-ethnic
hiring.
   We use these empirical ...ndings to consider the extent to which three conceptual models of
co-ethnic hiring are likely to be responsible for the patterns observed. A ...rst model focuses on
enhanced communications in the workplace if co-ethnic individuals are able to better commu-
nicate with each other and those with similar native languages. A second model emphasizes
how co-ethnic hiring can result from better information ow within ethnic groups. To the ex-
tent that ethnic networks and concomitant resource access allow superior hiring within ethnic
groups, co-ethnic hiring could enhance venture performance. A ...nal conceptual model features
taste-based rationales, where members of an ethnic group favor working together, that do not
result in a performance advantage and may even lead to weaker outcomes.
   We conduct this analysis using the Longitudinal Employer Household Dynamics (LEHD)
database and the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD). The LEHD contains matched
employer-employee data compiled by the United States Census Bureau for analyses of es-
tablishments and their workforces. Our data cover the years 1995-2014 and include all private
sector establishments in 26 states. The worker-level records include an individual'
                                                                                  s country of
birth and quarterly earnings. Our empirical strategy, developed in greater detail below, is to
identify the ventures with a top initial earner who is foreign born. We study the degree to
which the early workforce surrounding this lead individual comes from the same country of
birth and how the business evolves over time.
   We ...nd striking levels of co-ethnic hiring. The average new venture with ...ve or more
workers has a co-ethnic share of about 22.5%, with an enormous range from as low as 1.8% (top
earners from Germany) to as high as 45% (top earners from Vietnam). The variation within
language groups is also striking, such as the co-ethnic hiring rates for top earners from Mexico
being about four times larger than those evident for top earners from Guatemala, Colombia,


                                                3
and Cuba. Our analyses show how these co-ethnic hiring rates systematically relate to the local
workforce composition surrounding new ...rms, the native languages spoken by ethnic groups,
and the cultural similarity of groups to the United States (Spolaore and Wacziarg 2016).
   We observe remarkable persistence in co-ethnic hiring. Even ...ve and ten years after the
establishment birth, the co-ethnic share tends to increase slightly, rather than abate. We also
follow top earners when they move to new ventures, ...nding substantial persistence at the level
of individuals in terms of hiring patterns.
   Turning to the dynamics of ventures, we ...nd that higher initial co-ethnic shares are as-
sociated with an increased survival of the ...rm to ...ve years. We also observe, conditional
on survival, greater employment growth to ...ve years with a higher initial co-ethnic share,
although some of this e¤ect appears connected to a reduced likelihood of the ...rm to shrink
in size as it ages. Importantly, most of this survival and growth e¤ect happens when the ...rm
conducting co-ethnic hiring is situated in a city-industry setting where the ethnic group makes
up a substantial share of local employment. Extensions consider di¤erences by wage levels of
...rms, estimations using genetic and linguistic di¤erences across immigrant nationalities, and
local policy environments with E-Verify implementation.
   Returning to the three conceptual models, our empirical results are mostly inconsistent with
the model focused on overcoming communication barriers. A common language is a feature
in hiring, but distinctly second-order to factors like thick local ethnic labor pools. Instead,
the weight of evidence suggests that the co-ethnic hiring more typically follows from factors
operating within ethnic groups. We ...nd evidence that supports both the information advantage
and group taste frameworks, concluding both play important roles. There is overall more
support for the information advantage rationale as, on average, venture performance improves
with co-ethnic hiring. We observe, however, negative employment growth with co-ethnic hiring
when the surrounding local ethnic labor pool is very small, which is more consistent with the
group taste rationale.
   The striking empirical connections evident in this study suggest that the economic conse-
quences of greater workplace and entrepreneurial diversity deserve closer attention. Andersson
et al. (2014) is the closest prior study, where they too use the LEHD to characterize immi-
grants in the workplace. Their work focuses on a match to the Decennial Census and thereby
develops a rich cross-sectional portrait. Our complementary work focuses instead on the em-


                                               4
ployment dynamics associated with ventures over time. We also closely relate to Azoulay et al.
(2020), who consider multiple Census Bureau datasets, but focus more on resulting ...rm size
distributions rather than within-...rm employment records. To the best of our knowledge, we
provide some of the ...rst evidence on the nationality-speci...c nature of workplace concentration,
the persistence of the phenomenon as businesses age, and the intricate ways co-ethnic hiring
interacts with local labor markets. Other studies of the U.S. experience include Garcia-Perez
(2011), Hellerstein and Neumark (2008), and Hellerstein et al. (2011). These ...ndings are im-
portant for understanding the economic opportunity associated with international migration
(e.g., Borjas 1994, Clemens 2011, Docquier and Rapoport 2012).
    Likewise, recent empirical work like Hegde and Tumlinson (2014) and Gompers et al. (2016)
document the performance implications of ethnic ties in the high-growth entrepreneurship
and venture capital space. Our work extends this literature strand to a signi...cantly broader
set of new ventures in the economy. These literatures contribute to our understanding of
the development of entrepreneurial human capital for the country (e.g., Ehrlich et al. 2017)
and how it is transferred within and across ethnic groups through young ventures and their
employment patterns. Additional connections to the prior literature are discussed in the next
section.
    The rest of the paper is structured as follows: Section 2 reviews the literature on co-ethnic
hiring and diversity within ...rms more generally; this section also outlines our three conceptual
models in greater detail. Section 3 describes our data and the methodological choices made
to construct the analysis database. Section 4 presents the key ...ndings of our study, while the
last section concludes the paper and discusses future research ideas.


2    Co-Ethnic Hiring and Workforce Diversity

The academic literature on the immigrant ethnic diversity of ...rms and their hiring practices is
sparse. This under-development stems in large part from prior data constraints, as systematic
investigation requires detailed employment records and ideally the ability to track outcomes
for individuals and businesses over time. The development of employer-employee databases,
...rst in Europe and later with the LEHD in America, has begun to alleviate those constraints.
This section reviews the co-ethnic hiring literature from an immigrant nationality perspective
and then provides some broader comments from the vast literature on workplace diversity. We


                                                5
then describe in greater depth three conceptual models for co-ethnic hiring and some of their
implications.

2.1   Literature on Co-Ethnic Hiring

Co-ethnic hiring is typically measured as the degree to which ...rm owners or managers hire
employees from their ethnic groups. Many studies that focus on immigrants in the workplace
treat immigrants as single group, measuring the total share of the workforce of a business who
is foreign born. Other studies are able to delve deeper into countries of birth or nationalities
to measure workplace heterogeneity. The latter data are often tailored for speci...c settings
to reduce administrative burdens and/or protect worker identities. For example, the Swedish
administrative data has more speci...c data on European-sending countries as compared to the
United States, while U.S. administrative data has more speci...c data on Latin American-sending
countries.
   European studies have led the way, with Åslund et al. (2014) showing that Swedish ...rms
with greater immigrant representation in the general workforce and/or managerial positions
tend to hire more immigrants. The authors note that co-ethnic hiring may be due to pro-
ductivity advantages (e.g., better communication), preferences for own-ethnicity, information
asymmetries (e.g., better ability to evaluate skills), and the power of professional and ethnic
networks. In addition, Hammarstedt and Miao (2020) ...nd that self-employed immigrants in
Sweden, especially non-European, are more likely to hire other immigrants than the native
self-employed. Ansala et al. (2020) show a broad similarity between Sweden and Finland in
the early employment patterns for immigrants.
   Elsewhere in Europe, Nicodemo and Nicolini (2012) show the association between an im-
migrant manager and the hiring of immigrant low-skill employees is especially signi...cant in
Spain. den Butter et al. (2007) provide a broader set of theoretical and sociological perspec-
tives on co-ethnic hiring practices, with focus on the Netherlands. The authors note that the
key obstacle to minority integration appears to be the separation of native and ethnic minority
business networks, resulting in the economic isolation of ethnic minorities and consequent for-
mation of enclave economies. From a contrasting perspective, Ore...ce and Peri (2020) highlight
how immigration to France increases the size of the French labor pool and thereby aids better
...rm-worker matching.



                                               6
       While the workplace concentration for immigrants is consistently observed, the impact of
co-ethnic employment on the careers and economic advancement of immigrant employees is
mixed.2 Andersson Joona and Wadensjo (2009) ...nd lower initial incomes for immigrants to
Sweden who are hired by their self-employed co-nationals, with a greater likelihood that these
immigrants will later transition in the future to self-employment themselves. Tomaskovic-
Devey et al. (2015) also note that although immigrant-native wage gaps di¤er dramatically
across Swedish ...rms, such wage gaps are smaller in ...rms with a greater share of immigrant
employees and managers. Another study by Daunfeldt and Fergin-Wennberg (2018) found that
immigrants recently hired from unemployment are less likely to fall back into unemployment
if they are in a workplace with at least one manager born in a non-Western country.
       For the United States, important early studies documented examples and case studies of
co-ethnic hiring within immigrant groups, especially among new arrivals (e.g., Portes and
Wilson 1980, Waldinger and Lichter 2003), and the value of ethnic networks for jobs (e.g.,
Munshi 2003). Hellerstein and Neumark (2008) and Andersson et al. (2014) quanti...ed these
patterns more broadly across the economy. While most workers, including immigrants, work
in larger workplaces that are not as segregated, workplace segregation among smaller ...rms
is more pronounced. Garcia-Perez (2011) shows that small ...rms are especially likely to hire
immigrants. She also observes a substantial portion of the immigrant-native wage di¤erence
can be explained by immigrants working for immigrant-owned business that pay lower wages
on average. Chiswick and Miller (2012) study how the linguistic distance of a group to English
shapes the rate and direction of assimilation, and Cassidy (2019) shows larger co-ethnic group
sizes and lower rates of English language acquisition help explain some lower rates of earnings
assimilation. These intriguing results from the labor literature mostly focus on the outcomes
for workers, and we shift in this paper to investigating more the impact for ...rms.

2.2      Literature on Workplace Diversity

The topic of co-ethnic hiring is closely related to questions of diversity, a topic that has received
much more attention in many literatures. One signi...cant body of work has studied the impact
   2
    Immigrants often experience downward mobility and underemployment when they ...rst arrive in a destina-
tion country. This can result from under-recognition of past education and experience (e.g., Friedberg 2000,
Li 2001, Batalova et al. 2008, Mattoo et al. 2008, Creese and Wiebe 2012), challenges of discrimination (e.g.,
Oreopoulos 2011, Edo et al. 2013), selection of who migrates (e.g., Nowotny 2016), or a lack of employment
authorization.



                                                      7
of population and workforce diversity on aggregate outcomes.3                   For example, focusing on
immigration in the OECD countries, Alesina et al. (2016) study the relationships of birthplace,
cultural, and linguistic diversity by skill level of immigrants to economic development. Studies
have also looked at the impact of local immigrant diversity across cities.4
       A parallel set of work utilizes case studies and data collected via experiments, in-person
interviews, or mailed surveys to consider organizational implications of diversity (e.g., Milliken
and Martins 1996, Williams Phillips and O'
                                         Reilly 1998). The impact of diversity on perfor-
mance varies across studies (e.g., Richard 2000, Richard et al. 2003), and some argue that
performance is maximized with highly heterogeneous or highly homogeneous groups compared
to moderate diversity (e.g., Earley and Mosakowski 2000, Vermeulen 2003). Recent research
on the e¤ect of diversity on ...rms considers ethnic and gender diversity among the board of
directors, management (including founders and CEOs), and the general workforce.5 Nguyen
(2020), for example, uses micro-data to evaluate the importance of ethnic trust between CEOs
and the scientists working in their ...rms. Diversity is often, but not always, found to positively
correlate with ...rm innovation and productivity.6

2.3      Conceptual Framework

Building on Åslund et al. (2014) and the other studies above, we focus on three conceptual
models that can lie behind co-ethnic hiring. Our data provide several important levers that
we can apply to the analysis: detailed country-of-birth data that can be measured both within
and outside of the venture, the ability to follow individual leaders over time, and the ability
to connect initial co-ethnic hiring to subsequent venture survival and growth. As we describe
the conceptual models below, we note some features of how each model might be visible in the
data.
       A ...rst model focuses on communication in the workplace. Immigrant have varying degrees
   3
     Examples include Easterly and Levine (1997), Collier (2001), Alesina et al. (2003), Alesina and La Ferrara
(2005), Ashraf and Galor (2013a,b), Gören (2014), Bove and Elia (2017), and Bahar and Rapoport (2018).
   4
     Examples include Ottaviano and Peri (2006), High...ll and O' Brien (2015), Rodriguez-Pose and Von Berlep-
sch (2018), Kemeny and Cooke (2018), Burchardi et al. (2020), Burstein et al. (2020), and Docquier et al.
(2020). Related work on regional immigration for invention includes Hunt and Gauthier-Loiselle (2010), Kerr
and Lincoln (2010), Peri et al. (2015), and Doran and Yoon (2019).
   5
     Examples include Smith et al. (2005), Campbell and Minguez-Vera (2007), Adams and Ferreira (2009),
Marimuthu et al. (2009), Carter et al. (2010), Torchia et al. (2011), Lee and Nathan (2013), Del Carmen
Triana et al. (2014), Borghesi et al. (2016), Adusei et al. (2017), and Conyon and He (2017).
   6
     Examples include Ozgen et al. (2013), Parrotta et al. (2014a,b, 2016), Lee (2015), Trax et al. (2015), Kerr
et al. (2015a,b), and Mayer et al. (2018).



                                                       8
of uency in English, and language barriers can limit workplace productivity by hamper-
ing communication among employees or between employees and customers or other external
parties. Co-ethnic hiring might in part reect the managerial desire to enhance workplace
productivity through better communication. This model has a rather distinctive signature in
the data as it suggests easier substitution over ethnic groups within the same language family,
compared to across them. The model also more naturally ...ts in lower-wage sectors given the
greater language pro...ciency among higher educated and better paid immigrants.7 The model
predicts potentially improved venture outcomes, at least relative to others in the same city and
industry, if communication within the ...rm is enhanced.
    A second model brings together factors that would link co-ethnic hiring to improved venture
performance. Information ows are stronger within ethnic groups than across them, and ethnic
networks have been shown to be important in a variety of job search and hiring settings. In
both low- and high-wage sectors, a leader may be able to collect superior information about the
skills and workplace potential of job candidates when they are within his or her ethnic group.
This model suggests a narrower hiring practice focused on the ethnic group vs. language family,
and the strength of the practice should grow with larger local labor pools to draw upon. The
model also predicts improved venture outcomes with co-ethnic hiring due to the advantageous
resources acquired.8
    A third model focuses on the preferences of members of an ethnic group to work together
(e.g., Becker 1957). It is closely related to the second model in its reliance on ethnic-speci...c
features for hiring, and we would not expect the co-ethnic hiring practice to diminish much
over time. Given the lack of a productivity advantage, we anticipate at or diminished venture
performance as a consequence. This performance penalty may be less in environments where
there is substantial employment for the ethnic group as the leader has a thicker pool of potential
hires to draw from.
    7
      In the 2000 Census, 90% of immigrants earning above the median wage spoke English well or      uently, while
the share was 66% for those below the median wage.
    8
      The better signal extraction for co-ethnic hiring relates to statistical discrimination models (e.g., Phelps
1972, Arrow 1973, Aigner and Cain 1977). Employers are risk averse, and they do not know the true produc-
tivity of potential employees but see noisy signals (e.g., education). Employers may be better able to extract
information from these signals for the people of their own ethnicity, which leads them to prefer hiring them
even if other ethnicities look "just as good" on paper. This process could persist as the ...rm ages if the hiring
practice proves advantageous.




                                                        9
3         Data and Descriptive Tabulations
3.1        Census Bureau Data

We utilize the Longitudinal Employer Household Dynamics (LEHD) database and the Lon-
gitudinal Business Database (LBD).9 These datasets are con...dential and housed by the U.S.
Census Bureau to be used in the Federal Research Data Centers. The LEHD is constructed
by the Census Bureau from state-level quarterly ...lings by employers for the administration
of state unemployment insurance (UI) bene...t programs. Records for each state identify each
paid employee at an establishment and the employee'
                                                  s quarterly compensation; employees with
multiple jobs are recorded separately by each ...rm. The data longitudinally follow establish-
ments, ...rms, and employees and provide characteristics of each. We have access to the data for
26 states for this project, including states like California and Texas that receive large numbers
of immigrants to America.10 Our data extend through 2014, with start dates varying by state.
         The person-level characteristics available in the LEHD include age, gender, race, place of
birth, and citizenship status. The place of birth variable records the country of birth for persons
arriving from major immigration countries to America; the data record a region of birth for the
rest. The employment history ...les provide job-level earnings of each worker within the covered
states, and a national indicator ...le contains the quarterly employment status of individuals
across all U.S. states. We require individuals be aged 16-79, and we exclude job observations
with less than $200 in quarterly earnings. The quarterly ...rm and establishment characteristics
include ...rm age and size, detailed location (county), detailed NAICS and SIC industry code,
and payroll. We focus on ventures in metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs) to model the
typical de...nition of the local labor market.11
         We build a dataset that contains all ...rms that are established after the LEHD start date
of the state that they are located in. The LEHD start dates in our sample range from 1990
to 2000, with the majority of the states starting by 1995. As described further below, we
focus on new ventures so that we can characterize the early hiring decisions being made by
employers. We restrict the sample to ...rms where the highest earning person in the initial
     9
      Data description: https://www2.census.gov/ces/wp/2018/CES-WP-18-27.pdf
    10
      The covered states include Arkansas, California, Colorado, Delaware, Georgia, Hawaii, Illinois, Indiana,
Iowa, Louisiana, Maine, Maryland, Missouri, Nevada, New Mexico, Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode
Island, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Vermont, and Washington, as well as Washington D.C.
   11
      These metro areas are formally de...ned through Core-Based Statistical Areas (CBSA). The patterns that
we document can also be seen at the county level in an analysis that incorporates rural areas.


                                                     10
founding team was born outside of the United States, excepting for when we are measuring
the local labor composition surrounding a ...rm. We also focus on new entrants that employ ...ve
or more workers during their ...rst year, which helps safeguard against husband-wife or family
businesses being too important for our analysis; the LEHD does not document relationships
among individuals.12 A small number of odd cases with top initial earners associated with ...ve
or more ...rms are excluded. The LBD is used to construct the start date that corresponds to
the founding year of the ...rst establishment of the ...rm. We track each ...rm annually until 2014
or the last year of survival, and we end our sample with entrants in 2004 to ensure we have a
potential ten-year observation window for each business depending upon ...rm survival.
       The ...nal sample has about 275,000 new businesses. Throughout this paper, Census Bu-
reau disclosure requires observation counts be rounded, and all reported numbers are likewise
rounded to a maximum of four signi...cant digits.
       We characterize ...rms by the ethnicity of the highest initial earner within the ...rm. Sev-
eral studies, including our own, have used this top initial earner to proxy for the ...rm's
founder/owner.13 Our present study does not require such a strong interpretation of the
top initial earner, only that this initial top earner be inuential in employee hiring decisions
in the ...rm. We are equally comfortable if this top initial earner is a founder/owner of the ...rm
or just an early manager/leader in the new venture.

3.2      Descriptive Statistics

Table 1 provides descriptive statistics on the sample. Column 2 of Table 1 provides the count
of new ventures by top initial earner ethnic group, and Column 3 shows this as a percentage
of the total. The most prevalent countries of birth for the top initial earners include Mexico
(24.6%), India (6.4%), South Korea (6.2%), Vietnam (5.8%), and China (5.6%). In total,
22 foreign countries are individually identi...ed and cover 77% of the top initial earners in our
sample; each of these countries contains at least 0.2% of the top initial earners, with Haiti being
the smallest. The rest of the countries are grouped by the Census Bureau into 10 aggregate
regions of birth that range from 4.0% (South East Asia) to 0.4% (Caribbean) of the sample.
       We measure co-ethnic hiring by calculating the share of employees in each year who are
  12
       Fairlie and Miranda (2017) consider choices to hire employees into start-ups. Related to this work, they
observe Asian- and Hispanic-owned businesses are more likely to make the transition into being an employer
...rm.
    13
       See discussions in Kerr and Kerr (2017), Choi et al. (2019), and Hyatt et al. (2020).


                                                      11
from the same country or region of birth as the top initial earner. Column 4 shows the strength
and heterogeneity of co-ethnic hiring, and Figure 1 provides a graphical presentation of the
top 15 highest co-ethnic shares among identi...ed countries. The co-ethnic share of the initial
employee base ranges from as low as 1.8% (Germany) to 45% (Vietnam), with an unweighted
average co-ethnic share of 14.6%. To provide an explicit example, a co-ethnic share of 40%
would suggest the top earner is of the same ethnicity as two of the ...ve remaining employees
in a six-person business. The weighted average co-ethnic share is 22.5%, reecting that larger
groups display more co-ethnic hiring, and it falls to 19.6% if excluding Mexican top earners
and their ...rms.
   While it is perhaps intuitive that the co-ethnic share for top initial earners from Canada
and the United Kingdom will be lower than those from El Salvador or the Philippines, other
variations are quite intriguing. Co-ethnic shares for top initial earners from Mainland China
are twice the rate evident for top initial earners from Taiwan. Co-ethnic rates for Mexico
exceed 30% but are less than 8% for Guatemala, Colombia, and Cuba.
   The appendix extends these descriptive tabulations by ethnicity and industry. Appendix
Table A1 documents co-ethnic shares as ...rms age to ...ve and ten years. About half of ...rms
survive to be ...ve years old, and the attrition rate is even greater from ...ve to ten years. Co-
ethnic hiring is remarkably persistent (holding the ethnicity of the ...rm constant to that of the
top initial earner even if the top earner in the ...rm is now someone di¤erent). The co-ethnic
share does not change signi...cantly as establishments age, with the unweighted and weighted
averages rising slightly. Most ethnic groups show a very modest relative change in the co-ethnic
composition of their ...rms over time, amounting usually to an increase or decline of less than
3%. Thus, hiring patterns do not become more di¤use with ...rm survival nor do they converge
to mirror the overall U.S. labor market (or even its immigrant populations).
   Appendix Tables A2a and A2b provide statistics for 12 industry groups, aggregating over
ethnicities. Appendix Table A2a ...rst documents the composition of entering ...rms by industry
and the signi...cant variation in co-ethnic shares, for example, from agriculture to professional
service ...rms. The persistence of these co-ethnic shares as the ...rm ages to ...ve years or more
mirrors the tabulations in Appendix Table A1.
   We also use the greater sample size at the industry level to disclose three additional features
of co-ethnic hiring: 1) the comparable share of initial employment in the ...rm that comes from


                                               12
other immigrant groups and a benchmark to what would be expected if hiring at random
from the MSA-industry worker pool, 2) the average earnings percentile of co-ethnic employees
within the ...rms (excluding the top initial earner), and 3) the distribution of co-ethnic hiring
across granular hiring bins ranging from no co-ethnic employees are hired to where 75% or
more of hires are co-ethnic.

3.3   Additional Approaches and Considerations

Our empirical analyses in the next section consider some of the causes and consequences of
co-ethnic hiring. Before proceeding, it is important to describe the robustness of the approach
taken to natural alternatives. Limits on implicit disclosure across samples by the Census
Bureau only allow us to present a few of the robustness checks formally in the tables ahead.
   First, our baseline metric treats all groups shown in Table 1 as distinct, such that the
presumed ethnic distance from natives of Cuba to natives from Japan or the United States is
the same as that to natives of the Dominican Republic. We later demonstrate robustness to
employing continuous metrics of linguistic and genetic distance across ethnic groups using the
work of Spolaore and Wacziarg (2016). While we will observe some measure of cross-ethnic
hiring or substitution, ...rms not hiring from their own co-ethnic group tend to mostly hire U.S.-
born workers rather than immigrants from other ethnicities, which makes the binary metrics
quite reasonable and easy to interpret.
   Second, the choice to focus on the top initial earner is quite robust. We ...nd similar results
when looking at matches to top two or three initial earners. We also ...nd similar results when
focusing on extreme cases for the top initial earner, when she earns signi...cantly more than
anyone else in the business, to isolate greater likely decision-making authority. We hold the
ethnicity of the business ...xed at that of the top initial earner as the ...rm ages. In many cases,
the top earner in fact remains the same, and, when di¤erent, the subsequent top earner often
has the same ethnicity. Either way, the results below are similar when focusing on cases where
the top earner remains the same from the birth of the ...rm throughout the period we observe it
in operation. Finally, the persistent co-ethnic shares over time shows that most future hiring
mirrors the ...rst year, and we have con...rmed our results when looking only at new employees
entering the ...rm after year one (and thus for certain after the top initial earner starts or
otherwise enters the ...rm).



                                                13
4     Regression Analysis

We break our analysis into two steps. We ...rst quantify the determinants of co-ethnic hiring to
assess which of our three models are consistent with the hiring patterns themselves, especially
regarding the relative importance of the speci...c ethnic group vs. its broader language family.
We then study the venture performance connected to co-ethnic hiring to di¤erentiate among
the two theories that are operate within ethnic groups.

4.1   Determinants of Co-Ethnic Hiring

Our ...rst set of analyses quantify the tight relationship of co-ethnic hiring to local labor market
conditions and the persistence of choices by top initial earners across ventures. We focus on
the hiring conducted in the ...rst year of the business, measuring the share of early employees
that are from the same country of birth as the top initial earner.
    The primary explanatory variables in Table 2 model the overall presence of the ethnic
group in the local labor market, de...ned through two-digit NAICS industries and metropolitan
areas. We use non-parametric indicator/dummy variables to allow for non-linearities in the
empirical relationship; this approach also limits the overall inuence of Mexico compared to a
linear model. Coe¢ cients are measured relative to settings where an ethnic group constitutes
less than 1% of employment in the MSA-industry (53% of ...rms). In our sample, 25% of ...rms
are in the 1%-5% cell, 8% are in the 5%-10% cell, 10% are in the 10%-25% cell, and 4% are
in the >25% cell. Pre-existing ...rms and new ventures with U.S.-born top initial earners are
used to calculate local workforce traits but otherwise excluded. The employment of the new
venture itself is excluded from the local labor composition.
    Column 1 of Table 2 shows a speci...cation where we incorporate two measures for ethnic
groups beyond the MSA-industry shares: a (0,1) indicator variable for the native language of
the ethnic group being a language other than English and a continuous measure of cultural
similarity of the ethnic group to U.S. natives. In our sample, 90% of ...rms are in ethnic groups
where the native language is not English. Cultural similarity measures the bilateral similarity
of culture between the top initial earner'
                                         s country of birth and natives of the United States.
The measure is taken from Spolaore and Wacziarg (2016) and based upon genetic distances
for groups, which we discuss in greater detail later. Positive values represent greater cul-
tural similarity, and we express this variable in unit standard deviations to aid interpretation.


                                                14
Estimations are unweighted and report robust standard errors.
       Column 1 ...nds a quite strong empirical relationship, with businesses with surrounding
local MSA-industry ethnic shares of 1%-25% showing a 10%-15% increase in the share of their
initial workforce of the same ethnic group as the top initial earner compared to businesses in
settings with a <1% local share. The co-ethnic hiring relationship further grows to a 33%
workforce share gain when the local MSA-industry workforce is more than 25% of the same
ethnic group as the top initial earner. Top initial earners with a non-English native language
are also connected to 5% greater co-ethnic hiring, while a one-standard deviation increase
in cultural similarity of top initial earners group to the United States links a 4% decline in
co-ethnic hiring.14
       These baseline estimations allow for large variations across U.S. regions, such as the more
extensive immigrant entrepreneurship and immigrant workforce concentration in California
and Texas compared to Iowa and Vermont. The speci...cations also allow for large industry
variation: there is greater immigrant concentration in businesses like landscaping and food
services at lower skill levels and in IT-connected ...elds at higher skill levels. Kerr and Kerr
(2020) document in the 2012 SBO data that roughly half of immigrant-owned startups are in
three sectors: accommodation and food services, retail trade, and professional and technical
services.15 Column 2 accordingly augments the empirical model to include MSA-industry-year
...xed e¤ects, focusing attention on local di¤erences across ethnic groups. The results are quite
similar, indicating a mechanism that is deeper than spatial or industry concentration.16
       Column 3 further includes ethnic ...xed e¤ects for top initial earners. With these ...xed
e¤ects, we can no longer model language or cultural similarity of the ethnic group to U.S.
natives. The role of the local labor force persists and, in fact, strengthens in this model.
Businesses with surrounding local MSA-industry ethnic shares of 1%-25% exhibit a 11%-25%
increase in the share of their initial workforce of the same ethnic group as the top initial earner
  14
      As a complementary statistic, there is a 0.59 correlation between average co-ethnic shares for the ...rst year
of ventures shown in Table 1 with the in-marriage rate for the ethnic group in the 2000 Census. The latter is
calculated as the share of child arrivals to the United States who subsequently have married another person
from their country of birth.
   15
      Immigrant entrepreneurs further display a remarkable concentration by ethnic group in terms of sectors, such
as Vietnamese nail care salons, Korean dry cleaners, Gujarati Indian motels, and Punjabi Indian convenience
stores. For example, Kalnins and Chung (2006), Roth et al. (2012), Patel and Vella (2013), Andersson et al.
(2014), Battisti et al. (2016), and Kerr and Mandor¤ (2021).
   16
      We have also con...rmed throughout this project that food services are not overly in    uencing our results
given the ethnic-based nature of many immigrant-owned restaurants.



                                                        15
compared to businesses in settings with a <1% local share. For settings where the local MSA-
industry workforce is more than 25% of the same ethnic group, the co-ethnic share now reaches
41%. Across each stage of the non-linear estimation, the realized co-ethnic shares are greater
than what the local workforce representation alone would predict. There is a disproportionate
jump once the local share exceeds 1% and continued increases thereafter.
       Column 4 shows these results are robust to adding controls for the age, gender, race, and
education of top initial earners. Column 5 further shows robustness to adding controls for ...rm
size and wage rate in entry year. The ...nal two columns show that the pattern is similar when
splitting the sample by the state-level median wage among new ventures in the sample.
       When viewing these results, it is important to recognize that we do not have data on some
factors that prior work connects to workplace segregation. The ...rst is residential segregation of
immigrant groups (e.g., Hellerstein et al. 2011, Andersson et al. 2014). Our ...xed e¤ects cap-
ture spatial isolation that is general to ethnic groups and in a city overall, but not idiosyncratic
features.17 Second, while our MSA-industry shares reect the extent of local worker pools, we
do not have data on detailed personal networks that are inuential in job matching.18 Our
education controls are also incomplete characterizations of the deeper skill dimensions (e.g.,
cognitive, physical) of human capital on which immigrants and natives di¤er (e.g., Schoellman
2010). Nonetheless, the stability of our coe¢ cients across these models in Table 2 is reassuring.
       Appendix Table A3 presents a version of these estimations where we show ethnic ...xed
e¤ects, with Canada being the reference category. For this purpose, we model a simpler linear
ethnic share for surrounding MSA-industry-year employment; this linear model ...nds that a
10% increase in the share of the local labor force of the same ethnicity as the top initial earner
correlates with a 12% higher co-ethnic hiring share. As would be expected, the coe¢ cients
on the ethnic ...xed e¤ects follow Table 1'
                                          s descriptive shares closely. For most ethnic groups,
further adding MSA-industry-year ...xed e¤ects, local ethnic employment shares, and controls
for the traits of top initial earners and ...rms has little consequence. The one exception is for
top initial earners from Mexico, where the raw baseline e¤ect of 0.292 (0.001) declines to 0.096
  17
     As one characterization, we calculated the distribution of immigrants by birthplace across Public Use Micro
Areas (PUMAs) within MSAs using the 2000 Census. The R-Squared of a regression of a birthplace'          s share
in a given PUMA on ...xed e¤ects for MSAs and birthplaces is 0.71. The R-Squared of a regression of squared
deviation from underlying population for immigrants from a birthplace was 0.46.
  18
     This literature includes Holzer (1987), Montgomery (1991), Elliot (2001), and Nijkamp (2003), with Caldwell
and Danieli (2020) and Caldwell and Harmon (2020) providing powerful recent additions.




                                                      16
(0.003) in the presence of all these controls. In the raw baseline, the co-ethnic hiring propensity
of top initial earners from Mexico is the third highest, behind only those from Vietnam and
China, but it is in the middle of the pack (12th largest) in the full speci...cation; immigrants
from Mexico are a large share of many local labor forces, inating the baseline co-ethnic hiring
propensity.19
       The next two exercises conduct tests that help us evaluate the conceptual models. The
analysis in Table 3 starts by exploring the persistence of co-ethnic hiring choices at the level
of individuals. We identify 10,000 new ventures where the top initial earner was the top initial
earner of a prior business in a di¤erent MSA-industry. As discussed in the data section above,
we have dropped a small number of cases where one individual was the top initial earner of
...ve or more ventures. Thus, after excluding the initial venture for each top initial earner, a
maximum of three follow-on ventures is feasible for a given top initial earner in this sample
of 10,000 businesses. The format of Table 3 is identical to Table 2 excepting that we add as
an explanatory variable the initial co-ethnic hiring present in the top initial earner'
                                                                                      s excluded
...rst venture. (In comparing results over tables, one should bear in mind that the determinants
of co-ethnic hiring among the types of individuals who are top initial earners in multiple new
ventures could di¤er from the modal leader/manager who we observe only once.)
       The prior co-ethnic hiring behavior of a top initial earner is very predictive of subsequent
co-ethnic hiring behavior: a 10% higher share in a prior venture is associated with a 7% higher
share in the current venture. This persistence of co-ethnic hiring at the individual level is
consistent with both taste-based rationales and also information advantages (e.g., stronger
personal networks of the top earner). Unreported analyses ...nd a very modest decay in coe¢ -
cients when moving from the second to the third to the fourth ventures of an individual. This
past behavior of individuals completely captures the e¤ect earlier measured for the language
and cultural similarity measures. Interestingly, the local workforce composition continues to
play a role, albeit diminished. Businesses with surrounding local MSA-industry ethnic shares
of 1%-25% exhibit a 2%-5% increase in the share of their initial workforce of the same ethnic
group as the top initial earner compared to businesses in settings with a <1% local share.
       A ...nal depiction of these co-ethnic hiring patterns is captured in Table 4, where we in-
  19
    Appendix Table A3 also shows that co-ethnic hiring is usually comparable for lower- and higher-wage ...rms.
Top initial earners from Vietnam, China, South-East Asia, Jamaica, and Cuba show the strongest tilt towards
greater co-ethnic hiring in lower-wage ...rms, while top initial earners from South Korea, Russia, Poland, and
Taiwan show instead relatively greater co-ethnic hiring in higher-wage ...rms.


                                                      17
vestigate the degree to which the local workforce composition impacts hiring individuals with
the same native language. The dependent variable is now the share of the initial workforce
with the same language but di¤erent country of birth as the top initial earner. We restrict this
sample to observations where a country of birth is known, excluding cases where we only know
the region of birth. The negative coe¢ cients compared to the reference category suggest a
modest measure of substitution towards immigrants with a similar native language in settings
where there is a very small local share of co-ethnic employment. These magnitudes however
are quite small compared to those in Table 2, suggesting that the co-ethnic hiring e¤ect is
more speci...c than possession of a common native language.
       What do the results of Tables 1-4 say about our three conceptual models? Several ...ndings
are inconsistent with common language being the essential element. Most important, Table 4
shows only a quite modest substitution towards other ethnicities of the same native language
when an ethnic group is scarce locally. Table 2 also supports this conclusion when comparing
di¤erent factors lying behind within-group hiring. While language plays a role that is material
and precisely estimated, it is distinctly second-order in importance to the local ethnic group's
presence in the workforce. Appendix Table A4 further provides additional evidence from the
2014 Annual Survey of Entrepreneurs that suggests native language use beyond Spanish in the
workplace tends to be less common in industries that interact with ...nal consumers.20
       By contrast, the evidence thus far is consistent with both the information advantage and
group taste hypotheses. Both models align with Table 2's strong and persistent growth of co-
ethnic hiring with local workforce composition. In the information advantage model, the deeper
local labor pool would yield more potential matches where the ethnic connections and insight
could be valuable. The deeper local labor pool also allows greater potential for matching based
upon taste, although it less clear why that would necessarily continue to scale with labor pool
  20
     The 2014 Annual Survey of Entrepreneurs (ASE) recorded information on both the ethnic backgrounds
of immigrant business owners and the languages spoken with customers. We calculate the share of ...rst-listed
business owners who report interacting with customers in the native language of their country of origin. About
half of business owners from China and Vietnam, the two groups that show the highest co-ethnic hiring in
Figure 1, report using their native language with customers (usually in addition to English and possibly with
other languages, too). This rate is higher than what is evident for other groups that display lower co-ethnic
hiring, like Indian and Korean business owners. Unsurprisingly, immigrant Hispanic owners report high rates of
Spanish use. When separating out businesses that interact with ...nal consumers (e.g., transportation, services)
vs. those more removed (e.g., manufacturing, construction), we ...nd the use of the owner'    s native language is
lower for non-Hispanic owners in sectors that interact with ...nal consumers. This di¤erence suggests the patterns
that we observe are not being dictated by local ethnic customer bases, with the potential exception of Hispanic
populations.



                                                       18
depth vs. atten out once a certain workforce availability is achieved. When looking that the
persistence of co-ethnic hiring at the individual level, this could represent a ...xed managerial
approach or taste bias.
   We turn next to venture performance to provide some additional insight about the models.
Before doing so, we note that an appendix to this paper provides an initial examination of how
the policy environment of an area towards immigrants might impact relative rates of co-ethnic
hiring. While our paper focuses on quantifying venture hiring and dynamics, we explored if
changes in legal and policy environments impact the workplace concentration of immigrants.
We have kept this analysis for an extension in part because our data will not a¤ord an analysis
of venture performance implications due to the policy shifts. We hypothesize that a stricter
enforcement background leads some employers to recruit fewer immigrants, perhaps leading to
less competition for the labor pool for co-ethnic hiring. The appendix ...nds greater rates of co-
ethnic hiring in harsher policy environments towards immigration, which would be consistent
with both of the information advantage and group taste hypotheses.

4.2   Co-Ethnic Hiring and Venture Performance

Table 5 analyzes how the survival and employment growth of a ...rm relate to the ...rm'
                                                                                      s initial
co-ethnic hiring share. The top panel of Table 5 considers a (0,1) indicator variable for a new
venture surviving until age ...ve. The key explanatory variable is the co-ethnic share of the ...rm
workforce to the top initial earner in the ...rm's ...rst year. The progression across columns is
the same as in earlier tables.
   The ...rst column ...nds that a 10% higher initial co-ethnic share is associated with 0.9%
higher business survival rate (compared to a sample average of 49%). This e¤ect declines
to 0.4% in the presence of controls but remains precisely measured. The survival e¤ect is
concentrated in ...rms that are paying above the median wage for new ventures in the state.
   The bottom panel of Table 5 considers the employment growth of ...rms for ...ve years from
birth, conditional on survival. Employment growth is measured relative to average starting
and ending employment, following Davis et al. (1996). The measure is thus symmetric around
zero and bounded between -2 and 2. The ...rst column ...nds that a 10% higher initial co-ethnic
share is associated with 0.002 higher employment growth (compared to a baseline rate of 0.065
for ventures that survive ...ve years). This e¤ect remains or grows in the presence of controls.



                                                19
For the split sample, we continue to separate ventures based upon the same wage as in the top
panel. There is some interesting evidence of a negative growth e¤ect in lower-wage ...rms from
a high co-ethnic share, while the e¤ect appears positive in higher-wage ...rms.
       Unreported analyses further explored some the potential ways a higher growth measure
can occur. Our growth measure includes many ...rms that have negative growth, as they shrink
from the initial employment level of the entity (which was at least ...ve workers in our sample
design). It appears that a reduced likelihood to shrink, vs. a greater likelihood to expand, is
more important for the higher growth estimates for ...rms with substantial amounts of initial
co-ethnic hiring. In many ways, this aligns with two other results evident in this study: the
substantial co-ethnic persistence as ...rms age and the higher survival rates evident in Panel A
of Table 5.21
       Table 6 extends these survival and growth estimations in two ways. As noted earlier, we
want to test more continuous measures of distance between ethnic groups than our baseline
binary approach of origin from the same country of birth. Spolaore and Wacziarg (2016)
measure the bilateral genetic and linguistic similarity among countries. In earlier analyses, we
quanti...ed that top initial earners whose country of birth was genetically similar to the United
States exhibited less co-ethnic hiring. In this extension, we measure instead the average genetic
and linguistic similarity of the ...rm'
                                      s initial employees to the top initial earner. To construct
those measures, we use data on all employees present in the ...rm, including those born in
the United States. In cases where we have a regional mapping, we use a weighted average
of distances based upon the prevalence of grouped nationalities in America. Positive values
indicate greater team similarity, and we normalize the metrics to have unit standard deviation
for ease of interpretation. (Columns 1 and 4 that repeat our baseline metric continue to be
expressed in co-ethnic shares with a standard deviation of 0.279.)
       Panel A of Table 6 ...rst repeats the earlier survival and growth speci...cations (Column 5 of
Table 5) for the continuous measures, with column headers indicating the dependent variable
and type of hiring similarity used. A one-standard deviation increase in genetic or linguistic
similarity among initial employees is associated with a 1% increase in ...rm survival rates,
  21
    This is also consistent with results from other studies (e.g., Kerr and Kerr 2020) that show that immigrant
entrepreneurs tend to start smaller ...rms in terms of worker counts than natives, with much of the higher ...rm
growth subsequently being measured for immigrant-founded companies coming through employment convergence
over time. In the present study, we are only comparing among companies whose top initial earner is foreign
born, and we are also controlling for initial ...rm employment levels in the regressions.



                                                      20
roughly comparable to a 20% increase in initial co-ethnic hiring. A similar e¤ect is estimated
in the regressions for ...rm employment growth, which represents perhaps an even larger relative
impact for the genetic and linguistic similarity metrics compared to the co-ethnic hiring metric.
   When viewing these results, it is important to note that we have not observed in our
research project signi...cant evidence of cross-ethnic employment e¤ects (e.g., among Spanish-
speaking nationalities or genetically close European countries). Table 4 shows some modest
spillovers for MSA-industry settings where an ethnic group is very weakly represented, and
these results in Table 6 are consistent again with some modest e¤ects. However, most of the
explanatory power for the genetic and linguistic similarity measures comes because co-ethnic
workers of the top initial earner are of the same genetic and linguistic background. As such,
we view these results as robustness checks on our co-ethnic speci...cation design rather than
proof of cross-ethnic hiring spillovers. We note in the discussion below some exciting research
opportunities to extend this work.
   Panel B of Table 6 provides an important extension to connect the survival and growth
estimations of Table 5 to MSA-industry analysis conducted in Tables 2-4. We now model
jointly the hiring similarity measures, the local ethnic shares of workers, and an interaction
of these variables. The striking ...nding is that little, if any, of the positive impact of ethnic
hiring similarity for ...rm outcomes is evident in cases where the local ethnic worker share is
<1%, which represents 53% of the sample. The positive e¤ects instead are evident where there
is a signi...cant local worker base of the same ethnic background as the top initial earner. For
survival, the peak comes in settings with the ethnicity represents 10-25% of the MSA-industry
employment; for growth, the relationship is virtually monotonic to ethnic shares of >25%.
   Returning to our models, we see evidence for both the information advantage and group
tastes model. The information advantage model suggests equal or better venture performance
following upon an advantage conferred by ethnic connections; the taste model suggests instead
no e¤ect or a penalty on average. Across Tables 5 and 6, the majority of the evidence points
towards a positive impact of co-ethnic hiring on survival and growth, especially in higher-wage
businesses and those with thicker surrounding labor markets. We conclude this model accounts
for a the bigger part of the data.
   But we also note the negative growth impact observed in lower-wage business and espe-
cially where co-ethnic hiring is done in an environment with very limited local presence of the


                                               21
ethnicity. These negative e¤ects are not consistent with the information advantage model, and
it is important to note that they represent a signi...cant share of businesses. They suggest hiring
based upon group tastes are also contributing to the patterns observed. A corollary is that our
average e¤ects in Table 6 likely under-estimate the positive venture impact of co-ethnic hiring
due to information advantages given its blend of several motivations.


5    Discussion and Future Research

This project has explored co-ethnic hiring among new ventures using U.S. administrative data.
Co-ethnic hiring is ubiquitous among immigrant groups, averaging about 22.5% and ranging
twenty-fold from less than 2% to more than 40%. Co-ethnic hiring grows in the presence of a
large local workforce surrounding new ...rms with members of the ethnic community, greater
linguistic distance of the group to English, and lower cultural/genetic similarity of groups to
the United States. Perhaps even more striking is the remarkable persistence of co-ethnic hiring
at the level of venture, growing slightly on average as the company ages to ...ve or ten years
old, and for top initial earners as they move over companies. Co-ethnic hiring is thus very
persistent, and we do not observe convergence in hiring patterns over time.
    Turning to venture performance, higher initial co-ethnic shares are associated with a higher
likelihood of the venture surviving to ...ve years and also a greater likelihood that the venture
has kept its initial employment level or grown. This higher performance is concentrated,
however, among new ...rms located in cities and industries with thick local employment of the
ethnic group. The pattern of results is most consistent with a blend of co-ethnic hiring due to
informational advantages within ethnic groups alongside taste-based hiring. The former model
appears more important given the widespread advantages observed, but it cannot explain the
negative growth ...ndings we observed in some settings.
    These results are important given that immigrants are a quarter of U.S. entrepreneurs,
and new companies are also a critical source of net new jobs developed for the economy.
In future research, we hope to develop a greater understanding of the policy and business
environments that shape co-ethnic hiring. We made a ...rst stab at one in the appendix with
the E-Verify implementation, but a richer treatment of the local environment should encompass
local regulations (e.g., minimum wages), depth of past assimilation for ethnic communities in
markets, and so on. Occupational licensing may play a particularly strong role (e.g., Federman


                                                22
et al. 2006, Cassidy and Dacass 2021). We are also fascinated by the lack of any convergence in
employment patterns with time. Many studies demonstrate the bene...ts of diversity, and many
policy e¤orts explicitly or implicitly encourage assimilation of new immigrants into the economy
(e.g., training programs, English as a second language assistance, job banks). There may be
some tension between realizing the short-term advantages of co-ethnic hiring and achieving the
long-term assimilation for ethnic groups, along with the spillover bene...ts of diversity.
   At a narrower and more managerial level, it is interesting to study whether a new venture
can use strategic hires to bridge e¤ectively into larger local ethnic groups for better labor
market access. A surprising ...nding for us in this work is the relatively modest degree to which
hiring spanned into neighboring ethnic groups beyond the top initial earner's country of origin.
Interesting heterogeneity may lurk beneath this overall average. We suspect that a founder
from a small ethnic group may be able to access some of the scaling bene...ts conveyed by a
thick local labor pool of a larger ethnic group through careful early hires.
   Finally, our work has focused mostly on the outcomes of co-ethnic hiring for ventures,
but we earlier noted the larger parallel literature strand examining the career implications of
co-ethnic hiring for the immigrants themselves. Most of this work has looked at outcomes
in northern Europe, and it is important to know how the United States (and even regions of
the country) resemble and di¤er from what is documented in the literature thus far. Such an
inquiry can examine traits of the ...rst job (e.g., comparability of wage levels and growth, job
duration) and also the ability to jump later to new positions or open new businesses. These
studies on how human capital develops for individuals over their careers will help discern the
degree to which co-ethnic hiring is a boost or opportunity for immigrants when labor market
access is di¢ cult vs. a cul-de-sac that provides less long-term assimilation and growth.




                                               23
Appendix: Policy Environments

       This appendix provides an initial examination of how the policy environment of an area
towards immigrants might impact relative rates of co-ethnic hiring. We ...rst collect the state-
by-state existence and timing of laws or executive orders that require employers use the E-Verify
system to check the employment eligibility of new hires. Orrenius and Zavodny (2015) describe
the development of E-Verify, initially under the name Basic Pilot, by the federal government as
part of its e¤ort to curb illegal immigration in the workplace. The resource became available
to employers in California, Florida, Illinois, New York, and Texas in 1997, to Nebraska in 1999,
and to employers in all states in 2003. While making the E-Verify system available nationally,
the federal government did not mandate its use.22
       Starting in 2006, however, some states began requiring businesses use it. Within our
sample of states, some like Georgia and Missouri mandated that nearly all businesses use E-
Verify, while others like California and Illinois did not require E-Verify. More speci...cally, 12
of our 26 states mandated E-Verify use before our sample period ends in 2014. Some states
implemented E-Verify in steps, beginning with government contractors and/or large employers
before extending to other companies. In these cases, we take the implementation date that most
closely matches small companies.23 While the LEHD should only capture authorized workers,
we hypothesize that a stricter enforcement background leads some employers to recruit fewer
immigrants, perhaps leading to less competition for the labor pool for co-ethnic hiring.
       We ...rst model the implementation of E-Verify as an interaction term in our estimations
that include our typical MSA-Industry-Year and Ethnic ...xed e¤ects, along with controls for
the traits of top initial earners and ...rms. We model the MSA-industry-year ethnic workforce
share as a linear term, similar to Appendix Table A3, and interact it with an indicator variable
for whether a state has mandated E-Verify. There is no main e¤ect for E-Verify as it is absorbed
into the MSA-Industry-Year ...xed e¤ect. The baseline coe¢ cient for the reference category is
  22
     Papers studying E-Verify include Amuedo-Dorantes and Bansak (2012, 2014), Leerkes et al. (2012), Bohn
et al. (2014, 2015), Orrenius and Zavodny (2015, 2016), and Hasan et al. (2020).
  23
     States with E-Verify and coded date of implementation: Colorado (2006), Georgia (2012), Indiana (2011),
Louisiana (2012), Missouri (2009), Oklahoma (2008), Pennsylvania (2013), Rhode Island (2011), South Carolina
(2012), Tennessee (2013), Texas (2014), and Utah (2010). Indiana and Utah mandated E-Verify but explicitly
did not enforce it. As only two states took this route during our sample period, Census Bureau disclosure
restrictions require that we treat E-Verify passage as single group to achieve a minimum of three states. The
reference category includes Arkansas, California, Washington D.C., Delaware, Hawaii, Iowa, Illinois, Maryland,
Maine, New Mexico, Nevada, Oregon, Vermont, and Washington.



                                                     24
1.217 (0.015), indicating that a 10% increase in the local workforce of the same country of
birth as the top initial earner correlates with 12.2% increase in co-ethnic hiring into the new
...rm. The interaction e¤ect for E-Verify is 0.624 (0.096), indicating an even greater propensity
towards co-ethnic hiring after its adoption.
    An alternative model replaces the MSA-Industry-Year ...xed e¤ect with State and Year
...xed e¤ects. In this more typical di¤erences-in-di¤erences model, the baseline coe¢ cient for
the MSA-industry-year ethnic workforce share is 1.013 (0.007) and the post e¤ect for E-Verify
passage is 0.003 (0.004). The interaction of E-Verify'
                                                     s passage and the MSA-industry-year
ethnic workforce share is 0.696 (0.140). This model suggests that the accentuated co-ethnic
hiring connected to E-Verify is most prevalent in settings where a more sizable local workforce
of the ethnicity is present.
    Finally, we also modelled at the cross-sectional level an overall measure of the "immigrant
policy tone"from a study by Monogan (2013) of the 2005-2011 period. The policy tone metric
captures the relative number and scope of "welcoming laws" (such as opposition to the 2005
REAL ID Act) vs. "hostile laws" (such as the requirement to report all suspected illegal
immigrant arrestees to the U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement). In our sample of
states, the tone variable ranges in value from a least-welcoming value of 1.78 (South Carolina)
to a most-welcoming value of -1.51 (Rhode Island).24 Similar to our ...rst E-Verify estimation,
we model these state policy tones as an interaction e¤ect in an estimation that includes MSA-
Industry-Year and Ethnic ...xed e¤ects, along with controls for the traits of top initial earners
and ...rms. The baseline coe¢ cient is 1.449 (0.020) with and interaction e¤ect of 0.394 (0.022).
These results again suggest that harsher policy environments towards immigrants may lead to
greater co-ethnic hiring.


  24
     We have taken a negative of the original Monogan (2013) index so that the direction of the coe¢ cients align
with the introduction of E-Verify discussed above.




                                                       25
References
Adams, R.B. and D. Ferreira. (2009). "Women in the Boardroom and Their Impact on
Governance and Performance." Journal of Financial Economics 94, 291-309.
Adusei, M., K. Poku and S.Y. Akomea. (2017). "Board and Management Gender Diversity
and Financial Performance of Micro...nance Institutions." Cogent Business and Management
4.
Aigner, D.J., and G.G. Cain. (1977). "Statistical Theories of Discrimination in Labor Mar-
kets." ILR Review 30(2), 175-187.
Alesina, A., A. Devleeschauwer, W. Easterly, S. Kurlat and R. Wacziarg. (2003). "Fractional-
ization." Journal of Economic Growth 8, 155-194.
Alesina, A. and E. La Ferrara. (2005). "Ethnic Diversity and Economic Performance."Journal
of Economic Literature 43(3), 762-800.
Alesina, A., J. Harnoss and H. Rapoport. (2016). "Birthplace Diversity and Economic Pros-
perity." Journal of Economic Growth 21, 101-138.
Amuedo-Dorantes, C. and C. Bansak. (2012). "The Labor Market Impact of Mandated
Employment Veri...cation Systems." American Economic Review 102(3), 543-548.
Amuedo-Dorantes, C. and C. Bansak. (2014). "Employment Veri...cation Mandates and the
Labor Market Outcomes of Likely Unauthorized and Native Workers." Contemporary Eco-
nomic Policy 32(3), 671-680.
Anderson, S. and M. Platzer. (2006). American Made: The Impact of Immigrant Entre-
preneurs and Professionals on U.S. Competitiveness. National Venture Capital Association
Report, Washington DC.
Andersson, F., M. García-Pérez, J. Haltiwanger, K. McCue and S. Sanders. (2014). "Work-
place Concentration of Immigrants." Demography 51(6): 2281-2306.
Andersson Joona, P. and E. Wadensjö. (2009). "Being Employed by a Co-national: A Cul-
de-sac or a Short Cut to the Main Road of the Labour Market?" Journal of International
Migration and Integration 13(1), 99-120.
Ansala, L., O. Åslund and M. Sarvimäki. (2020). "Immigration History, Entry Jobs, and the
Labor Market Integration of Immigrants." Working Paper.
Arrow, K.J. (1973). "The Theory of Discrimination." In O. Aschenfelter and A. Rees (Eds)
Discrimination in Labor Markets. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Åslund, O., L. Hensvik and O. Nordström Skans. (2014). "Seeking Similarity: How Immigrants
and Natives Manage in the Labor Market." Journal of Labor Economics 32(3), 405-441.
Ashraf, Q. and O. Galor. (2013a). "The ` Out of Africa'Hypothesis, Human Genetic Diversity,
and Comparative Economic Development." American Economic Review 103(1), 1-46.
Ashraf, Q. and O. Galor. (2013b). "Genetic Diversity and the Origins of Cultural Fragmenta-
tion." American Economic Review 103(3), 528-533.
Azoulay, P., B. Jones, J.D. Kim and J. Miranda. (2020). "Immigration and Entrepreneurship
in the United States." Working Paper.
Bahar, D. and H. Rapoport. (2018). "Migration, Knowledge Di¤usion and the Comparative
Advantage of Nations." Economic Journal 128(612), F273-F305.
Batalova, J., M. Fix and P.A. Creticos. (2008). Uneven Progress the Employment Pathways
of Skilled Immigrants in the United States. Migration Policy Institute.
Battisti, M., G. Peri and A. Romiti. (2016). "Dynamic E¤ects of Co-Ethnic Networks on
Immigrants'Economic Success." NBER Working Paper No. 22389.
Becker, G. (1957). The Economics of Discrimination. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Bohn, S., M. Lofstrom and S. Raphael. (2014). "Did the 2007 Legal Arizona Workers Act
Reduce the State' s Unauthorized Immigrant Population?"Review of Economics and Statistics
96(2), 258-269.

                                             26
Bohn, S., M. Lofstrom and S. Raphael. (2015). "Do E-Verify Mandates Improve Labor Market
Outcomes of Low-Skilled Native and Legal Immigrant Workers?"IZA Working Paper No. 9420.
Borghesi, R., K. Chang and J. Mehran. (2016). "Simultaneous Board and CEO Diversity:
Does It Increase Firm Value?" Applied Economics Letters 23(1), 23-26.
Borjas, G. (1986). "The Self-Employment Experience of Immigrants." Journal of Human
Resources 21, 487-506.
Borjas, G. (1994). "The Economics of Immigration." Journal of Economic Literature 32(4),
1667-1717.
Bove, V. and L. Elia. (2017). "Migration, Diversity, and Economic Growth." World Develop-
ment 89, 227-239.
Brown, J.D., J.S. Earle, M.J. Kim and K.-M. Lee. (2020). "Immigrant Entrepreneurs and
Innovation in the US High-Tech Sector."In Ganguli, I., S. Kahn and M. MacGarvie (Eds.), The
Roles of Immigrants and Foreign Students in US Science, Innovation, and Entrepreneurship,
149-171. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Burchardi, K.B., T. Chaney, T. Hassan, L. Tarquinio and S.J. Terry. (2020). "Immigration,
Innovation, and Growth." NBER Working Paper No. 27075.
Burstein, A., G. Hanson, L. Tian and J. Vogel. (2020). "Tradability and the Labor-Market
Impact of Immigration: Theory and Evidence from the U.S." Econometrica 88(3), 1071-1112.
Caldwell, S. and O. Danieli. (2020). "Outside Options and the Labor Market."Working Paper.
Caldwell, S. and N. Harmon. (2020). "Outside Options, Bargaining, and Wages: Evidence
from Coworker Networks." Working Paper.
Campbell, K. and A. Mínguez-Vera. (2007). "Gender Diversity in the Boardroom and Firm
Financial Performance." Journal of Business Ethics 83, 435-451.
Carter, D.A., F. D' Souza, B.J. Simkins and W.G. Simpson. (2010). "The Gender and Ethnic
Diversity of US Boards and Board Committees and Firm Financial Performance." Corporate
Governance: An International Review 18(5), 396-414.
Cassidy, H. (2019). "Occupational Attainment of Natives and Immigrants: A Cross-Cohort
Analysis." Journal of Human Capital 13(3), 375-409.
Cassidy, H. and T. Dacass. (2021). "Occupational Licensing and Immigrants."Journal of Law
and Economics, forthcoming.
Chiswick, B.R. and P.W. Miller. (2012). "Negative and Positive Assimilation, Skill Transfer-
ability, and Linguistic Distance." Journal of Human Capital 6(1), 35-55.
Choi, J., N. Goldschlag, J.C. Haltiwanger and J.D. Kim. (2019). "Founding Teams and
Startup Performance." SSRN Working Paper.
Clark, K. and S. Drinkwater. (2000). "Pushed Out or Pulled In? Self-Employment Among
Ethnic Minorities in England and Wales." Labour Economics 7(5), 603-628.
Clark, K. and S. Drinkwater. (2006). "Changing Patterns of Ethnic Minority Self-Employment
in Britain: Evidence from Census Microdata." IZA Discussion Papers 2495, Institute for the
Study of Labor (IZA).
Clemens, M.A. (2011). "Economics and Emigration: Trillion-Dollar Bills on the Sidewalk?"
Journal of Economic Perspectives 25(3), 83-106.
Collier, P., P. Honohan and K.O. Moene. (2001). "Implications of Ethnic Diversity."Economic
Policy 16(32), 129-166.
Conyon, M.J. and L. He. (2017). "Firm Performance and Boardroom Gender Diversity: A
Quantile Regression Approach." Journal of Business Research 79, 198-211.
Creese, G. and B. Wiebe (2012). "`     Survival Employment' : Gender and Deskilling among
African Immigrants in Canada." International Migration 50(5), 56-76.
Daunfeldt, S. and E. Fergin-Wennberg. (2018). "Unemployment Risk Among Newly Hired
Immigrants." HUI Working Papers 126.

                                            27
Davis, S., J. Haltiwanger and S. Schuh. (1996). Journal Creation and Job Destruction. The
MIT Press, Cambridge MA.
del Carmen Triana, M., T.L. Miller and T.M. Trzebiatowski. (2014). "The Double-Edged
Nature of Board Gender Diversity: Diversity, Firm Performance, and the Power of Women
Directors as Predictors of Strategic Change." Organization Science 25(2), 609-632.
den Butter, F.A.G., E. Masurel and R.H.J. Mosch. (2007). "The Economics of Co-Ethnic
Employment: Incentives, Welfare E¤ects and Policy Options." In L-P. Dana (Ed.) Handbook
of Research on Ethnic Minority Entrepreneurship.
Docquier, F. and H. Rapoport. (2012). "Globalization, Brain Drain, and Development."
Journal of Economic Literature 50(3): 681-730.
Docquier, F., R. Turati, J. Valette and C. Vasilakis. (2020). "Birthplace Diversity and Eco-
nomic Growth: Evidence from the US States in the Post-World War II Period." Journal of
Economic Geography 20(2), 321-354.
Doran, K. and C. Yoon. (2019). "Immigration and Invention: Evidence from the Quota Acts."
Working Paper.
Earley, P.C. and E. Mosakowski. (2000). "Creating Hybrid Team Cultures: An Empirical Test
of Transnational Team Functioning." The Academy of Management Journal 43(1), 26-49.
Easterly, W. and R. Levine. (1997). "Africa' s Growth Tragedy: Policies and Ethnic Divisions."
Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(4), 1203-1250.
Edo, A., N. Jacquemet and C. Yannelis. (2013). "Language Skills and Homophilous Hiring
Discrimination: Evidence from Gender and Racially Di¤erentiated Applications." Review of
Economics of the Household 17(1), 349-376.
Ehrlich, I. and J. Kim. (2015). "Immigration, Human Capital Formation, and Endogenous
Economic Growth." Journal of Human Capital 9(4), 518-563.
Ehrlich, I., D. Li and Z. Liu. (2017). "The Role of Entrepreneurial Human Capital as a Driver
of Endogenous Economic Growth." Journal of Human Capital 11(3), 310-351.
Elliot, J.R. (2001). "Referral Hiring and Ethnically Homogeneous Jobs: How Prevalent is the
Connection and for Whom?" Social Science Research 30, 401-425.
Fairlie, R.W. and M. Lofstrom. (2013). "Immigration and Entrepreneurship."IZA Discussion
Paper 7669.
Fairlie, R.W. and B.D. Meyer. (2003). "The E¤ect of Immigration on Native Self-
Employment." Journal of Labor Economics 21(3), 619-650.
Fairlie, R.W. and J. Miranda. (2017). "Taking the Leap: The Determinants of Entrepreneurs
Hiring their First Employee." Journal of Economics and Management Strategy 26, 3-34.
Fairlie, R.W., J. Zissimopoulos and H.A. Krashinsky. (2010). "The International Asian Busi-
ness Success Story: A Comparison of Chinese, Indian, and Other Asian Businesses in the
United States, Canada, and United Kingdom." In Lerner, J. and A. Schoar (Eds.) Interna-
tional Di¤erences in Entrepreneurship, University of Chicago Press and National Bureau of
Economic Research, Chicago IL, 179-208.
Federman, M.N., D.E. Harrington and K.J. Krynski. (2006). "The Impact of State Licensing
Regulations on Low-Skilled Immigrants: The Case of Vietnamese Manicurists." American
Economic Review 96(2), 237-241.
Friedberg, R.M. (2000). "You Can'      t Take It with You? Immigrant Assimilation and the
Portability of Human Capital." Journal of Labor Economics 18(2), 221-251.
Garcia-Perez, M. (2011). "Does it Matter Who I Work For and Who I Work With? The
Impact of Owners and Coworkers Birthplace and Race on Hiring and Wages."Working Paper.
Gompers, P.A., V. Mukharlyamov and Y. Xuan (2016). "The Cost of Friendship." Journal of
Financial Economics 119(3), 626-644.


                                             28
Gören, E. (2014). "How Ethnic Diversity A¤ects Economic Growth?"       . World Development
59(7), 275-297.
Hasan, I., I. Kim and X. Yuan. (2020). "Unauthorized Immigration Regulation and Labor
Productivity: Evidence from Establishment-Level Data"   . Working Paper.
Haltiwanger, J., R. Jarmin and J. Miranda (2013). "Who Creates Jobs? Small vs. Large vs.
Young." Review of Economics and Statistics 95(2), 347-361.
Hammarstedt, M. and C. Miao. (2020). "Self-Employed Immigrants and Their Employees:
Evidence from Swedish Employer-Employee Data." Review of Economics of the Household
18(1), 35-68.
Hart, D.M. and Z.J. Acs. (2011). "High-Tech Immigrant Entrepreneurship in the United
States." Economic Development Quarterly 25(2), 116-129.
Hegde, D. and J. Tumlinson. (2014). "Does Social Proximity Enhance Business Partnerships?
Theory and Evidence from Ethnicity'   s Role in U.S. Venture Capital." Management Science
60(9), 2355-2380.
Hellerstein, J., M. McInerney and D. Neumark. (2011). "Neighbors and Coworkers: The
Importance of Residential Labor Market Networks."Journal of Labor Economics 29, 659-695.
Hellerstein, J. and D. Neumark. (2008). "Workplace Segregation in the United States: Race,
Ethnicity, and Skill." Review of Economics and Statistics 90(3), 459-477.
High...ll, J. and K. O'
                      Brien. (2015). "The E¤ect of Ethnic Diversity on Municipal Spending."
Atlantic Economic Journal 43(3), 305-318.
Holzer, H. (1987). "Hiring Procedures in the Firm: Their Economic Determinants and Out-
comes." NBER Working Paper No. 2185.
Hunt, J. and M. Gauthier-Loiselle. (2010). "How Much Does Immigration Boost Innovation?"
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2(2), 31-56.
Hyatt, H., S. Murray and K. Sandusky. (2020). "Business Income Dynamics and Labor Market
Fluidity." Working Paper.
Kalnins, A. and W. Chung. (2006). "Social Capital, Geography, and Survival: Gujarati
Immigrant Entrepreneurs in the U.S. Lodging Industry."Management Science 52(2), 233-247.
Kemeny, T. and A.M. Cooke. (2018). "Spillovers from Immigrant Diversity in Cities"   . Journal
of Economic Geography 18(1), 213-245.
Kerr, S.P. and W.R. Kerr. (2011). "Economic Impacts of Immigration: A Survey." Finnish
Economic Papers 24(1), 1-32.
Kerr, S.P. and W.R. Kerr. (2017). "Immigrant Entrepreneurship." In Haltiwanger, J., E.
Hurst, J. Miranda and A. Schoar (Eds.), Measuring Entrepreneurial Businesses: Current
Knowledge and Challenges, NBER Book Series Studies in Income and Wealth, Cambridge
MA, 187-249.
Kerr, S.P. and W.R. Kerr. (2020). "Immigrant Entrepreneurship in America: Evidence from
the Survey of Business Owners 2007 & 2012." Research Policy 49(3).
Kerr, S.P., W.R. Kerr and W.F. Lincoln. (2015a). "Firms and the Economics of Skilled
Immigration."In Kerr, W.R., J. Lerner and S. Stern (Eds.), Innovation Policy and the Economy
Vol. 15, NBER Book Series Innovation Policy and the Economy, Cambridge MA.
Kerr, S.P., W.R. Kerr and W.F. Lincoln. (2015b). "Skilled Immigration and the Employment
Structures of U.S. Firms." Journal of Labor Economics 33(S1), S147-S186.
Kerr, W.R. (2019). The Gift of Global Talent: How Migration Shapes Business, Economy &
Society. Stanford University Press, Palo Alto, CA.
Kerr, W.R. and W.F. Lincoln. (2010). "The Supply Side of Innovation: H-1B Visa Reforms
and U.S. Ethnic Invention." Journal of Labor Economics 28(3), 473-508.


                                             29
Kerr, W.R. and M. Mandor¤. (2021). "Social Networks, Ethnicity, and Entrepreneurship."
Journal of Human Resources, forthcoming.
Lee, N. (2015). "Migrant and Ethnic Diversity, Cities and Innovation: Firm E¤ects or City
E¤ects?" Journal of Economic Geography 15, 769-796.
Lee, N. and M. Nathan. (2013). "Cultural Diversity, Innovation and Entrepreneurship: Firm-
Level Evidence from London." Economic Geography 89(4), 367-394.
Leerkes, A., M. Leach and J. Bachmeier. (2012). "Borders Behind the Border: An Exploration
of State-Level Di¤erences in Migration Control and their E¤ects on US Migration Patterns."
Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies 38(1), 111-129.
Li, P.S. (2001). "The Market Worth of Immigrants'Educational Credentials."Canadian Public
Policy / Analyse de Politiques 27(1), 23-38.
Lofstrom, M. (2002). "Labor Market Assimilation and the Self-Employment Decision of Im-
migrant Entrepreneurs." Journal of Population Economics 15(1), 83-114.
Lofstrom, M. (2011). "Low-Skilled Immigrant Entrepreneurship."Review of Economics of the
Household 9(1), 25-44.
Lofstrom, M., T. Bates and S. Parker. (2014). "Why Are Some People More Likely to
Become Small-Businesses Owners than Others: Entrepreneurship Entry and Industry-Speci...c
Barriers." Journal of Business Venturing 29(2), 232-251.
Marimuthu, M. and I. Kolandaisamy. (2009). "Ethnic and Gender Diversity in Boards of
Directors and Their Relevance to Financial Performance of Malaysian Companies."Journal of
Sustainable Development 2(3), 139-148.
Mattoo, A., I.C. Neagu and Ç. Özden. (2008). "Brain Waste? Educated Immigrants in the
US Labor Market." Journal of Development Economics 87(2), 255-269.
Mayer, R.C., R.S. Warr and J. Zhao. (2018). "Do Pro-Diversity Policies Improve Corporate
Innovation?" Financial Management, Fall 2018, 617-650.
Migration Policy Institute. (2020). "U.S. Immigrant Population and Share over Time,
1850-Present,"       https://www.migrationpolicy.org/programs/data-hub/charts/immigrant-
population-over-time?width=1000&height=850&iframe=true, accessed May 2020.
Milliken, F.J. and L.L. Martins. (1996). "Searching for Common Threads: Understanding the
Multiple E¤ects of Diversity in Organizational Groups."The Academy of Management Review
21(2), 402-433.
Monogan, J.E. (2013). "The Politics of Immigrant Policy in the 50 US States, 2005-2011."
Journal of Public Policy 33(1), 35-64.
Montgomery, J. (1991). "Social Networks and Labor Market Outcomes: Toward an Economic
Analysis." American Economic Review 81, 1408-1418.
Monti, D.J., L. Smith-Doerr and J. MacQuaid. (2007). Immigrant Entrepreneurs in the
Massachusetts Biotechnology Industry. Immigrant Learning Center, Boston MA.
Munshi, K. (2003). "Networks in the Modern Economy: Mexican Migrants in the U.S. Labor
Market." Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(2): 549-599.
Nguyen, K.T. (2020). "Trust and Innovation within the Firm: Evidence from Matched CEO-
Firm Data." Working Paper.
Nicodemo, C. and R. Nicolini. (2012). "Random or Referral Hiring: When Social Connections
Matter." IZA Discussion Papers 6312.
Nijkamp, P. (2003). "Entrepreneurship in a Modern Network Economy." Regional Studies
37(4), 395-405.
Nowotny, K. (2016). "Are Overquali...ed Migrants Self-Selected? Evidence from Central and
Eastern European Countries." Journal of Human Capital 10(3), 303-346.



                                           30
Ore...ce, G. and G. Peri. (2020). "Immigration and Worker-Firm Matching." NBER Working
Paper No. 26860.
Oreopoulos, P. (2011). "Why Do Skilled Immigrants Struggle in the Labor Market? A Field
Experiment with Thirteen Thousand Resumes."American Economic Journal: Economic Policy
3(4), 148-171.
Orrenius, P.M. and M. Zavodny. (2015). "The Impact of E-Verify Mandates on Labor Market
Outcomes." Southern Economic Journal 81(4), 947-959.
Orrenius, P.M. and M. Zavodny. (2016). "Do State Work Eligibility Veri...cation Laws Reduce
Unauthorized Immigration?" IZA Journal of Migration 5(5).
Ottaviano, G.I.P. and G. Peri. (2006). "The Economic Value of Cultural Diversity: Evidence
from US Cities." Journal of Economic Geography 6(1), 9-44.
Ozgen, C., P. Nijkamp and J. Poot. (2013). "The Impact of Cultural Diversity on Firm
Innovation: Evidence from Dutch Micro-data." IZA Journal of Migration 2, 18.
Partnership for a New American Economy. (2011). The New American Fortune 500. A Report
by the Partnership for a New American Economy, New York NY.
Parrotta, P., D. Pozzoli and M. Pytlikova. (2014a). "Labor Diversity and Firm Productivity."
European Economic Review 66, 144-179.
Parrotta, P., D. Pozzoli and M. Pytlikova. (2014b). "The Nexus Between Labor Diversity and
Firm'  s Innovation." Journal of Population Economics 27(2), 303-364.
Parrotta, P., D. Pozzoli and D. Sala. (2016). "Ethnic Diversity and Firms'Export Behavior."
Economic Review 66, 248-263.
Patel, K. and F. Vella (2013). "Immigrant Networks and Their Implications for Occupational
Choice and Wages." Review of Economics and Statistics 95(4), 1249-1277.
Peri, G., K. Shih and C. Sparber. (2015). "STEM Workers, H-1B Visas and Productivity in
US Cities." Journal of Labor Economics 33(3), S225-S255.
Phelps, E.S. (1972). "The Statistical Theory of Racism and Sexism." American Economic
Review 62, 659-661.
Portes, A. and K.L. Wilson. (1980). "Immigrant Enclaves: An Analysis of the Labor Market
Experiences of Cubans in Miami." American Journal of Sociology 86, 295-319.
Richard, O.C. (2000). "Racial Diversity, Business Strategy, and Firm Performance: A
Resource-Based View"    . Academy of Management Journal 43(2), 164-177.
Richard, O.C., A. McMillan, K. Chadwick and S. Dwyer. (2003). "Employing an Innovation
Strategy in Racially Diverse Workforces E¤ects on Firm Performance."Group & Organization
Management 28(1), 107-126.
Rodríguez-Pose, A. and V. von Berlepsch. (2018). "Does Population Diversity Matter for
Economic Development in the Very Long Term? Historic Migration, Diversity and County
Wealth in the US." European Journal of Population 35(4), 873-911.
Roth, W.D., M. Seidel, D. Ma and E. Lo. (2012). "In and Out of the Ethnic Economy: A
Longitudinal Analysis of Ethnic Networks and Pathways to Economic Success across Immigrant
Categories." International Migration Review 46(2), 310-361.
Saxenian, A. (1999). Silicon Valley' s New Immigrant Entrepreneurs. Public Policy Institute
of California, San Francisco, CA.
Saxenian, A. (2002). "Silicon Valley's New Immigrant High-Growth Entrepreneurs."Economic
Development Quarterly 16, 20-31.
Schoellman, T. (2010). "The Occupations and Human Capital of U.S. Immigrants." Journal
of Human Capital 4(1), 1-34.
Schuetze, H.J. and H. Antecol. (2007). "Immigration, Entrepreneurship and the Venture Start-
Up Process. The Life Cycle of Entrepreneurial Ventures." In Parker, S. (Ed.), International
Handbook Series on Entrepreneurship, vol. 3. Springer, New York NY.

                                            31
Smith, N., V. Smith and M. Verner. (2005). "Do Women in Top Management A¤ect Firm
Performance? A Panel Study of 2500 Danish Firms." International Journal of Productivity
and Performance Management 55(7), 563-599.
Spolaore E. and R. Wacziarg. (2016). "Ancestry, Language and Culture." In: Ginsburgh V.,
Weber S. (eds) The Palgrave Handbook of Economics and Language. Palgrave Macmillan,
London.
Tomaskovic-Devey, D., M. Hällsten and D. Avent-Holt. (2015). "Where do Immigrants
Fare Worse? Modeling Workplace Wage Gap Variation with Longitudinal Employer-Employee
Data"  . American Journal of Sociology 120(4), 1095-1143.
Torchia, M., A. Calabrò and M. Huse. (2011). "Women Directors on Corporate Boards: From
Tokenism to Critical Mass." Journal of Business Ethics 102(2), 299-317.
Trax, M., S. Brunow and J. Suedekum. (2015). "Cultural Diversity and Plant-Level Produc-
tivity." Regional Science and Urban Economics 53, 85-96.
Vermeulen, F. (2003). "A Healthy Divide: Subgroups as a Stimulus for Team Learning Be-
havior." Administrative Science Quarterly 48(2), 202-239.
Wadhwa, V., A. Saxenian, B. Rissing and G. Gere¢ . (2007). America'        s New Immigrant
Entrepreneurs. Duke University Report.
Waldinger, R. and M.I. Lichter. (2003). How the Other Half Works: Immigration and the
Social Organization of Labor. Oakland, CA: University of California Press.
Williams Phillips, K. and C.A. O'Reilly. (1998). "Demography and Diversity in Organizations:
A Review of 40 Years of Research." Research in Organizational Behavior 20, 77-140.




                                            32
    Figure 1: Levels of co-ethnic hiring in new firms




Notes: See Table 1. Figures shows 15 highest co-ethnic hiring rates among country-specific
places of birth.
 Table 1: Descriptive statistics on new firm sample with top initial earner being foreign-born
                                                                                                       Share of employees with
 Country of birth of top initial                                        Composition of age 1           same country of birth as
     earner in new firm               Number of firms at entry            entering firms               initial top earner at entry
               (1)                                (2)                             (3)                              (4)
Country-specific places of birth:
Mexico                                          67,500                          24.6%                            31.4%
India                                           17,500                           6.4%                            21.0%
South Korea                                     17,000                           6.2%                            27.8%
Vietnam                                         16,000                           5.8%                            45.0%
China                                           15,500                           5.6%                            43.1%
Philippines                                     12,000                           4.4%                            27.7%
Taiwan                                           8,100                           2.9%                            19.5%
El Salvador                                      7,500                           2.7%                            16.3%
Germany                                          7,100                           2.6%                             1.8%
Canada                                           6,400                           2.3%                             2.3%
United Kingdom                                   6,400                           2.3%                             2.3%
Iran                                             6,300                           2.3%                            11.0%
Russia                                           5,000                           1.8%                            25.4%
Japan                                            4,900                           1.8%                            18.8%
Guatemala                                        3,300                           1.2%                             7.8%
Italy                                            2,800                           1.0%                             5.2%
Poland                                           2,200                           0.8%                            26.7%
Colombia                                         1,600                           0.6%                             5.6%
Cuba                                             1,500                           0.5%                             4.6%
Jamaica                                          1,200                           0.4%                             7.0%
Dominican Republic                                850                            0.3%                            11.0%
Haiti                                             450                            0.2%                             3.7%
Regional places of birth for those not mapped to a specific country:
South-East Asia                                 11,000                           4.0%                            19.0%
Middle East / North Africa                      10,500                           3.8%                            11.6%
Western Europe                                  10,500                           3.8%                             5.6%
Africa                                           7,300                           2.7%                            15.6%
Central Asia                                     7,300                           2.7%                            16.1%
South America                                    6,400                           2.3%                             6.2%
Eastern Europe                                   4,100                           1.5%                            13.3%
Central America                                  3,200                           1.2%                             5.5%
Oceania                                          2,200                           0.8%                             6.6%
Caribbean                                        1,200                           0.4%                             2.5%
Notes: Sample includes entering new firms that have a foreign-born top initial earner and employed five or more workers during their
first year. Top earners and workers are required to earn at least $200 in quarterly earnings and be aged 16-79. A small number of
cases with top initial earners associated with five or more firms are excluded. The sample builds off the 1990-2014 LEHD, with the
start dates for states depending upon when their records are included in the LEHD. Counts are rounded following Census Bureau
disclosure requirements. Appendix Tables A1 and A2 provide further tabulations.
                                                           Table 2: OLS estimations of co-ethnic hiring in new firms
                                                                                 Column 1                     Column 3 further
                                                                               incorporating Column 2 further adding controls Column 4 further Column 5 with Column 5 with
                                                           Estimation          MSA-Industry- adding Ethnicity for top earner   adding controls firms below state firms above state
                                                         without controls         Year FE          FE              traits       for firm traits   median wage       median wage
                                                                 (1)                  (2)                  (3)                  (4)                  (5)                  (6)                  (7)
                                                                                     DV: Share of initial workforce from same country-of-birth as top initial earner
(0,1) MSA-industry ethnic share <1%                          Reference


(0,1) MSA-industry ethnic share 1%-5%                          0.131                0.122                0.111                0.110                0.110                0.100                 0.112
                                                              (0.002)              (0.002)              (0.002)              (0.002)              (0.002)              (0.003)               (0.003)
(0,1) MSA-industry ethnic share 5%-10%                         0.099                0.092                0.188                0.186                0.188                0.169                 0.208
                                                              (0.002)              (0.003)              (0.003)              (0.003)              (0.003)              (0.005)               (0.005)
(0,1) MSA-industry ethnic share 10%-25%                        0.145                0.134                0.247                0.245                0.246                0.225                 0.266
                                                              (0.002)              (0.002)              (0.003)              (0.003)              (0.003)              (0.005)               (0.005)
(0,1) MSA-industry ethnic share >25%                           0.334                0.266                0.411                0.410                0.412                0.399                 0.434
                                                              (0.002)              (0.005)              (0.005)              (0.005)              (0.005)              (0.008)               (0.009)
(0,1) Ethnic native language in not English                    0.049                0.045
                                                              (0.002)              (0.002)
Ethnic group's cultural similarity to US                       -0.037               -0.040
                                                              (0.001)              (0.001)
MSA-Industry-Year FE                                                                 Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes
Ethnic group of top initial earner FE                                                                     Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes
Controls of top initial earner traits                                                                                          Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes
Controls of firm traits                                                                                                                             Yes                  Yes                  Yes
Observations                                                  275,000              275,000              275,000              275,000              275,000              137,000              137,000
R-Squared value                                                 0.16                 0.18                 0.28                 0.28                 0.30                 0.35                 0.27
Notes: See Table 1. Estimations quantify the OLS relationship between co-ethnic hiring in the first year of the venture and local availability of workers from the same country-of-birth as the top
initial earner. Firms with US-born top initial earners are used to calculate local workforce traits but otherwise excluded. NAICS industries are defined at the two-digit level. Share of sample by
MSA-industry group: 53% of firms are in <1% cell, 25% are in 1-5% cell, 8% are in 5-10% cell, 10% are in 10-25% cell, and 4% are in >25% cell. 90% of firms are in ethnic groups where the
native language is not English. Cultural similarity is defined to have unit standard deviation, with positive values representing greater similarity. Top earner traits control for age, gender, race, and
education. Firm traits control for firm size and wage rate in entry year.
               Table 3: OLS estimations of co-ethnic hiring in new firms controlling for past hiring behavior by same top initial earner
                                                                                 Column 1                     Column 3 further
                                                                               incorporating Column 2 further adding controls Column 4 further Column 5 with Column 5 with
                                                           Estimation          MSA-Industry- adding Ethnicity for top earner   adding controls firms below state firms above state
                                                         without controls         Year FE          FE              traits       for firm traits   median wage       median wage
                                                                 (1)                  (2)                  (3)                   (4)                  (5)                  (6)                  (7)
                                                                                      DV: Share of initial workforce from same country-of-birth as top initial earner
Co-ethnic hiring share in founding year in                      0.718                0.709                0.694                0.694                0.684                0.679                0.672
percentage
the          for top
    first venture  of the top initial earner                   (0.008)              (0.012)              (0.014)              (0.014)              (0.014)              (0.021)              (0.025)
(0,1) MSA-industry ethnic share <1%                          Reference


(0,1) MSA-industry ethnic share 1%-5%                           0.026                0.023                0.024                0.024                0.024                0.021                0.022
                                                               (0.004)              (0.007)              (0.009)              (0.009)              (0.008)              (0.013)              (0.016)
(0,1) MSA-industry ethnic share 5%-10%                          0.013                0.013                0.031                0.031                0.034                0.046                0.006
                                                               (0.006)              (0.011)              (0.016)              (0.016)              (0.016)              (0.026)              (0.029)
(0,1) MSA-industry ethnic share 10%-25%                         0.035                0.027                0.046                0.047                0.049                0.048                0.039
                                                               (0.006)              (0.011)              (0.018)              (0.018)              (0.018)              (0.028)              (0.033)
(0,1) MSA-industry ethnic share >25%                            0.072                0.015                0.045                0.046                0.047                0.029                0.129
                                                               (0.009)              (0.027)              (0.031)              (0.031)              (0.030)              (0.042)              (0.073)
(0,1) Ethnic native language in not English                     -0.002               -0.008
                                                               (0.004)              (0.009)
Ethnic group's cultural similarity to US                        0.000                0.001
                                                               (0.002)              (0.003)
MSA-Industry-Year FE                                                                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes
Ethnic group of top initial earner FE                                                                      Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes
Controls of top initial earner traits                                                                                           Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes
Controls of firm traits                                                                                                                              Yes                  Yes                  Yes
Observations                                                   10,000               10,000               10,000               10,000               10,000                5,100                5,100
R-Squared value                                                 0.72                 0.72                 0.72                 0.72                 0.72                  0.75                 0.71
Notes: See Table 2. Sample includes new firms where the top initial earner is observed two or more times in that role, to a maximum of four ventures. The first venture for an individual is
excluded and a control for the initial co-ethnic hiring present in that first venture is included as an explanatory variable for the initial co-ethnic hiring in the individual's current new firm.
                 Table 4: OLS estimations of similar language group hiring in new ventures excluding workers from country-of-birth
                                                                                Column 1                     Column 3 further
                                                                              incorporating Column 2 further adding controls Column 4 further Column 5 with Column 5 with
                                                          Estimation          MSA-Industry- adding Ethnicity for top earner   adding controls firms below state firms above state
                                                        without controls         Year FE          FE              traits       for firm traits   median wage       median wage
                                                                (1)                  (2)                 (3)                  (4)                  (5)                  (6)                 (7)
                                                                        DV: Share of initial workforce from same language but different country-of-birth as top initial earner
(0,1) MSA-industry ethnic share <1%                         Reference


(0,1) MSA-industry ethnic share 1%-5%                         -0.031               -0.032               -0.011               -0.010              -0.010               -0.012               -0.005
                                                             (0.001)              (0.001)              (0.001)              (0.001)             (0.001)              (0.002)              (0.002)
(0,1) MSA-industry ethnic share 5%-10%                        -0.056               -0.052               -0.038               -0.038              -0.038               -0.029               -0.038
                                                             (0.001)              (0.002)              (0.002)              (0.002)             (0.002)              (0.003)              (0.003)
(0,1) MSA-industry ethnic share 10%-25%                       -0.031               -0.041               -0.025               -0.025              -0.025               -0.021               -0.022
                                                             (0.001)              (0.002)              (0.002)              (0.002)             (0.002)              (0.003)              (0.003)
(0,1) MSA-industry ethnic share >25%                          -0.029               0.009                0.012                0.012               0.012                0.032                -0.013
                                                             (0.001)              (0.005)              (0.004)              (0.004)             (0.004)              (0.006)              (0.008)
(0,1) Ethnic native language in not English                   -0.637               -0.618
                                                             (0.002)              (0.002)
Ethnic group's cultural similarity to US                      -0.005               -0.007
                                                             (0.000)              (0.001)
MSA-Industry-Year FE                                                                Yes                  Yes                  Yes                 Yes                  Yes                  Yes
Ethnic group of top initial earner FE                                                                    Yes                  Yes                 Yes                  Yes                  Yes
Controls of top initial earner traits                                                                                         Yes                 Yes                  Yes                  Yes
Controls of firm traits                                                                                                                           Yes                  Yes                  Yes
Observations                                                 213,000              213,000             213,000              213,000              213,000              108,000             106,000
R-Squared value                                                0.67                 0.68                0.75                 0.75                 0.75                 0.73                0.76
Notes: See Table 2. The dependent variable in these estimation is share of the initial workforce with the same ethnic language but different country-of-birth location to the top initial earner.
                                            Table 5: OLS estimations of firm survival and growth with co-ethnic hiring
                                                                              Column 1                     Column 3 further
                                                                            incorporating Column 2 further adding controls Column 4 further Column 5 with Column 5 with
                                                         Estimation         MSA-Industry- adding Ethnicity for top earner   adding controls firms below state firms above state
                                                       without controls        Year FE          FE              traits       for firm traits   median wage       median wage
                                                              (1)                  (2)                 (3)                 (4)                 (5)                  (6)                 (7)
                                                                                                      A. DV: Survival of the firm for five years
Co-ethnic share of firm workforce to top                     0.086               0.036               0.045                0.047               0.042               0.003                0.053
initial earner                                              (0.003)             (0.004)             (0.004)              (0.004)             (0.004)             (0.006)              (0.005)
MSA-Industry-Year FE                                                              Yes                 Yes                  Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes
Ethnic Group FE                                                                                       Yes                  Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes
Controls of top earner traits                                                                                              Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes
Controls of firm traits                                                                                                                        Yes                 Yes                 Yes
Observations                                               275,000              275,000             275,000             275,000              275,000             137,000             137,000
R-Squared value                                              0.00                 0.21                0.21                0.21                 0.33                0.27                0.35

                                                                                  B. DV: Employment growth of the firm for five years, conditional on survival
Co-ethnic share of firm workforce to top                     0.019               0.033               0.064                0.065               0.014               -0.039               0.021
initial earner                                              (0.007)             (0.008)             (0.009)              (0.009)             (0.009)             (0.016)              (0.012)
MSA-Industry-Year FE                                                              Yes                 Yes                  Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes
Ethnic group of top initial earner FE                                                                 Yes                  Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes
Controls of top initial earner traits                                                                                      Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes
Controls of firm traits                                                                                                                        Yes                 Yes                 Yes
Observations                                               135,000              135,000             135,000             135,000              135,000              50,000              84,500
R-Squared value                                              0.00                 0.04                0.04                0.04                 0.08                0.11                0.06
Notes: See Table 2. The dependent variable in Panel A is an indicator variable for the survival of firms for five years from birth. The dependent variable in Panel B is the employment growth of
firms for five years from birth, conditional on survival. Employment growth is measured relative to average starting and ending employment, following Davis et al. (1996).
       Table 6: OLS estimations of firm survival and growth with co-ethnic hiring by local traits
                                                           Firm survival estimations                      Firm growth estimations
                                                      Country of   Genetic      Linguistic          Country of    Genetic    Linguistic
                                                        birth     similarity    similarity            birth      similarity   similarity
                                                          (1)            (2)            (3)              (4)            (5)            (6)
                                                                                     A. Baseline estimation
Hiring similarity (see column header)                    0.042          0.010          0.013           0.014          0.009          0.006
                                                        (0.004)        (0.001)        (0.001)         (0.009)        (0.003)        (0.003)
Observations                                           275,000        275,000        275,000          135,000        135,000        135,000
R-Squared value                                          0.33           0.32           0.33             0.08           0.08           0.08

                                                                           B. Interaction with local workforce shares
Hiring similarity (see column header)                    0.010          0.002          0.005           -0.059         -0.001         -0.008
                                                        (0.006)        (0.002)        (0.002)         (0.014)        (0.004)        (0.004)
(0,1) MSA-industry ethnic share 1%-5%                    -0.009         0.003          0.002           0.000          0.023          0.025
                                                        (0.003)        (0.003)        (0.003)         (0.009)        (0.007)        (0.007)
(0,1) MSA-industry ethnic share 5%-10%                   -0.010         0.016          0.008           0.000          0.053          0.042
                                                        (0.007)        (0.006)        (0.005)         (0.017)        (0.014)        (0.014)
(0,1) MSA-industry ethnic share 10%-25%                  -0.013         0.024          0.010           0.009          0.039          0.036
                                                        (0.007)        (0.006)        (0.006)         (0.018)        (0.016)        (0.015)
(0,1) MSA-industry ethnic share >25%                     0.016          0.027          0.027           0.019          0.059          0.044
                                                        (0.013)        (0.010)        (0.011)         (0.036)        (0.026)        (0.029)
Hiring similarity x
(0,1) MSA-industry ethnic share 1%-5%                    0.040          0.007          0.010           0.099          0.005          0.017
                                                        (0.008)        (0.002)        (0.002)         (0.019)        (0.006)        (0.006)
(0,1) MSA-industry ethnic share 5%-10%                   0.067          0.018          0.018           0.156          0.028          0.029
                                                        (0.013)        (0.004)        (0.004)         (0.032)        (0.010)        (0.010)
(0,1) MSA-industry ethnic share 10%-25%                  0.088          0.027          0.023           0.102          0.017          0.023
                                                        (0.013)        (0.004)        (0.004)         (0.032)        (0.011)        (0.010)
(0,1) MSA-industry ethnic share >25%                     0.030          0.009          0.003           0.131          0.039          0.041
                                                        (0.021)        (0.007)        (0.007)         (0.053)        (0.018)        (0.017)
Observations                                           275,000        275,000        275,000          135,000        135,000        135,000
R-Squared value                                          0.33           0.33           0.33             0.08           0.08           0.08
Notes: See Column 5 of Table 5. Estimations in Panel A consider alternative definitions of closeness to same country-of-birth by using
genetic and linguistic similarity across groups. Estimations in Panel B interact these variables with local ethnic share in the MSA-industry
workforce. Estimations include MSA-Industry-Year fixed effects, ethnicity fixed effects, and controls for traits of top initial earners and
firms.
                                                 Appendix Table A1: Extended descriptive statistics by ethnic group
                                           Number of firms at entry             Composition                                 Share of employees with same country of birth as
      Country of birth of                and surviving to indicated age            of age 1      Survival rate from entry       initial top earner in firm at indicated age
 top initial earner in new firm      Age 1           Age 5            Age 10    entering firms   Age 5            Age 10        Age 1              Age 5             Age 10
               (1)                     (2)              (3)             (4)          (5)          (6)              (7)           (8)              (9)             (10)
Country-specific places of birth:
Mexico                               67,500           32,500           15,000      24.6%         48.1%            22.2%         31.4%           32.3%            32.4%
India                                17,500           10,000            4,300       6.4%         57.1%            24.6%         21.0%           26.6%            26.9%
South Korea                          17,000            8,100            3,200       6.2%         47.6%            18.8%         27.8%           30.2%            31.8%
Vietnam                              16,000            7,200            3,000       5.8%         45.0%            18.8%         45.0%           43.3%            41.1%
China                                15,500            6,800            2,500       5.6%         43.9%            16.1%         43.1%           45.0%            41.2%
Philippines                          12,000            5,900            2,600       4.4%         49.2%            21.7%         27.7%           28.5%            28.0%
Taiwan                                8,100            4,500            2,300       2.9%         55.6%            28.4%         19.5%           20.2%            21.0%
El Salvador                           7,500            3,400            1,500       2.7%         45.3%            20.0%         16.3%           16.4%            15.4%
Germany                               7,100            3,400            1,600       2.6%         47.9%            22.5%          1.8%            2.1%             2.0%
Canada                                6,400            3,200            1,500       2.3%         50.0%            23.4%          2.3%            2.2%             2.2%
United Kingdom                        6,400            3,200            1,500       2.3%         50.0%            23.4%          2.3%            2.3%             2.3%
Iran                                  6,300            3,500            1,700       2.3%         55.6%            27.0%         11.0%           12.7%            13.3%
Russia                                5,000            2,300            1,000       1.8%         46.0%            20.0%         25.4%           25.0%            25.9%
Japan                                 4,900            2,600            1,300       1.8%         53.1%            26.5%         18.8%           21.5%            23.0%
Guatemala                             3,300            1,500             700        1.2%         45.5%            21.2%          7.8%            7.2%             6.9%
Italy                                 2,800            1,500             800        1.0%         53.6%            28.6%          5.2%            6.2%             6.3%
Poland                                2,200            1,200             550        0.8%         54.5%            25.0%         26.7%           28.0%            29.3%
Colombia                              1,600             750              300        0.6%         46.9%            18.8%          5.6%            6.6%             7.1%
Cuba                                  1,500             700              300        0.5%         46.7%            20.0%          4.6%            4.0%             4.9%
Jamaica                               1,200             500              200        0.4%         41.7%            16.7%          7.0%            7.7%             7.0%
Dominican Republic                     850              300              100        0.3%         35.3%            11.8%         11.0%           12.8%            11.0%
Haiti                                  450              200               60        0.2%         44.4%            13.3%          3.7%            3.2%             1.5%
Regional places of birth for those not mapped to a specific country:
South-East Asia                      11,000            5,400           2,400        4.0%         49.1%            21.8%         19.0%           19.2%            18.2%
Middle East / North Africa           10,500            5,200           2,300        3.8%         49.5%            21.9%         11.6%           14.1%            13.9%
Western Europe                       10,500            5,600           2,900        3.8%         53.3%            27.6%          5.6%            6.1%             5.5%
Africa                                7,300            3,600           1,400        2.7%         49.3%            19.2%         15.6%           14.3%             9.2%
Central Asia                          7,300            3,600           1,500        2.7%         49.3%            20.5%         16.1%           20.4%            21.5%
South America                         6,400            3,000           1,300        2.3%         46.9%            20.3%          6.2%            6.9%             7.1%
Eastern Europe                        4,100            1,900            850         1.5%         46.3%            20.7%         13.3%           12.7%            11.3%
Central America                       3,200            1,400            550         1.2%         43.8%            17.2%          5.5%            4.8%             5.7%
Oceania                               2,200            1,000            400         0.8%         45.5%            18.2%          6.6%            5.2%             4.6%
Caribbean                             1,200             550             200         0.4%         45.8%            16.7%          2.5%            2.3%             1.5%
Notes: See Table 1.
                                           Appendix Table A2a: Extended descriptive statistics by industry
                                                                                                           Share hiring
                                                                                                              other      Average
                                                                                                           immigrants    earning
                                                            Composition                         Other       more than   percentile
                                             Number of       of entering     Co-ethnic       immigrant MSA-Industry within firm of   Survival rate   Co-ethnic
                 Industry                  firms at entry       firms      share at entry   share at entry    share     co-ethnics     to Age 5    share in Age 5
                      (1)                       (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)          (6)           (7)           (8)            (9)

Agriculture, Forestry, Fishing and
                                               9,700           3.5%           47.3%           16.5%         45.4%        53.0%         57.7%           46.2%
Hunting; Mining; Utilities (11,21,22)

Construction (23)                             24,000           8.7%           24.1%           18.5%         52.1%        56.7%         45.8%           24.5%


Manufacturing (31-33)                         21,000           7.6%           27.9%           34.9%         47.1%        55.4%         46.2%           25.8%


Wholesale Trade (42)                          12,000           4.4%           26.0%           30.3%         53.3%        58.9%         51.7%           26.8%


Retail Trade (44-45)                          31,500          11.5%           20.1%           22.9%         55.6%        59.5%         50.8%           24.2%


Transportation and Warehousing (48-49)         6,400           2.3%           26.9%           21.2%         48.4%        56.6%         45.3%           26.7%

Information; Finance and Insurance; Real
                                              12,500           4.5%           15.9%           21.8%         50.4%        56.9%         43.2%           16.9%
Estate (51,52,53)
Professional, Scientific, and Technical
                                              16,500           6.0%           17.8%           22.6%         47.3%        57.6%         46.7%           18.3%
Services; Mgmt. of Companies (54,55)
Administrative and Support and Waste
                                              16,500           6.0%           21.3%           22.5%         50.9%        55.2%         46.1%           21.6%
Mgmt. and Remediation (56)
Education Services; Health Care and
                                              25,000           9.1%           18.2%           20.6%         44.0%        56.5%         58.0%           17.5%
Social Assistance (61,62)
Arts, Entertain., and Recreation; Other
                                              22,500           8.2%           25.3%           22.1%         44.4%        58.0%         46.7%           25.0%
Services; Public Admin. (71,81,92)

Accommodation and Food Services (72)          77,500          28.2%           20.3%           22.0%         47.7%        59.8%         48.4%           21.7%

Notes: See Table 1.
             Appendix Table A2b: Extended descriptive statistics by industry, continued
                                                                 Share of firms by co-ethnicity share at entry
                  Industry                          0%            (0, 0.25)      [0.25, 0.50)    [0.50, 0.75)    [0.75, 1.00]
                     (1)                            (2)                 (3)          (4)              (5)            (6)

Agriculture, Forestry, Fishing and
                                                   12.4%               11.3%        22.7%           33.0%          19.6%
Hunting; Mining; Utilities (11,21,22)

Construction (23)                                  35.8%               23.3%        20.4%           13.3%           6.7%


Manufacturing (31-33)                              28.6%               28.1%        19.1%           13.8%          11.0%


Wholesale Trade (42)                               33.3%               25.8%        18.3%           13.3%           9.2%


Retail Trade (44-45)                               41.3%               28.9%        15.6%            9.5%           6.0%


Transportation and Warehousing (48-49)             34.4%               23.4%        17.2%           14.8%          10.2%

Information; Finance and Insurance;
                                                   50.4%               24.8%        12.0%            6.4%           5.2%
Real Estate (51,52,53)
Professional, Scientific, and Technical
                                                   50.3%               23.0%        10.9%            7.9%           7.3%
Services; Mgmt. of Companies (54,55)
Administrative and Support and Waste
                                                   39.4%               27.3%        16.4%           11.5%           6.7%
Mgmt. and Remediation (56)
Education Services; Health Care and
                                                   48.0%               24.8%        11.6%            8.8%           6.4%
Social Assistance (61,62)
Arts, Entertain., and Recreation; Other
                                                   41.3%               22.7%        12.0%            9.8%          13.3%
Services; Public Admin. (71,81,92)

Accommodation and Food Services (72)               36.1%               34.2%        14.2%            8.9%           7.0%

Notes: See Table 1. Shares are calculated using rounded firm counts.
                                          Appendix Table A3: OLS estimations of co-ethnic hiring with ethnic-specific coefficients
                                        Estimation with year        Column 1          Column 2 further      Column 3 further      Column 4 further     Column 5 with firms Column 5 with firms
          Country of birth of           fixed effects and no   incorporating MSA-    adding ethnic share   adding controls for   adding controls for   below state median   above state median
       top initial earner in firm             controls           Industry-Year FE    in MSA-NAICS-Yr        top earner traits        firm traits             wage                 wage
                                                (1)                      (2)                 (3)                   (4)                   (5)                   (6)                 (7)
Country-specific places of birth:
Mexico                                      0.292 (0.001)          0.252   (0.002)      0.125   (0.002)       0.100   (0.003)       0.096   (0.003)       0.091    (0.005)     0.085   (0.005)
India                                       0.188 (0.002)          0.192   (0.003)      0.182   (0.003)       0.145   (0.004)       0.140   (0.004)       0.131    (0.005)     0.148   (0.005)
South Korea                                 0.255 (0.003)          0.254   (0.003)      0.257   (0.003)       0.220   (0.004)       0.214   (0.004)       0.178    (0.006)     0.249   (0.006)
Vietnam                                     0.427 (0.003)          0.410   (0.003)      0.403   (0.003)       0.360   (0.004)       0.354   (0.004)       0.416    (0.006)     0.246   (0.006)
China                                       0.408 (0.003)          0.415   (0.003)      0.404   (0.003)       0.365   (0.004)       0.354   (0.004)       0.406    (0.006)     0.269   (0.006)
Philippines                                 0.254 (0.003)          0.246   (0.003)      0.212   (0.003)       0.176   (0.004)       0.177   (0.004)       0.161    (0.006)     0.181   (0.006)
Taiwan                                      0.173 (0.003)          0.162   (0.003)      0.165   (0.003)       0.128   (0.004)       0.121   (0.004)       0.106    (0.006)     0.126   (0.006)
El Salvador                                 0.140 (0.003)          0.124   (0.003)      0.114   (0.003)       0.089   (0.004)       0.083   (0.004)       0.077    (0.006)     0.082   (0.006)
Germany                                    -0.004 (0.001)          0.001   (0.002)     -0.003   (0.002)      -0.005   (0.002)      -0.005   (0.002)       0.006    (0.004)    -0.014   (0.003)
Canada                                       Reference
United Kingdom                              0.000 (0.001)          0.000   (0.002)      0.000   (0.002)      -0.001   (0.002)      -0.002   (0.002)        0.000   (0.004)    -0.004   (0.003)
Iran                                        0.088 (0.003)          0.079   (0.003)      0.085   (0.003)       0.086   (0.003)       0.084   (0.003)        0.081   (0.005)     0.086   (0.004)
Russia                                      0.231 (0.004)          0.222   (0.005)      0.223   (0.005)       0.226   (0.005)       0.220   (0.005)        0.179   (0.008)     0.239   (0.006)
Japan                                       0.166 (0.004)          0.173   (0.005)      0.178   (0.005)       0.149   (0.005)       0.146   (0.005)        0.136   (0.007)     0.149   (0.007)
Guatemala                                   0.055 (0.003)          0.036   (0.003)      0.047   (0.003)       0.021   (0.004)       0.017   (0.004)        0.023   (0.006)     0.000   (0.006)
Italy                                       0.029 (0.002)          0.022   (0.003)      0.025   (0.003)       0.023   (0.003)       0.024   (0.003)        0.030   (0.005)     0.010   (0.005)
Poland                                      0.244 (0.007)          0.226   (0.008)      0.211   (0.008)       0.211   (0.008)       0.206   (0.008)        0.194   (0.012)     0.214   (0.010)
Colombia                                    0.033 (0.003)          0.036   (0.004)      0.039   (0.004)       0.023   (0.005)       0.021   (0.005)        0.023   (0.008)     0.017   (0.007)
Cuba                                        0.023 (0.003)          0.021   (0.004)      0.028   (0.004)       0.008   (0.005)       0.007   (0.005)        0.024   (0.009)    -0.009   (0.007)
Jamaica                                     0.047 (0.004)          0.053   (0.006)      0.052   (0.006)       0.009   (0.006)       0.007   (0.006)        0.027   (0.009)    -0.010   (0.009)
Dominican Republic                          0.087 (0.007)          0.073   (0.008)      0.076   (0.008)       0.052   (0.008)       0.051   (0.008)        0.046   (0.010)     0.042   (0.013)
Haiti                                       0.015 (0.005)          0.016   (0.007)      0.023   (0.006)      -0.019   (0.007)      -0.017   (0.007)       -0.017   (0.009)    -0.016   (0.012)
Regional places of birth for those not mapped to a specific country:
South-East Asia                             0.167   (0.003)        0.169   (0.003)      0.168   (0.003)       0.128   (0.004)       0.123   (0.004)        0.160   (0.006)     0.075   (0.006)
Middle East / North Africa                  0.093   (0.002)        0.088   (0.003)      0.089   (0.003)       0.089   (0.003)       0.086   (0.003)        0.094   (0.004)     0.074   (0.004)
Western Europe                              0.033   (0.002)        0.024   (0.002)      0.025   (0.002)       0.021   (0.002)       0.022   (0.002)        0.027   (0.004)     0.018   (0.003)
Africa                                      0.134   (0.003)        0.137   (0.003)      0.126   (0.003)       0.093   (0.004)       0.093   (0.004)        0.097   (0.006)     0.080   (0.005)
Central Asia                                0.139   (0.003)        0.146   (0.003)      0.143   (0.003)       0.109   (0.004)       0.105   (0.004)        0.118   (0.006)     0.091   (0.006)
South America                               0.039   (0.002)        0.036   (0.003)      0.039   (0.003)       0.022   (0.003)       0.020   (0.003)        0.027   (0.005)     0.010   (0.005)
Eastern Europe                              0.110   (0.004)        0.104   (0.004)      0.103   (0.004)       0.102   (0.004)       0.096   (0.004)        0.090   (0.006)     0.095   (0.006)
Central America                             0.032   (0.002)        0.026   (0.003)      0.032   (0.003)       0.010   (0.004)       0.008   (0.004)        0.012   (0.006)    -0.005   (0.006)
Oceania                                     0.043   (0.004)        0.041   (0.004)      0.046   (0.004)       0.040   (0.004)       0.039   (0.004)        0.043   (0.007)     0.034   (0.006)
Caribbean                                   0.002   (0.003)        0.003   (0.004)      0.006   (0.004)      -0.030   (0.004)      -0.031   (0.005)       -0.026   (0.007)    -0.037   (0.007)
Ethnic share MSA-Industry-Year                                                          1.221 (0.015)         1.216 (0.015)         1.228 (0.014)         1.175 (0.020)        1.321 (0.023)
MSA-Industry-Year FE                                                    Yes                 Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes                  Yes
Controls of top initial earner traits                                                                             Yes                   Yes                   Yes                  Yes
Controls of firm traits                                                                                                                 Yes                   Yes                  Yes
Observations                                  275,000                  275,000            275,000               275,000               275,000               137,000              137,000
R-Squared value                                0.20                     0.25               0.28                  0.28                  0.29                  0.35                 0.26
Notes: See Table 2.
 Appendix Table A4: Share of immigrant-owned firms serving customers in the
              native language of the owner's country of origin
                                                           Businesses in industries      Businesses outside of
                                                            interacting with final       industries interacting
                                                                  consumers              with final consumers
                                                                      (1)                          (2)
Hispanic immigrant groups                                            0.764                        0.666
Non-Hispanic immigrant groups
    High co-ethnic hiring in group                                   0.473                        0.590
    Low-to-medium co-ethnic hiring in group                          0.234                        0.410
Notes: Data collected from the 2014 Annual Survey of Entrepreneurs. Entries are the share of business owners
who report interacting with customers in a native language of the first-listed owner's country of origin. Hispanic
owners are treated separately due to the pervasive use of the Spanish language; immigrant owners from countries
with English as the native language are excluded. Hispanic immigrant groups are identified through the owner's
ethnic declaration to be of Hispanic origin. Immigrant owners placed into non-Hispanic high co-ethnic hiring
groups include those specifying their race to be Chinese or Vietnamese. Immigrant owners placed into non-
Hispanic low-to-medium co-ethnic hiring groups include Asian Indian, Filipino, Japanese, and Korean (terms as
described in ASE). Immigrants from some smaller racial groups (e.g., Pacific Islander) are excluded due to the
lack of a potential corresponding ethnic language in the language spoken with customers section of the ASE form.
Industries interacting with final consumers include NAICS 44-45, 48, 52-56, 61-62, 71-72, and 81.
