                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                NEIGHBORHOOD EFFECTS AND HOUSING VOUCHERS

                                       Morris A. Davis
                                      Jesse M. Gregory
                                      Daniel A. Hartley
                                       Kegon T.K. Tan

                                      Working Paper 28508
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28508


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   February 2021




We thank numerous discussants and seminar participants for helpful comments. We gratefully
acknowledge financial support from the National Science Foundation (grant SES-1629422). The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago or the Federal Reserve System. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Morris A. Davis, Jesse M. Gregory, Daniel A. Hartley, and Kegon T.K. Tan. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Neighborhood Effects and Housing Vouchers
Morris A. Davis, Jesse M. Gregory, Daniel A. Hartley, and Kegon T.K. Tan
NBER Working Paper No. 28508
February 2021
JEL No. I24,I31,I38,J13,R23,R38

                                         ABSTRACT

Researchers and policy-makers have explored the possibility of restricting the use of housing
vouchers to neighborhoods that may positively affect the outcomes of children. Using the
framework of a dynamic model of optimal location choice, we estimate preferences over
neighborhoods of likely recipients of housing vouchers in Los Angeles. We combine simulations
of the model with estimates of how locations affect adult earnings of children to understand how
a voucher policy that restricts neighborhoods in which voucher-recipients may live affects both
the location decisions of households and the adult earnings of children. We show the model can
nearly replicate the impact of the Moving to Opportunity experiment on the adult wages of
children. Simulations suggest a policy that restricts housing vouchers to the top 20% of
neighborhoods maximizes expected aggregate adult earnings of children of households offered
these vouchers.

Morris A. Davis                                Daniel A. Hartley
Rutgers University                             Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
Rutgers Business School                        Economic Research Department
Newark, NJ 07102                               230 S. LaSalle St.
mdavis@business.rutgers.edu                    Chicago, IL 60604
                                               USA
Jesse M. Gregory                               daniel.a.hartley@chi.frb.org
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin, Madison               Kegon T.K. Tan
1180 Observatory Drive                         Department of Economics
Madison, WI 53706-1393                         University of Rochester
and NBER                                       Harkness Hall
jmgregory@ssc.wisc.edu                         280 Hutchison Road
                                               Rochester, NY 14627
                                               kegontantk@gmail.com




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28508
1     Introduction
    We study if housing policy that was enacted to reduce housing costs of low-income house-
holds can also affect intergenerational mobility. Specifically, we consider an environment in
which policy-makers restrict the use of housing vouchers to a set of neighborhoods that may
positively impact the earnings of children once they are adults. We investigate the extent
that this change in policy affects both the willingness of low-income households to use housing
vouchers and the adult earnings of children of those households.
    So, why is this interesting? Chyn (2018) shows that children of families forced to relocate
out of demolished public housing projects in Chicago are more likely to be employed and earn
more in young adulthood than peer children of nearby public housing that was not demolished.
Chetty, Hendren, and Katz (2016), hereafter CHK, evaluate the impact of the Moving To Op-
portunity (MTO) program on adult earnings of children. MTO was an experiment undertaken
in the 1990s that randomly assigned a group of households with children eligible to live in low
income housing projects in five U.S. cities to three different groups: (i) a treatment group that
received a Section 8 housing voucher that in the first year could be applied only in Census
tracts with a poverty rate under 10% and could be applied unconditionally thereafter, (ii) a
second treatment group that received a comparable Section 8 housing voucher with no location
restriction attached, and (iii) a control group that received no voucher. CHK show that children
under the age of 13 from the group that received the location-restricted voucher experienced a
$3,477 annual increase in adult earnings relative to the control group.
    Given this evidence, it may seem reasonable to ask if public policy should steer low-income
households away from neighborhoods that might be detrimental to child outcomes and towards
neighborhoods that might improve child outcomes. One way to achieve this goal may be to
provide counseling and assistance to both renters and landlords to reduce barriers voucher
recipients face in moving to neighborhoods that improve child outcomes. This is the approach
taken by Bergman, Chetty, DeLuca, Hendren, Katz, and Palmer (2019) who are currently
running a large-scale experiment to this effect in Seattle. A different policy may be to simply
restrict the locations in which housing vouchers may be applied. Low-income households that
receive a location-restricted housing voucher would only be able to use the voucher to pay rent


                                               2
in a pre-determined set of neighborhoods.
   The Bergman, Chetty, DeLuca, Hendren, Katz, and Palmer (2019) paper uses an experimen-
tal design to understand costs and benefits of large-scale changes to existing housing voucher
programs. We use a structural approach. We estimate preferences for locations, consumption,
housing and amenities in a dynamic, forward-looking location-choice model using panel data
for many different types of renting households in Los Angeles. Given these estimates, we sim-
ulate the steady-state equilibrium of our model under various counterfactual policies in which
households can only use housing vouchers in Census tracts with relatively high Opportunity
Atlas scores.
   We believe our model-based, structural approach to analyze the costs and benefits of large
changes to housing policy offers different and complementary perspectives on the impact of
policy to the experimental approach advocated by Bergman, Chetty, DeLuca, Hendren, Katz,
and Palmer (2019) and others. To start, we are not limited to evaluating one or two particular
policies; we evaluate a suite of policies in order to identify a policy that maximizes the adult
earnings of children. Importantly, we measure general-equilibrium impacts that are not cap-
tured using current experimental methods. The relevance of general-equilibrium effects arises
because we impose a finite elasticity of housing supply in each Census tract in Los Angeles,
the values of which we take from Baum-Snow and Han (2020), that allows both housing supply
and rental prices to respond to voucher policies. In many of the counterfactual experiments
we consider, the location-restricted voucher program boosts rental prices in Census tracts with
high Opportunity Atlas scores. This change in rental prices induces some households that do
not receive vouchers to move from high Opportunity-Atlas neighborhoods to neighborhoods
that may provide similar utility, but have lower rental prices and lower Opportunity Atlas
scores. This relocation of households that do not receive vouchers reduces the net benefits of
restricted-location voucher program. Thus, our analysis highlights the importance of under-
standing general-equilibrium effects in studying the distributional effects of policy as well its
costs and benefits.
   In the paper that is closest to ours, Galiani, Murphy, and Pantano (2015) use data on the
location choices of the Boston participants in the Moving to Opportunity experiment to help
identify the structural parameters of a location-choice model. Their approach exploits the ran-


                                               3
domization of MTO participants along with Census data on tract demographics to estimate the
preference weights that households place on consumption, housing, amenities and various neigh-
borhood characteristics. The randomization of households into the different MTO treatment
and control groups allows the preference weight on consumption and housing to be identified
without an instrument for rent. The model successfully matches a number of moments summa-
rizing the location choices of MTO participants offered location-restricted vouchers, providing
out-of-sample model validation. The spirit of our paper and Galiani, Murphy, and Pantano
(2015) are similar, however there are a few key differences. Specifically, we focus on the loca-
tion decisions of households and the implications for adult earnings of children. Additionally, we
model and estimate the choices of all renters in Los Angeles (both voucher recipients and non-
recipients), enabling us to study metro-wide implications of large-scale hypothetical changes to
housing-voucher policies in a general-equilibrium framework.
   The rest of this introduction summarizes our methods, details and results.
   We start by estimating the parameters of a discrete-choice, dynamic model of location
choice for renters in Los Angeles. The model is in the spirit of Kennan and Walker (2011) and
Bayer, McMillan, Murphy, and Timmins (2016). We use panel data on renting households from
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York Consumer Credit Panel / Equifax (CCP) to estimate
optimized indirect utility for each neighborhood (Census tract) in Los Angeles and the cost of
moving. These data are a 5% random sample of U.S. adults conditional on having an active
credit file and any individuals residing in the same household. Our estimation sample includes
more than 1.75 million person-year observations of renter households living in Los Angeles. We
divide the sample into 144 types of households based on observable characteristics in the first
period in which we observe the household.
   Next, we specify that conditional on a choice of neighborhood, each household has Cobb-
Douglas preferences for consumption and housing in that neighborhood. With Cobb-Douglas
preferences, the ratio of expenditures on housing to expenditures on consumption is fixed,
implying that households rent smaller units in neighborhoods where the rental price-per-unit
of housing is high. The fact that households vary their housing quantity in response to changes
to rental prices suggests our structural framework can be used to to evaluate possible supply-
side interventions if desired, for example policies that increase the quantity of housing in high


                                                4
Opportunity-Atlas neighborhoods.
      Our specification requires estimation of one additional parameter that scales the determinis-
tic portion of utility relative to the variance of utility shocks that are embedded in the dynamic
location-choice model. This scale parameter determines how households respond to shocks that
affect utility after controlling for consumption, housing and fixed location-specific amenities.
To estimate this parameter we use the instrumental variables approach of Bayer, Ferreira, and
McMillan (2007).
      Finally, we determine the types of households that are eligible to receive a housing voucher
and have at least one child. We use tract-level data from the 2000 Census to estimate average
income and average number of children per household for each type. We identify 24 types of
voucher-eligible households in our sample with children that accept a housing voucher if offered.
These households are 1/4 African American and 3/4 Hispanic, have on average 2.1 children per
household, an annual income of $18.7 thousand and spend 36 percent of their income on rents.
      In the final sections of the paper, we combine the predictions of the estimated model with
data from the Opportunity Atlas to study how various housing-voucher policies affect optimal
location choices of households and the earnings of children when they become adults. The
Opportunity Atlas is a data set created by Chetty, Friedman, Hendren, Jones, and Porter
(2018) that, for each Census tract in the United States, predicts the percentile of a child's adult
earnings in the age-26 income distribution given the percentile of the household's income in the
income distribution.1 We begin the analysis by asking if our model can replicate the estimate
of CHK that the MTO voucher program increased annual adult earnings of children under the
age of 13 at the time the voucher was received by $3,477 with a standard error of $1,418. We
show that the model can nearly replicate this result; our model-based estimate of their statistic
is $2,923.
      Interestingly, holding the poverty rate constant of the chosen neighborhood, our simulations
show that if MTO voucher recipients had selected neighborhoods randomly then expected
average adult earnings of children of voucher recipients would have increased by $5,167, an
increase of more than 75%. In other words, we find that MTO voucher recipients selected into
  1
    We will sometimes refer to the expected percentile of the child's adult earnings in the age-26 income
distribution as the Opportunity Atlas "score" of the neighborhood.



                                                   5
neighborhoods that yield relatively low adult earnings for children. This occurs for two reasons.
For neighborhoods with a poverty rate less than 10%, households accepting an MTO voucher
prefer the amenities of low Opportunity Atlas score neighborhoods to high Opportunity Atlas
score neighborhoods. Additionally, rental prices tend to increase with Opportunity Atlas scores
across neighborhoods.
   In the final part of the paper we simulate our model under a plethora of policy scenarios to
understand the extent to which a city-wide voucher program that restricts the neighborhoods
in which housing vouchers can be used can increase the adult earnings of children of voucher-
eligible households. In all simulations, we allow for rental prices to adjust in equilibrium in
response to changes in tract-level housing demand. We consider two sets of simulations. At
first we analyze results assuming the Opportunity Atlas score of all neighborhoods is fixed at
its estimated value. After that, we allow the Opportunity Atlas score of a neighborhood to
adjust based on changes in the racial composition and average income of that neighborhood.
   We search for a cutoff Opportunity Atlas score, such that neighborhoods with higher Oppor-
tunity Atlas scores are included in the set of acceptable locations of restricted-voucher holders,
that (a) maximizes the aggregate adult earnings of all children and (b) maximizes aggregate
adult earnings of the children in voucher-eligible households. In the analysis, we highlight es-
sential trade-offs of a location-restricted voucher program: Some households decline the voucher
because the set of acceptable neighborhoods is too restrictive but households that accept the
voucher experience significant gains in the adult earnings of their children. We find that a
voucher program that limits locations to the top 10 percent of Opportunity Atlas neighbor-
hoods maximizes the aggregate annual earnings of all children of renting households in Los
Angeles; and, a policy that limits location to the top 20 percent of Opportunity Atlas neigh-
borhoods maximizes the aggregate earnings of children of renting households eligible to receive
vouchers. In either case, many children of households accepting vouchers experience enormous
gains to income and children of other households experience, on average, small losses. On net,
the gains outweigh the losses. We conclude policymakers can implement a location-restricted
voucher program that yields aggregate gains to adult earnings of children and significantly im-
pacts intergenerational mobility for low-income households eligible to receive housing vouchers.



                                                6
2     Location Choice Model and Estimates
2.1    Model

    The first step in our analysis is to understand how household utility changes with location.
To do this, we estimate the parameters of an optimal forward-looking location-choice model.
The basic intuition of estimation is as follows: If we notice households moving to certain clusters
of neighborhoods more frequently than others, then, on average, those neighborhoods must
provide higher levels of utility. In other words, viewed from the lens of the model, probabilities
over location choices are directly informative of net utility of locations.
    We consider the decision problem of a household head deciding where his or her family
should live using a dynamic discrete choice setting. Our basic framework is somewhat standard
and similar models have been studied by Kennan and Walker (2011), Bishop and Murphy
(2011) and Bayer, McMillan, Murphy, and Timmins (2016). For purposes of exposition, we
write down the model describing the optimal decision problem of a single family which enables
us to keep notation relatively clean. When we estimate the parameters of this model, we will
allow for the existence of many different "types" of people in the data. Each type of person
will face the same decision problem, but the vector of parameters that determines payoffs and
choice probabilities will be allowed to vary across types of people.
    The household can choose to live in one of J locations. Denote j as the household's current
location. We write the value to the household of moving to location       given a current location
of j and current value of a shock     (to be explained later) as


                              V ( | j, ) = u ( | j, ) + EV ( )


In the above equation EV ( ) is the expected future value of having chosen to live in        today
and  is the factor by which future utility is discounted. Note that the expected future value
of choosing to live in   today does not depend on the value of     , as in Rust (1987). We assume
households solve the same problem each period, explaining the lack of time subscripts.
    u is the flow utility the agent receives today from choosing to live in       given a current




                                                 7
location of j and a value for   . We assume u is the simple function


                                 u ( | j, ) =  -  j +


where  is the flow utility the household receives this period from living in neighborhood ,
net of rents and other costs. In section 2.4, we parse  into utility from consumption, housing
and fixed neighborhood amenities, but for now just know that  has the interpretation of
maximized indirect utility.  j = [0 + 1  D j ] · 1 =j are all costs (utility and financial) a
household pays when it moves to neighborhood from neighborhood j , which we specify as the
sum of a fixed cost 0 and a cost that increases at rate 1 with distance in miles between the
centroid of tracts and j denoted D j ; 1 =j is an indicator function that is equal to 1 if location
 = j and 0 otherwise, i.e. the household pays zero moving costs if it does not move; and
is a random shock that is known at the time of the location choice.                       is assumed to be iid
across locations, time and people. The parameters  , 0 and 1 may vary across households,
but for any given household these parameters are assumed fixed over time.                    induces otherwise
identical households living at the same location to optimally choose different future locations.
Dynamics in the model are driven by moving costs and the                         shocks. The model would be
static if either the idiosyncratic shocks were time-invariant or moving costs were zero.
   Denote   1   as the shock associated with location 1,              2    as the shock with location 2, and so
on. After the vector of   are revealed (one for each location), in each period households choose
the location that yields the maximal value


                            V (j |   1, 2, . . . , J )       =   max V ( | j, )                             (1)
                                                                 1,...,J



EV (j ) is the expected value of (1), where the expectation is taken with respect to the vector
of . We assume each period is one year.
   When the      are assumed to be drawn i.i.d. from the Type 1 Extreme Value Distribution,
the expected value function EV (j ) has the functional form

                                                         J
                             EV (j ) = log                    exp V ( | j )     +                           (2)
                                                         =1



                                                         8
where  is equal to Euler's constant,


                                 V ( | j ) =  -  j + EV ( )                                       (3)


and the tilde symbol signifies that the shock     has been omitted. Additionally, it can be shown
that the log of the probability that location        is chosen given a current location of j , call it
p ( | j ), has the solution

                                                           J
                       p ( | j ) = V ( | j ) - log              exp V ( | j )                     (4)
                                                           =1


Subtract and add V (k | j ) to the right-hand side of the above to derive

                                                           J
          p ( | j ) = V ( | j ) - V (k | j ) - log              exp V ( | j ) - V (k | j )        (5)
                                                           =1


   One approach to estimating model parameters such as Rust (1987) is to solve for the value
functions at a given set of parameters, apply equation (5) directly to generate a likelihood over
the observed choice probabilities, and then search for the set of parameters that maximizes the
likelihood. This approach is computationally intensive because it requires solving for the value
functions at each step of the likelihood, which involves backwards recursions using equations
(2) and (3). In cases such as ours, involving many parameters to be estimated, this approach
is computationally infeasible.
   Instead, we use the approach of Hotz and Miller (1993) and employed by Bishop (2012) in
similar work. This approach does not require that we solve for the value functions. Note that
equation (3) implies


            V ( | j ) - V (k | j ) =  - k - [ j - kj ] +  [EV ( ) - EV (k )]                      (6)


But from equation (2),

                                         J                               J
            EV ( ) - EV (k ) = log            exp V ( | l)      - log         exp V ( | k )
                                         =1                              =1



                                                 9
Now note that equation (4) implies

                                                             J
                     p (k | ) = V (k | ) - log                    exp V ( | )
                                                             =1
                                                             K
                     p (k | k ) = V (k | k ) - log                exp V ( | k )
                                                             =1


and thus

                           J                             K
                  log           exp V ( | )      - log           exp V ( | k )
                           =1                            =1


is equal to


                           V (k | ) - V (k | k ) - [p (k | ) - p (k | k )]
                     =              -k            - [p (k | ) - p (k | k )]

The last line is quickly derived from equation (3). Therefore,


                         EV ( ) - EV (k ) = - [p (k | ) - p (k | k ) + k ]


and equation (6) has the expression


                        V ( | j ) - V (k | j )                                                (7)

                        =  - k - [ j - kj ] -  [p (k | ) - p (k | k ) + k ]


   Combined, equations (5) and (7) show that the log probabilities that choices are observed
are simple functions of model parameters 1 , . . . , J , 0 , 1 and  and of observed choice proba-
bilities. In other words, a likelihood over choice probabilities observed in data can be generated
without solving for value functions. Our estimation approach also relies on the fact that the
expected value of choosing any neighborhood in the next period does not change over time. In
other words, decisions today do not affect future expected values (net of moving costs). This
allows us to estimate the model with a short panel, an insight from Arcidiacono and Miller



                                                  10
(2011).


2.2       Data and Likelihood

       We estimate the model using panel data from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York Con-
sumer Credit Panel / Equifax (CCP). The panel is comprised of a 5% random sample of U.S.
adults with a social security number, conditional on having an active credit file, and any in-
dividuals residing in the same household as an individual from that initial 5% sample.2 For
years 1999 to the present, the database provides a quarterly record of variables related to debt:
Mortgage and consumer loan balances, payments and delinquencies and some other variables we
discuss later. The data does not contain information on race, education, or number of children
and it does not contain information on income or assets although it does include the Equifax
Risk ScoreT M which provides some information on the financial wherewithal of the household
as demonstrated in Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2007). Most important
for our application, the panel data includes in each period the current Census block of resi-
dence. To match the annual frequency of our location choice model, we use location data from
the first quarter of each calendar year. Other authors have used the CCP data to study the
relationship of interest rates, house prices and credit (see Bhutta and Keys (2016) and Brown,
Stein, and Zafar (2015)) and the impact of natural disasters on household finances (Gallagher
and Hartley, 2017), but we are the first to use this data to estimate an optimal location-choice
model.3
       We restrict our sample to individuals who (a) lived in Los Angeles County in the first quarter
of any year from 1999 through 2013, (b) were observed in Los Angeles in the first quarter of the
following year, and (c) never had a home mortgage, yielding 1,787,558 person-year observations.
An advantage of the size of our data is that we can estimate a full set of model parameters for
many "types" of people, where we define a type of person based on observable demographic
   2
     The data include all individuals with 5 out of the 100 possible terminal 2-digit social security number (SSN)
combinations. While the leading SSN digits are based on the birth year/location, the terminal SSN digits
are essentially randomly assigned. A SSN is required to be included in the data and we do not capture the
experiences of illegal immigrants. Note that a SSN is also required to receive a housing voucher.
   3
     There are two other panel data sets of which we are aware with tract-level information on renting households
in Los Angeles: Data from Infutor.com and confidential data from the 2000 and 2010 Censuses. The Infutor.com
data has a larger sample but includes less information on each household. The confidential Census data are
accessible only in a Research Data Center, which limits its use for this paper.



                                                       11
and economic characteristics. We study renters to mitigate any problems of changing credit
conditions and availability of mortgages during the sample window.4 We exclude from our
estimation Census tracts with fewer than 150 rental units and tracts that are sparsely populated
in the northern part of the county.5 The panel is not balanced, as some individuals' credit
records first become active after 1999. Appendix A of Davis, Gregory, Hartley, and Tan (2021)
compares population coverage of the CCP to data from the 2000 Census for Los Angeles county;
summarizing the results, coverage appears quite good.
    We stratify households into types using an 8-step stratification procedure. We begin with
the full sample, and subdivide the sample into smaller "cells" based on (in this order): The
racial plurality, as measured by the 2000 Census, of the 2000 Census block of residence (4
bins),6 5 age categories (cutoffs at 30, 45, 55, and 65),7 number of adults age 18 and older
in the household (1, 2, 3, 4+), and then the presence of an auto loan, credit card, student
loan and consumer finance loan. We do not subdivide cells in cases where doing so would
result in at least one new smaller cell with fewer than 20,000 observations. In a final step
applied to all bins, we split each bin into three equally-populated types based on within-bin
credit-score terciles. Our strategy for specifying types is to balance fitting location choice as
flexibly as possible with estimating model parameters precisely. Our target is a minimum of
6,667 observations per type, giving us at least 35 observations per parameter, which we believe
is large enough to get reasonably precise estimates (on average, we have 12,414 observations
per type). In specifying types we prioritize race by putting that as the first variable in the
subdivisions. We then further subdivide based on age, household size and debt variables ­ the
latter are characteristics of households captured by this panel. We prioritize credit score by
doing a final split of the data based on credit-score terciles within each cell. After all the dust
settles, this procedure yields 144 types of households.8
   4
     In the CCP data, renters and homeowners without a mortgage are observationally equivalent. According to
data from the 2000 Census, 85% percent of the units without a home mortgage are renter-occupied for the 1,748
Census tracts of our study. Since we drop households that ever had a mortgage and follow most households
over multiple years, this implies the upper bound for the percentage of homeowners in our sample is 15%.
   5
     On average, each Census tract in Los Angeles has about 4,000 people.
   6
     We assign race based on the racial plurality of all persons in the Census block, owners and renters, where
they are first observed. The mean number of households and residents at the Census-block level in our sample
of 1,748 tracts is 41 and 118, respectively.
   7
     This refers to the age of the person in the household in the initial random sample.
   8
     We note that some of our type stratification relies on decisions households made in periods prior to the


                                                      12
    The following figures from our data are instructive. The left panel of Figure 1 shows the
typical location choices made by type 133 in our sample: A household earning $12,000 per year
with an Equifax Risk ScoreT M below 580 and first observed living in a Census block that is
predominantly African American.9 The light blue areas show all Census tracts with poverty
rates less than 10% and the tan areas show all Census tracts with higher poverty rates. The
areas in dark blue show the most chosen low-poverty Census tracts for this type and the areas
in black show the most chosen high-poverty tracts. The panel shows this type predominantly
clusters its location choices in one crescent-shaped area in the south-central part of the county.
The right panel of this figure shows the same set of location choices for type 28 in our sample, a
household earning $12,000 per year with an Equifax Risk ScoreT M below 600 and first observed
in a predominantly hispanic Census block. Comparing the two panels, not many neighborhood
choices overlap between the two types. If, counterfactually, we assumed that the vector of j
of the two types were the same, the model would attribute the systematic variation in optimal
neighborhood choices entirely to differences in the i.i.d. utility shocks.
    Households in our sample can choose to locate in one of 1,748 Census tracts in Los Ange-
les. Allowing a separate value of  for each tract and for each type would require estimating
more than 250,000 parameters. Conceptually, with a large enough sample we could separately
estimate every  for each type. For each type of household in our sample we use data on ap-
proximately 1,241 households followed over 10 years. For parsimony, and to exploit the fact
that geographically nearby tracts likely provide similar utility, for each type we specify that
the utility of location j , j , is a function of latitude (latj ) and longitude (lonj ) of that location
according to the formula

                                                 K
                                       j =            ak Bk (latj , lonj )
                                                k=1


The Bk are parameter-less basis functions. For each type, we use K = 89 basis functions.
Additionally, we allow the values of ak to vary for tracts above and below the 10% poverty
threshold. Inclusive of the two moving cost parameters that we separately identify for each
start date of our estimation sample, for example location, and in that sense some of our sorting into types can
be thought of as endogenous to the model.
   9
     We discuss later how we generate the estimate of household income.


                                                       13
        Figure 1: Location Choices by Type for Tracts Below and Above 10% Poverty Rate




         <10% Poverty                                          <10% Poverty
         Most Chosen <10% Poverty                              Most Chosen <10% Poverty
         >10% Poverty                                          >10% Poverty
         Most Chosen >10% Poverty                              Most Chosen >10% Poverty


                               (a) Type 133                                           (b) Type 28

Notes: These graphs show the most frequent location choices for type 133 (left panel), an African American
household with annual income of $12 thousand per year and a Risk Score less than 580 and type 28 (right
panel), a Hispanic household with annual income of $12 thousand per year and a Equifax Risk ScoreT M less
than 600. The light blue areas of the map indicate tracts with a poverty rate below 10% and the light brown
areas are tracts with a poverty rate above 10%. The dark blue and black areas show the most frequently chosen
tracts for each type. Dark blue are tracts with less than 10% poverty and black are tracts with greater than
10% poverty.


type, we estimate 2 × 89 + 2 = 180 parameters per type. With 144 types, we estimate a total
of 25, 920 parameters.10
       To define the log likelihood that we maximize we need to introduce more notation. Let i
denote a given household, t a given year in the sample, jit as person i s starting location in year
t and     it   as person i s observed choice of location in year t. Denote  as type and the vector of
parameters to be estimated for each type as  . The log likelihood of the sample is


                                                         p(   it   | jit ;  )                                  (8)
                                                 i   t


p (.) is the model predicted log-probability of choosing                     it   given jit . For each  we use the
quasi-Newton BFGS procedure to find the vector  that maximizes the sample log likelihood.
       Before moving on, note that the model assumes that all households have the ability to live in
  10
    Note that even though two adjacent tracts are likely to have similar values of  due to smoothing, the
shocks for each tract do not have to be similar as they are independent draws from the Type I Extreme Value
distribution. We use a large number of basis functions, and in particular allow the interaction of these functions
with a dummy variable for tracts below and above 10% poverty rate, to be able to fit steep changes to j over
a very narrow geography.



                                                         14
any neighborhood. Of course, some landlords may be racist or discriminate against households
with low income11 but households in our model do not need to be able to rent from every
landlord in every location; they only need to be able to rent one unit of their desired size and
quality in each Census tract. In the event racism or discrimination is systemic in certain tracts,
the probability that certain types of households will live in those tracts will be low and this
will affect estimates of  for those types in those tracts.12 If discrimination in certain tracks
is significant, we conjecture our framework will still be useful in predicting location choice for
those tracts ­ and the policy experiments we discuss later will continue to be informative ­ as
long as the degree to which landlords are discriminatory does not systematically change as a
result of any policies we consider.


2.3       Estimates and Model Fit

       Our procedure ultimately yields estimates of j , 0 and 1 for each type to match model-
predicted moving probabilities to those in the data.13 Due to our large number of types and
tracts, it is impossible to report all parameter estimates. Instead, we summarize the estimates
by examining the model's in-sample fit along a number of dimensions. By design our model
can nearly exactly match the average moving rate in the data for each type; a regression of
the model-predicted average moving rate on the moving rate in the data for our 144 types has
an R2 value of 0.9996. Figure 2 compares the distribution of distances moved (measured as
the straight line distance between tract centroids) for all movers in the data and as predicted
by our model.14 This figure shows that the model replicates the hump-shaped distribution of
distances moved, with the most frequent moves around 4 miles. By having type-specific values
of 0 and 1 , for each type we match the average probability of a move and the average distance
conditional on a move occurring. That said, the model slightly overpredicts moves between 4
  11
     For evidence on discrimination in rental markets, see studies by Yinger (1986) and Ewens, Tomlin, and
Wang (2014). Popkin, Cunningham, Godfrey, Bednarz, and Lewis (2002) and Phillips (2017) also demonstrate
that landlords discriminate against rental applicants that wish to use housing vouchers.
  12
     This may also affect estimates of , depending on the relative location of the tracts with these racial issues.
  13
     We fix  = 0.95 for all types.
  14
     In the data we know the Census block of residence for each household. We treat households that move
within-tract as if they did not move and for the remaining moves, we define distance moved as the distance
between tract centroids of the sending and receiving tracts.




                                                        15
and 10 miles in length and slightly underpredicts moves less than 4 miles.15

                           Figure 2: Model Fit: Density of Moving Distance




                                          .15
                                                                         Data         Model




                                               .1
                                       Density
                                    .05   0

                                                    0      10       20           30       40
                                                                 Distance



Notes: This graph shows the predicted and actual density of distance moved for all types of households in our
data, conditional on a move to a different Census tract.


       Figure 3 shows a detailed comparison of model-predicted and actual annual migration rates
for households that choose to move by poverty rate of Census tracts. The tracts from which
people are moving are split into six groupings based on the poverty rate of the originating tract:
0-5, 5-10, 10-15, 15-20, 20-25 and >25. For each of these groupings, the probability of choosing
a destination tract of a given poverty rate is plotted for the data (dark blue solid line) and as
predicted by the model (light blue dotted line). Figure 3 shows model fit for some very low-
probability moves.16 The model tends to underpredict the probability that households living in
low-poverty tracts move to a low-poverty tract, conditional on a move occurring. Aside from
that, in our view the model fits the data well.


2.4       Preferences for Amenities, Housing and Consumption

       We specify that  is the following function of consumption enjoyed in tract                        (c ), the
quantity of housing rented in tract                     (h ), and type-specific amenities associated with location
  that are fixed over time (A )

                                           1                     1-                       
                                =                       ln A +                  ln c +         ln h
                                                                                          
  15
     The model fit is almost identical for the 24 types of low-income households with children that accept housing
vouchers, the upcoming focus of much of our paper.
  16
     For perspective, the unconditional probability of any move is less than ten percent.


                                                                 16
 is a parameter that effectively rescales the variance of the draws of the utility shocks and 
is a parameter that determines preferences for housing relative to consumption. We will specify
that  is identical for all households but will allow  to vary across types of households. For
the purposes of exposition, we temporarily suppress all type-specific subscripts.
    We assume the renting households in our sample have no savings. Households not receiving
any rental assistance and choosing to live in location have the budget constraint w = c + r · h ,
where w is type-specific income and r is the quality-adjusted price-per-unit of housing in
location . Given preferences and constraints, households choosing location                                                                                                           choose optimal

                                Figure 3: Poverty Category Transitions t - 1 to t, Conditional on Moving
             .4




                                                                                .4




                                                                                                                                                   .4
                                                  Data         Model                                                 Data         Model                                                 Data         Model
                     .3




                                                                                        .3




                                                                                                                                                           .3
    Fraction of Moves




                                                                       Fraction of Moves




                                                                                                                                          Fraction of Moves
             .2




                                                                                .2




                                                                                                                                                   .2
     .1




                                                                        .1




                                                                                                                                           .1
             0




                                                                                0




                                                                                                                                                   0
                          5% 10% 15% 20% 25% 30% 35% 40% 45% 50%>50%                         5% 10% 15% 20% 25% 30% 35% 40% 45% 50%>50%                         5% 10% 15% 20% 25% 30% 35% 40% 45% 50%>50%
                               Destination Tract Poverty Category                                 Destination Tract Poverty Category                                 Destination Tract Poverty Category



                                 (a) From 0-5%                                                     (b) From 5-10%                                                     (c) From 10-15%
             .4




                                                                                .4




                                                                                                                                                   .4




                                                  Data         Model                                                 Data         Model                                                 Data         Model
                     .3




                                                                                        .3




                                                                                                                                                           .3
    Fraction of Moves




                                                                       Fraction of Moves




                                                                                                                                          Fraction of Moves
             .2




                                                                                .2




                                                                                                                                                   .2
     .1




                                                                        .1




                                                                                                                                           .1
             0




                                                                                0




                                                                                                                                                   0




                          5% 10% 15% 20% 25% 30% 35% 40% 45% 50%>50%                         5% 10% 15% 20% 25% 30% 35% 40% 45% 50%>50%                         5% 10% 15% 20% 25% 30% 35% 40% 45% 50%>50%
                               Destination Tract Poverty Category                                 Destination Tract Poverty Category                                 Destination Tract Poverty Category



                                (d) From 15-20%                                                    (e) From 20-25%                                                     (f) From >25%

Notes: These graphs show the predicted and actual density of moves in our data. Panels show outcomes for
different poverty rates at the initial location. The x-axis of each panel is the poverty rate at the destination
location and the y-axis is the frequency that poverty rate is chosen.


consumption and housing to satisfy c = (1 - ) w and r · h = w. Since income is fixed
for each type in our sample, and as a direct result of assumptions we have made about a
lack of savings and the log-separability of consumption and housing in utility, consumption is
independent of location choice. The quantity of housing consumed varies across locations in

                                                                                                              17
a deterministic way determined by the rental price per unit of housing. As indicated by the
first-order conditions, as households move from (say) cheaper to more expensive locations, their
optimal quantity of housing falls such that the expenditure share on housing stays constant.


2.5    Housing Vouchers and Likelihood Calculations

   Our assumption of Cobb-Douglas preferences is important, as it implies that the presence
of households in our data that receive housing assistance in the form of vouchers does not affect
our type-specific estimates of  . To understand why, it is useful to compare the indirect utility
received in any given tract by voucher-receiving and non-voucher-receiving households.
   For this section, we continue to suppress type-specific subscripts. When households do not
receive a voucher, the optimized indirect utility in location   is equal to

                         1              1-                         
                   =          ln A +            ln [(1 - ) w] +        ln (w/r )             (9)
                                                                   

   Computing the indirect utility of voucher-receiving households is a bit more complicated.
Voucher recipients face constraints that are illustrated by Olsen (2003) and are summarized by
HUD.gov (2021), which we repeat below

         A family which receives a housing voucher can select a unit with a rent that is
      below or above the payment standard. The housing voucher family must pay 30%
      of its monthly adjusted gross income for rent and utilities, and if the unit rent
      is greater than the payment standard the family is required to pay the additional
      amount. By law, whenever a family moves to a new unit where the rent exceeds
      the payment standard, the family may not pay more than 40 percent of its adjusted
      monthly income for rent.

In our model, utility is strictly increasing in the quantity of housing. Since households have to
pay 30% of their income to receive any level of assistance, if they choose to receive assistance
they should choose the maximum amount of assistance. This implies voucher recipients will
never rent a housing unit with rent less than the payment standard, which we denote as std.
   As a thought experiment, suppose (counterfactually) households are able to treat their
housing assistance as if it were extra income. In this case, households would optimally choose

                                               18
the following expenditures on housing and consumption


                                 rh     =  (0.7w + std)                                      (10)

                                   c    = (1 - ) (0.7w + std)                                (11)


However the voucher program specifies that voucher recipients can consume no more than 70%
of their income w on consumption since they have to spend a minimum of 30% of income to
receive a voucher of any size up to std. This constraint binds when

                                                  std
                                                                                             (12)
                                               0.7w + std

The voucher program also specifies that voucher recipients can consume no less than 60% of
their income w since they are not allowed to spend more than 40% of their income on rent.
This constraint binds when

                                              std + 0.1w
                                                                                             (13)
                                          0.6w + (std + 0.1w)

Define L and H as the values of alpha such that equations (12) and (13) hold with equal-
ity, respectively. Table 1 summarizes the quantities of consumption and housing for voucher
recipients for ranges of  given income w and the voucher rules.
   Regardless of the value of , the difference in utility between accepting a voucher and not
accepting a voucher is constant across tracts. Define  , -  as the difference in utility of living
in tract    with a voucher and without a voucher

                                       1-         0.7                    std
           Case 1: 0 <  < L                  ln          +          ln
                                                 1-                      w
                                       1      0.7w + std
           Case 2: L    H                 ln                                                 (14)
                                                  w
                                       1-         0.6                    std + 0.1w
           Case 3: H <  < 1                  ln          +          ln
                                                 1-                          w

In all three cases,  , -  is constant across tracts. To understand why, note that for any
household std and w are constant. The only variables that vary across tracts that enter indirect
utility, A and r , enter the expression for indirect utility of voucher and non-voucher recipients

                                               19
exactly the same way; these terms cancel when taking the difference of indirect utilities of
voucher and non-voucher households.17 Thus, the probability that any particular tract is chosen
does not depend on whether or not the household is receiving a voucher and our likelihood
calculations are not affected by the presence of voucher recipients.

                   Table 1: Consumption and Housing by  for Voucher Recipients

                          Case   Range of               c                    h
                           1      0 to L              0.7w                 std/r
                           2     L to H        (1 - ) (0.7w + std)     (0.7w + std) /r
                           3      H to 1              0.6w            (std + 0.1w) /r




      Another way of understanding why the presence of some voucher-recipients in the data does
not affect our estimates is to study  -  for any tracts                  and    . For both voucher-holders
and non-voucher holders, this is equal to

                                         1                           
                         -        =           (ln A - ln A ) -            (ln r - ln r )                   (15)
                                                                     

Thus, given estimates of  and  , our identification of differences across tracts in amenities
is unaffected by the share of each type that receives vouchers. This matters because not all
eligible households in our data receive vouchers, and we do not know which households receive
them.

2.5.1      Estimating Type-Specific w and 

      We wish to estimate w and  for each type, but the CCP data does not contain measures
of income or rental expenditures. Instead, we estimate w and  by type using data from the
Census. Starting with w, for any given Census tract we compute the average income of renters
in the tract in the 2000 Census, call it w
                                         ¯ . We restrict our sample of tracts to tracts with at least
250 rental units, 1,642 tracts in total. Denote the share of type  renters in tract                   according
to the CCP data in the year 2000 as   . Ideally, we could estimate type-specific income, w ,
 17
      This follows from our specification of log-separable preferences for consumption and housing.




                                                       20
                                   ¯ on the full set of type shares in each tract   , that is
by regressing average tract income w


                                   w
                                   ¯     =               w   + errorw
                                                   


where by construction        = 1. That said, we wish to enforce that estimates of annual income
                        
are at least w = $12, 000 for every type. To do this, we run the regression




                              ¯ -w =
                              w                       (w - w)   + errorw
                                                


and impose that w  w in estimation. We estimate that 13% of our types (19 of 144 types)
have income at our lower bound of $12 thousand per year. The average income of the other
125 types is $47 thousand per year, with a standard deviation of $31 thousand. The largest
type-specific income we estimate is $173 thousand per year.
   Our next step is to estimate a value of  for each type. Denote our estimates of w as
^  and denote the average level of rental expenditures (paid by renters) measured in the 2000
w
Census in tract   as rh . The first-order condition of households implies


                                       rh       =               w                           (16)
                                                         


where  is the type-specific expenditure share on rents. We transform this equation so re-
gressions do not place disproportionate weight fitting tracts with relatively high average rents.
Define predicted average income in tract        as


                                         w
                                         ^      =              ^ 
                                                               w
                                                            


Divide equation (16) by w                                              ^  for w to yield
                        ^ and substitute our estimate of annual income w

                                    rh                           ^ 
                                                                 w
                                            =             
                                    w^                
                                                                  w^




                                                      21
       We run a regression of the form

                           rh
                           w^
                                -                 -           ^ 
                                                              w
                                      =                                + errorrh                       (17)
                            -               
                                                  -            w^

This enables us to easily enforce in estimation that      .18 We set  = 0.1 and
 = 0.7. We find that that 3 types (2%) have an expenditure share of exactly 10 percent and
4 types have an expenditure share of exactly 70 percent. For the types with  strictly between
these bounds, we estimate the average value of  is 27% with a standard deviation of 12.2%.
       Denote our estimates of  as ^  . Figure 4 presents a scatterplot of ^  and w
                                                                                  ^  . The small
dots show the 144 type estimates and the larger diamonds show mean estimates of  when we
      ^  into 10 bins, one for each income decile. Figure 4 shows a large dispersion of estimates
group w
of  , especially in the lowest-income decile; we take these type-specific estimates at face value
                                                                                   ^  and
and do not adjust them. As a check, we compute average values in each bin for both w
^  . Although the individual type data vary somewhat, on average the expenditure share on

rent falls from about 40% for households at the lowest income levels to about 20% once income
surpasses $50 thousand per year.
       We acknowledge the decline in the average expenditure share on rents with income is at
odds with our assumption of Cobb-Douglas preferences if all households have the same Cobb-
Douglas utility function. Our assumption of Cobb-Douglas utility allows a tractable way for
households in the model to consume less housing in areas with higher rent (as opposed to
assuming a constant demand for housing); and, as noted earlier, this assumption allows us to
ignore the presence of voucher-receiving households in our data when estimating the model.
The cost to this assumption is that it is not consistent with the data suggesting the budget
share on housing declines with income, unless we assume there is a distribution of  in the
population that happens to be correlated with income and we have uncovered that distribution.
Additionally, our assumption of Cobb-Douglas utility does not allow expenditure shares to vary
with the level of rental prices; if housing and consumption are more complementary in utility
than Cobb-Douglas, for example, expenditure shares increase with the level of rental prices.19
  18
    When      , the term in brackets is always between 0 and 1.
  19
    There is some debate among economists about the appropriate functional form for preferences for consump-
tion and housing. For example, many authors argue the income elasticity should be less than one using micro


                                                    22
                                                      Figure 4: Estimates of  and w




                                             .8
                                             .6
                         Value of  by Type

                                             .4
                                             .2
                                             0




                                                  0     25   50        75        100    125     150   175   200

                                                                  Predicted Income by Type (000s)




Notes: This figure shows type-specific estimates of  , the small blue dots, and the average estimated value of
 for each decile of predicted income, the larger red diamonds.


    Finally, note that the presence of voucher recipients adds a small amount of error to our
estimates of  for the types of households eligible to receive vouchers. When some households
receive vouchers, our estimate ^  is the following function of the "true" type-specific ,  


                                                        ^  =   +  ( -   )
                                                                                                                  (18)


where  is the type-specific probability of receiving a voucher and  is the reported amount
paid on rent as a percentage of income when receiving a voucher. Depending on how households
interpret the question from the 2000 Census, "What is the monthly rent?"  can be either the
payment standard divided by income or it can be 30 percent. Later on, we show that only
24 types of households accept a housing voucher, if offered. Of these 24 types, the average
expenditure share on rents is 35.8 percent and later we estimate that only 11.18 percent of
households for each of these types is offered a voucher. From equation (18), if households
interpret the rent question in the Census such that  = 0.30 ­ this is what we predict most
voucher-receiving households pay out of pocket on rent, scaled by income ­ we would conclude
data similar to what we have presented: See Green and Malpezzi (2003) and references therein. In contrast,
Davis and Ortalo-Magne (2011) report that median rental expenditure shares are constant across time and
across metropolitan areas and are invariant to changes in income and rental prices.


                                                                            23
our estimates of expenditure shares of voucher-eligible types of households are too low by about
0.65 percentage points, on average (11.18  (0.30 - 0.358)). If voucher-receiving households
respond to the question such that  is the payment standard divided by income ­ that is,
what landlords receive in rent, scaled by income ­ the bias may be larger. In either case, we
acknowledge that this adds some bias to our estimates of  .

2.5.2   Estimating 

   Rewrite the optimized indirect utility for each type of non-voucher household as

                     1             1-                                       
                =        ln A +            ln [(1 - ) w] +      ln (w) -         ln r
                                                                            
                             1             
                = const +         ln A -       ln r
                                           

where const is a type-specific constant (and we have otherwise temporarily omitted type-specific
notation). Assume that log amenities include both observed O and unobserved  characteris-
tics of tract   such that the above can be rewritten as

                                                 1
                                  = ·O -              ·  ln r + 
                                                 

The coefficient on  times log rent, 1/ , cannot be estimated using OLS because equilib-
rium rents will almost certainly be correlated with unobserved but valued characteristics of
neighborhoods,  . An instrument is required.
   Given type-specific estimates of  from section 2.5.1, we use a three-step IV approach to
estimate 1/ that is similar to the procedure in Bayer, Ferreira, and McMillan (2007). As
mentioned earlier, we impose in estimation that 1/ is the same for all types. This means
that after explicitly accounting for variation in how much people value housing relative to
consumption and amenities, and abstracting from differences across types in moving costs, we
impose that the importance of utility shocks in household decision making is constant across
types. In the first step of our procedure, we estimate 1/ using two-stage least squares. We
include characteristics of the housing stock 0-5 miles from tract j in Oj as controls (number of
rooms, number of units in the housing structure and age of structure) and use characteristics of


                                               24
the housing stock 5-20 miles from the tract as instruments for rent. The first-stage F-statistic
is 5.35: For more details, see Appendix B of Davis, Gregory, Hartley, and Tan (2021).
      In the second step, we use estimates of 1/ and type-specific estimates  from the first
                   1
step, call them    
                       and  , to construct predicted indirect utilities for each type that controls
for unobserved amenities as

                                                           1
                                     =  · Oj -                   ln r
                                                           

We simulate the model using this specification for indirect utility and adjust r for all     tracts
until the simulated total housing demand in any tract is equal to the observed housing demand
in the estimation sample for that tract.20 This procedure determines market-clearing rents in
all tracts in the absence of unobserved amenities. We use these rents as instruments to estimate
1/ in the third and final step with an F-statistic of 31.7. Intuitively, the F-statistic rises from
5 to 32 because the first step only uses information about the quality of substitutes for each
tract individually whereas the third step uses similar information for all tracts. We estimate
that 1/ = 0.84 with a standard error of 0.198.21


2.6       Estimating Voucher-Eligible Households with Children

2.6.1     Number of Children

      For our analysis of the MTO experiment and our alternative policy simulations, we wish to
track the outcomes of households with children that are offered housing vouchers. This means
we need estimates of which types have children, and for the types with children the number of
children per household. In the 2000 Census, we know the average number of children by tract
for all households, not just renting households. To estimate the average number of children by
type for our sample of renting households, we invent a new type called "owner-occupiers." We
then run the regression


                                        ¯
                                        k   =       k ~ + errork
                                                 

 20
      Given Cobb-Douglas preferences, type-specific housing demand in tract is  w /r .
 21
      The value of our 1st-stage estimate of 1/ is 0.414 with a standard error 0.189.


                                                    25
                                                                                  ¯ is the
where k  is the average number of children per household for type  households and k
average number of children per household in tract . ~ is the percentage of type  households
in tract (which, relative to   , explicitly accounts for the fact that there is an additional type,
homeowners). As before,           ~ = 1.
                                  
                               
       To limit the influence that owner-occupiers have on our estimates of k  for renters, we
restrict the estimation sample to tracts where at least 50% of the households rent.22 This
restricts our sample to 1,052 tracts (from 1,642 tracts) with 250 or more renting households.
We do not restrict k  to be an integer but we impose in estimation that 0  k   3 for all
types. After discarding the owner-occupier type, we estimate that 80 types in our sample (56
percent of types) have less than 0.5 children on average and 17 types (12 percent) have more
than 2.9 children.

2.6.2      Voucher Eligibility

       In 2000, 2-person households with annual income less than $25,020 and 3-person households
with annual income less than $28,140 were eligible to receive a housing voucher in Los Angeles
County. Given these rules, we estimate 59 types out of 144 were eligible for a voucher, 41 percent
of households.23 This implies that of the 1.634 million renting households in Los Angeles, 670
thousand households were eligible for a housing voucher in 2000. Only 62,487 households
received a voucher, 9.3% of those eligible. Of the 59 types eligible to receive a voucher, 31 types
have estimated income less than $25,020 and 0 children (k  < 0.5) and 28 types have estimated
income less than $28,140 and have at least one child (k   0.5). Our estimate that 47% (28/59)
of voucher-eligible households have at least one child in Los Angeles in 2000 is very close to the
actual percentage of voucher households with children in Los Angeles that can be computed
directly from public-housing-agency data, 52.8%.24
  22
     We experimented with setting the rental-share cutoff in 10 percentile increments, from 10% to 90%. Type-
specific estimates seemed to stabilize at around a rental-share cutoff of 50%. Additionally, this cutoff minimized
the number of types of households with k  exactly equal to 3, the upper bound on the number of children that
we impose in estimation.
  23
     The average expenditure share on rents of these 59 types is 37.4 percent.
  24
     The Housing Authorities of the City of Los Angeles, Los Angeles County and the City of Long Beach report
40,344, 16,583 and 5,372 voucher units, respectively. This total of 62,299 represents almost all of the 62,487
vouchers in the county. The share of voucher units with children is 52%, 54%, and 55% in the City of Los
Angeles, the County of Los Angeles and City of Long Beach, respectively. The voucher-weighted average is
52.8% of voucher units have children, 32,993 units.



                                                       26
   We use the derivations in equation (14) to check if any of the 28 types of households with
at least 0.5 children that are eligible for a housing voucher would choose to decline a housing
voucher if offered. If the value of  , -  is less than zero for any type of household, that
household would reject a voucher. We use the estimate of  , -  to determine the value of
the voucher to households in terms of equivalent extra annual income. Specifically, we set the
estimate of equivalent extra annual income from the voucher equal to annual income multiplied
by exp [ ( , -  )] - 1, which can be derived from equation (9).
   We use the payment standard of $9,192 per year ($766 per month) as set by the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) for a 2-bedroom apartment in Los
Angeles in 2000. We find that 4 out of 28 types of households should reject the offer of a housing
voucher. Shown in Table 2, relative to the 24 types of households that accept a voucher, these
types have fewer children, higher income, and lower expenditure shares on rents. The last line
of Table 2 shows that these 4 types account for 18.4% of all households technically eligible to
receive a voucher. For these four types, accepting the voucher offer would be equivalent to
losing $367 per year of income.

         Table 2: Differences between voucher-eligible types with at least 0.5 children

                                                            reject voucher   accept voucher
                                                               (4 types)       (24 types)
                               Average number of children         1.32             2.11
               Average annual gain from accepting voucher        -$367           $2,903
                                                       ^
                                      Average value of w        $26,822         $18,737
                                      Average value of ^         0.181            0.358
                                        African American                         25.0%
                                                 Hispanic      100.0%            75.0%
                    Percent of Households Offered Voucher      18.4%             81.6%

Notes: This table shows various economic and demographic characteristics of the 4 types of households that
reject a housing voucher if offered and the 24 types of households that accept a voucher.


   Figure 5 shows the income-equivalent gain from the voucher (dots) and the housing subsidy
from the voucher (red dashed line) for all 28 types. The figure also includes a line at zero
to highlight the four types that optimally do not take up the voucher. For the 24 types that
accept the voucher, on average the voucher is equivalent to an increase in annual income of
$2,903, shown in Table 2. The average rent subsidy, defined as the payment standard less 30
percent of household income, for these 24 types is equal to $3,571 suggesting a "bang-for-the-

                                                   27
buck" (dollars of income-equivalent utility per dollar of subsidy) of 81% on average. As Figure
5 shows, for many of the types the income-equivalent is nearly exactly equal to the housing
subsidy yielding a bang-for-the-buck of 100%. The average income of the 24 types that take
up the voucher is $19 thousand, explaining why the benefits of the voucher are high. The
types that accept a voucher are mixed racially, 6 African American and 18 Hispanic, and have
more children (2.11) and have a higher expenditure share on rents (36 percent) than the types
that do not take the voucher. When we use our model to simulate actual and counterfactual
housing-voucher policies, we restrict the households that are offered housing vouchers to one of
these 24 types.

        Figure 5: Income-Equivalent Value of Voucher and Amount of Housing Subsidy
                                 6000




                                                                      Income Equivalent
                                                                      Housing Subsidy
                                 4000
                       Dollars

                                 2000
                                 0




                                    12000   16000      20000         24000          28000

                                                    Annual Income




Notes: This figure shows the income equivalent of the housing voucher, the blue dots, and the dollar amount of
the housing subsidy provided by the housing voucher, the red line, for each of the 28 types of households with
children that are eligible to receive housing vouchers based on their household income.




3     Analysis of MTO
    Moving to Opportunity (MTO) was a randomized control trial authorized by Section 152
of the 1992 Housing and Community Development Act that was designed to study the effect of
low-poverty neighborhoods on child outcomes, free from selection issues associated with earlier


                                                     28
studies on the same topic.25 The MTO experiment began in the 1990s and randomly assigned a
group of volunteer households with children eligible to live in low-income housing projects in five
U.S. metropolitan areas to three different groups: (i) a treatment group that received housing
assistance ­ either a housing voucher or housing certificate, with a difference we explain later
­ that in the first year could be applied only in Census tracts with a poverty rate under 10%
and could be applied unconditionally thereafter, (ii) a second treatment group that received
equivalent housing assistance with no location restriction attached, and (iii) a control group
that received no voucher or certificate. Nonprofit organizations were paid as part of the MTO
program to provide counseling to participating families, helping them to find appropriate units
to rent. According to Goering and Kraft (1999), 4,610 families enrolled in the MTO program
and 62 percent of households that were offered a location-restricted voucher in Los Angles (47
percent of households across all 5 MTO sites) accepted the voucher and moved to a location with
less than a 10% poverty rate.26 The focus on restricting the location choice of voucher recipients
to neighborhoods with a poverty rate of less than 10% reflected expectations at the time that
the poverty rate is highly correlated with neighborhood quality and that neighborhoods with
poverty rates under 10% were likely to positively affect child outcomes.
       Summarizing the medium- to long-term impacts of MTO, Sanbonmatsu, Kling, Duncan, and
Brooks-Gunn (2006), Kling, Liebman, and Katz (2007) and others show that on average the
MTO treatment successfully reduced exposure to crime and poverty and improved the mental
health of female children, but failed to improve child test scores, educational attainment or
physical health. This was surprising to many researchers given earlier work that demonstrated
potentially quite large neighborhood effects on child outcomes. In later work, CHK identify
important positive effects. Specifically, CHK estimate the impact of accepting an MTO voucher
on the annual adult earnings of each child under age 13 at the time the MTO voucher is accepted
is $3,477 with a standard error of $1,418.27
       We ask if simulations of our estimated model can reconcile the specific estimates of the
impact of MTO on adult earnings of children with estimates from Opportunity Atlas from
  25
      See Leventhal and Brooks-Gunn (2000), Durlauf (2004) and Ross (2011) for a discussion of this earlier
literature.
   26
      The take-up rate of families offered a non-location-restricted voucher was 75% for Los Angeles and 60%
across all 5 MTO sites.
   27
      See column (4) of Table 3 of their paper.


                                                    29
Chetty, Friedman, Hendren, Jones, and Porter (2018) that suggest effects of neighborhoods on
adult earnings of children can be large and are correlated with poverty rates. In a way we
describe precisely in a moment, we use these Opportunity Atlas estimates to map the loca-
tion choices of households receiving housing assistance to the adult wages of children in those
households. The bottom line is that we can nearly match the CHK statistic (our estimate is
$2,923) and we have an explanation for why the impact of MTO on adult earnings of children
was not more sizable. Ultimately, poverty rates are not perfectly correlated with Opportunity
Atlas scores and many households receiving a location-restricted voucher move to low poverty
locations that also have relatively low Opportunity Atlas scores. In other words, when house-
holds are given location-restricted vouchers, conditioning on the poverty rate is not sufficient
to ensure the adult earnings of children improve. To study the potential maximal impact of
location-restricted vouchers on child earnings, in the next section we run a set of counterfactual
simulations that directly require voucher-receiving households to live in high Opportunity-Atlas
neighborhoods.
   To demonstrate the impact of neighborhood selection on the CHK result, we perform three
sets of model simulations. For all simulations, we only consider the experiences of a small set
of relevant households that we call "MTO Simulation Households," the parameters of which
we delineate soon. In the spirit of replicating the original, relatively small MTO experiment,
we do not allow for any general-equilibrium effects on rental prices or any other variable. The
three sets of simulations are:

1. Baseline: No household is offered any housing assistance. Household utility for type  living
in tract   is   , as estimated in section 2.
2. MTO: Two-thirds of households are offered housing vouchers and one third of households
are offered housing certificates. Households receiving a housing certificate are all governed by
Case 1 of equation (14): They pay 30% of their income to receive a certificate for the payment
standard, and are not allowed to spend any more of their income on rent. Any households
receiving housing assistance must live in a Census tract with a poverty rate no greater than
10% in the first year. After the first year, they continue to receive the voucher and can live
in any Census tract. Households that reject the initial offer of the housing assistance MTO-
style voucher are not offered a voucher in the future. All households understand the full set of

                                               30
program rules.
       We adjust   for tracts where housing assistance can be applied in the first year and all
tracts in the second and subsequent years by appropriately applying equation (14), depending
on whether the household is receiving a certificate or a voucher and that household's value of
. Note that for most types of voucher-accepting households, the distinction of certificate or
voucher is irrelevant. Figure 6 shows the mapping of our estimates of ^  to cases from equation
(14) for voucher-receiving households. Case 1 binds or very nearly binds for 24 of the 28 types
and Case 3 only binds for 1 type of household.28
3. MTO-R: We assign households to neighborhoods randomly according to the distribution of
neighborhood poverty-rates that households are exposed to under the MTO simulations.29

       Note that one important difference of our MTO simulations and the actual MTO experiment
is that we do not model counseling; we discuss the potential implication of this omission later.
We define our MTO Simulation Households as those households that (a) are one of the 24
types of low-income agents with at least 0.5 children that are predicted to always accept housing
assistance (see section 2.6.2) and (b) who reside at the start of the simulation in one of 15 Census
tracts with at least 250 occupied non-senior-citizen public housing units.30 While a few of the
developments contain a small share of units set aside for senior citizens, these are predominately
public housing developments for families with children. MTO Simulation Household types are
represented in all simulations in proportion to their empirical distribution in the 15 public-
housing tracts. Note that we hold income fixed for all households in all simulations.31
  28
     We do not include some program details in our simulations. First, housing certificates were phased out
of use by 2001 in favor of housing vouchers. Since Case 1 is binding for 24 of 28 types, we assume assume
certificate recipients in the MTO experiment always receive certificates, even after certificates were phased out
in the general population. Second, a referee has alerted us that households receiving vouchers prior to 1999
technically had the option to spend more than 40% of their income on rents. We abstract from this detail in
our simulations but note that Case 3 is binding for only one type of household.
  29
     Specifically, the procedure is as follows. (1) pool the set of simulated Census tract choices in MTO and the
unconditional list of sample Census tracts. (2) Estimate a probit model predicting the probability that a record
comes from the simulated data using only tract-poverty-rate categories as explanatory variables, and obtain the
predicted probability pj (propensity score) that a record from tract j comes from the simulated data. (3) Draw
                                                                                            1    pj     1-p
MTO-R simulated locations from the full set of Census tract with probability P r(j ) =                       .
                                                                                            J 1 - pj     p
  30
     We also include the Census tracts containing Avalon Gardens and Hacienda Village which are below the
250 unit threshold but are proximate to several large developments. The MTO experiment also required the
tracts to have a poverty rate of at least 40% in 1990. Of our 15 tracts, only 2 have a poverty rate of less than
40% in 2000; one tract has a poverty rate of 35.4% and the other tract poverty rate is 37.3%.
  31
     A case can be made that expected household income should rise once households move to low-poverty


                                                       31
              Figure 6: Mapping Estimates of ^  to Voucher Cases of Equation (14)

                                                                   L      H               
                                                                                 Estimated 




                                 .65
                                 .55
                                 .45
                         Value

                                 .35
                                 .25
                                 .15




                                   12000    16000         20000          24000           28000

                                                       Annual Income




Notes: This figure plots type-specific estimates of ^  for the 24 types of households that accept housing assistance
and which case of the voucher program as written in equation (14) applies to that type. Case 1 is the light-grey
area in the south-west bounded above by the black line; case 2 is the medium-grey area bounded by the black
and blue lines; and case 3 is the dark-grey area in the north-east bounded below by the blue line.


    We keep track of the location of all households in all simulations and then map the sequence
of locations to expected earnings of children using data from Opportunity Atlas. For each Cen-
sus tract in the United States, Chetty, Friedman, Hendren, Jones, and Porter (2018) generate
the Opportunity Atlas estimates by measuring the earnings of children given the earnings of
parents using tax data from the IRS. For each tract, the Opportunity Atlas reports a child's
expected percentile in the nationwide income distribution at age 26 given household income
of (a) the 25th percentile and (b) the 75th percentile of the nationwide income distribution.32
We map each type's household income to the percentile of the nationwide household income
distribution. Then, we use the two estimates from Opportunity Atlas to produce via linear
interpolation (or extrapolation) an expected percentile in the nationwide age-26 income distri-
bution for the children of that type of household in that tract. We interpret the Opportunity
neighborhoods, but Jacob and Ludwig (2012) find that households receiving housing vouchers in Chicago reduce
labor supply and earnings. The MTO data show no significant impact on adult earnings.
  32
     The Opportunity Atlas data are for 2010 Census tracts. We use the Census Tract Relationship File from
the U.S. Census Bureau to map the 2010 tracts to 2000 tracts. For the two cases in which this mapping fails,
we assign an Opportunity Atlas number to those two tracts using spatial interpolation.



                                                        32
Atlas estimates as causal and for the analysis in this section, we assume the estimates for
each tract are fixed. In a later section, we allow the Opportunity Atlas estimates to change
in response to a possibly large policy intervention that alters the average income and racial
composition of each neighborhood.
       Households enter the MTO intervention with children of different ages. Assumptions we
make about the starting age of children in the MTO experiment and years of exposure to
treatment effects once they enter the MTO experiment are detailed in Appendix C of Davis,
Gregory, Hartley, and Tan (2021). We simulate each household for 18 years, including the
appropriate number of years prior to the start of the MTO intervention. For the years before
the MTO intervention begins, we assign the expected Opportunity Atlas percentile of the
initial tract of residence (one of the 15 tracts described previously) to the child.33 After the
intervention starts, we assign the expected Opportunity Atlas percentile for each optimally
chosen location in the simulation for the number of years shown in column (3). We average all
18 percentiles and then convert the resulting average percentile to a level of income using the
nationwide age-26 income distribution for individual earners.34 The estimates we report are
averages across simulated households of this level of income.
       Table 3 reports simulation results. The table separately shows the outcomes of 8 household
types that account for more than 90% of all MTO-voucher acceptances, the appropriately-
weighted average outcome for the other 16 types, the overall average and the average of the
top 8 rows. The top 8 rows sort types by household income (column 3) and then by housing
expenditure share  (column 4). Column (2), "Sim. Share," shows the proportion of the
population that is offered an MTO voucher that belongs to this type, column (5) shows the
race (B = African American and H = Hispanic) and column (6) shows number of children.
The poverty rate and level of adult earnings of children in $000s (per-child) from the Baseline
simulations are shown in columns (7) and (8). Columns (9) - (11) show results from the MTO
simulations. Column (9) shows the poverty rate for all households including those that do not
accept the voucher; column (10) shows the fraction of households that accept the MTO-style
  33
     We assume that the household continuously resided in the initial tract of residence prior to the start of the
simulation. Since this assumption is imposed for the baseline, MTO and MTO-R simulations, it will not affect
comparisons across simulations.
  34
     We assume each year of exposure has the same importance at every age, consistent with the results of
Chetty and Hendren (2018).


                                                       33
voucher; and column (11) shows the per-child change in annual adult earnings, in $000s, for the
children of all households that accept the voucher. Column (12) shows results from the MTO-R
simulations; this is the projected change in adult earnings in $000s, per child, if households had
randomly selected a tract with the same poverty rate as tracts actually chosen in the MTO
simulation. The averages reported are per-household except for the adult-earnings columns (8,
11 and 12), which are reported on a per-child basis such that these estimates are compatible
with those of CHK.
   Overall, three results are worth emphasizing. First, perhaps not surprisingly, the MTO
experiment reduced exposure to poverty. The average poverty rate of the Census tract of
residence falls from 41 percent in the baseline to 34 percent in the MTO simulations. The overall
reduction in poverty for the top 8 types is more dramatic, from 43 percent to 26 percent. Second,
our overall average simulated voucher take-up rate in the MTO simulations is only 26.2%. Recall
that all of the Simulation Households are predicted to accept a location-unrestricted voucher.
Our predicted take-up rate is much lower than the actual MTO take-up rate in Los Angeles
of 62%. We do not include the impact of counseling in our simulations, and the additional
counseling that MTO offered as noted by Galiani, Murphy, and Pantano (2015) likely played
an important role in explaining the difference between simulated and actual voucher take-up
rates. A different, possibly complementary story is that the distribution of types in the MTO
experiment may be different than that in our simulations.
   To see this more clearly, consider the experiences of the eight types of households that
account for 90% of all households accepting a voucher in the simulations. These eight types
of households are poor (average income of $13 thousand) and mostly African American (6 of
8 types) and have a relatively high average expenditure share on rents of 45%. Each of these
types has a voucher-acceptance rate in the MTO simulations of more than 19% such that the
average voucher take-up rate of these types is 56%. It may be the case that these 8 types are
over-represented in the MTO experimental data relative to the other 16 types of Simulation
Households we consider. Since these 8 types account for almost all of the households accepting
a voucher, a downweighting of the other 16 types would boost the simulated voucher take-up
rate but would not affect our results on the impact on adult earnings of children conditional on



                                               34
           Table 3: Simulations of MTO-Style Vouchers for MTO Simulation Households


                                   Demographics             Baseline               MTO                 MTO-R
                   Sim.                                   Pov.          Pov.    Take-Up     Treated    Treated
         Type      Share     w             Race    k      Rate AE       Rate     Rate         AE         AE
          (1)       (2)      (3)    (4)     (5)    (6)     (7)    (8)    (9)      (10)       (11)       (12)

          139      0.057    12.0    0.27    B     1.30    0.44    7.9   0.35      30.6       3.65        7.09
          142      0.031    12.0    0.35    B     1.29    0.39    9.7   0.23      63.6       2.74        5.70
          143      0.023    12.0    0.53    B     0.53    0.40    9.9   0.19      81.4       2.77        5.80
           28      0.051    12.0    0.62    H     3.00    0.42    9.3   0.21      74.0       3.62        6.32
          136      0.052    12.0    0.66    B     0.96    0.42    8.3   0.21      77.2       2.47        7.00
          133      0.102    12.0    0.39    B     3.00    0.45    7.3   0.24      67.5       3.78        8.10
           32      0.038    13.5    0.50    H     3.00    0.39   12.4   0.24      56.9       3.19        4.19
          137      0.065    18.4    0.38    B     1.82    0.43   10.4   0.37      19.7       3.14        6.29
        Other 16   0.581    21.7    0.30          2.23    0.40   14.1   0.39       4.2       2.65        4.08

    Avg. top 8              13.1    0.45          2.07    0.43    9.0   0.26      56.5       3.30        6.67
   Overall Avg.             18.1    0.36          2.16    0.41   12.0   0.34      26.2       2.92        5.17


Notes: Column (1) is a type reference number and column (2) is the share of that type in the simulated samples.
Column (3) is estimated household income in $000s, (4) is estimated value of , (5) is assigned race (B = African
American and H = Hispanic) and (6) is estimated number of children. Column (7) is average poverty rate in
the baseline simulations and column (8) is expected adult earnings in $000s of each child, also in the baseline
simulations. Columns (9) - (11) refer to the MTO simulations: (9) is the average poverty rate of everyone offered
a voucher, (10) is the percentage of households that accept the MTO-style voucher and (11) is the change in the
expected adult earnings in $000s of each child relative to baseline conditional on accepting a voucher. Column
(12) is the change in expected adult earnings in $000s of each child for households that accept a voucher, relative
to baseline, in the MTO-R simulation in which households randomly choose a tract.


households accepting a voucher.35
       Finally, our simulations do not quite match the reported CHK estimate on the impact of
accepting the MTO voucher on the adult earnings of children under the age of thirteen. As
mentioned, the CHK estimate is $3,477 with a standard error of $1,418 and our estimate is very
close at $2,923. The gap could reflect simple differences in weighting of the 8 main types, as
the range for these types span $2,473 (type 136) to $3,780 (type 133). Interestingly, the results
from the MTO-R simulations suggest the impact on adult earnings from MTO-style vouchers
had the potential to have been much greater. Had the households that accepted a voucher
  35
    Of course, even if we strictly limit the simulations to only these 8 types, we would underestimate the overall
takeup rate at 56% as compared to 62%. That gap may represent the impact of counseling; or it might reflect
a weighting of the 8 types in the MTO experimental data that is different from the simulations as 5 of the 8
types have a take-up rate of 63% or greater.


                                                         35
selected a tract randomly with the same poverty rate as the tract they actually chose, the
expected impact on per-child adult earnings from the MTO-experiment compared to baseline
would have been $5,167, an increase of more than 75 percent. In other words, conditional on
the tract having a poverty rate of less than 10%, in the MTO experiment households negatively
selected into tracts ­ a result that holds for every one of the 8 types we emphasize.
       So, why did households select into relatively low Opportunity Atlas neighborhoods when
offered an MTO-style voucher? For each of the 8 types, we ran median regressions (least absolute
                  1
deviation) of     
                      ln A on the Opportunity Atlas score for all 508 tracts in Los Angeles with
a poverty rate less than 10%.36 For all 8 types, the conditional median of log amenities is
decreasing with Opportunity Atlas scores in these low-poverty neighborhoods. For six of the
types, the estimated negative slope is statistically significant. Additionally, we ran a median
regression of the Opportunity Atlas score on log rental prices and estimated a positive coefficient
of 0.963 with a standard error of 0.20, implying that rental prices increase with Opportunity
Atlas scores.37 The bottom line is that MTO-voucher-receiving households negatively select into
relatively low Opportunity Atlas score neighborhoods both because they prefer the amenities
of these neighborhoods and because the rental prices are low.38


4        Large Policy Experiments
       In this section, we simulate our model to ask what would happen to the adult earnings of
children of the recipients of housing assistance if the county of Los Angeles were to implement
a large-scale policy in which the location choices of all recipients of housing assistance was
restricted.39 Rather than directly condition feasible location choices on poverty rates, as was
the case in the MTO experiment, we assume policy-makers in Los Angeles restrict the set of
neighborhoods in which recipients of housing assistance can live based on the Opportunity
  36
     The specific score we use is the child's forecasted percentile in the age-26 earnings distribution given parent
income in the 25th percentile of the earnings distribution.
  37
     This estimate implies that for each 10 percentage point increase in the neighborhood's impact on the child's
percentile in the earnings distribution according to the Opportunity Atlas data, log rental prices increase by 9.6
percent.
  38
     A different possibility that we do not consider, and that is the focus of Bergman, Chetty, DeLuca, Hendren,
Katz, and Palmer (2019), is that households faced barriers in the housing search process that impeded moves
to higher Opportunity Atlas locations.
  39
     In each policy scenario and in each simulation, for each type we fully solve for the value function using
value-function iteration.


                                                        36
Atlas scores of those neighborhoods. To keep language straightforward, throughout this section
we denote housing assistance in these experiments as housing "vouchers," but to be precise
the housing assistance we consider is in the form of a housing certificate in which households
accepting assistance spend exactly 30% of their income on rent and choose to rent a unit
with monthly rent exactly equal to the payment standard. Consumption and housing for all
recipients of housing assistance in the policy experiments that follow is summarized by Case 1
in Table 1.40
       In each policy experiment, we restrict the set of Census tracts where vouchers can be
used based on the neighborhood's Opportunity Atlas score, its forecasted percentile in the
age-26 income distribution of a child's adult earnings conditional on the parents earning the
25th percentile of the income distribution. We specify a cutoff value such that voucher-eligible
neighborhoods are restricted to the top Xth percentile of Opportunity Atlas neighborhoods. We
consider 10 possible cutoffs in total: X = 10, 20, 30, . . . , 90, 100. To illustrate, when X = 10,
households receiving a voucher are only allowed to live in the top ten percent of neighborhoods
based on the Opportunity Atlas score of that neighborhood. When X = 100, voucher recipients
can live in any neighborhood. We call the results from the X = 100 experiment our baseline,
since it essentially implements current policy.
       We run each experiment exactly the same way: 11.18% of each of the 24 voucher-eligible
types with children described earlier, currently living in any location, are offered a housing
voucher.41 The set of households that are offered vouchers is pre-determined and does not
change; if a household ever declines the voucher in any given period, the household may accept
the voucher in a later period. We choose 11.18% such that in the baseline simulation, the number
of voucher-receiving households with children is equal to 2.02% of all renter households, the
same as in the data for Los Angeles County in 2000 (32,993 voucher-receiving households with
children and 1,634,030 rental households in total). In the experiments where we restrict the set
of neighborhoods that are voucher-eligible, the percentage of households that accept housing
vouchers falls, implying total expenditures on vouchers declines. Of course, policy-makers
  40
     Recall that Case 1 exactly or nearly binds for 20 of the 24 types of households that accept non-location-
restricted housing vouchers, suggesting simulations of certificates and not vouchers will not materially affect
any results.
  41
     Restated, in our counterfactual simulations we assume the rationing of vouchers under the current system
continues.


                                                      37
interested in maintaining constant expenditures on vouchers have the option of boosting the
payment standard or increasing the number of households offered a voucher. We do not consider
these alternatives as we wish to evaluate how restricting the feasible set of location choices of a
fixed set of households, with no other policy parameters adjusted, changes the voucher take-up
rates and adult earnings of children of those households.
    In all simulations, we compute the optimal decisions of all households, including those that
are not offered a voucher, to determine the steady state distribution of types across Census
tracts. In all simulations, we assume neighborhood amenities A are unaffected by changes in
public policy.42 Rental prices in each simulation are determined in equilibrium such that total
housing supply is equal to total housing demand in each tract.43 In the event rental prices
change as a result of the policy, in each tract we allow the the stock of housing to expand or
contract by specifying a nonzero elasticity of housing supply that is specific to that tract.
    Explaining this last point, denote Hb and rb as the total stock of housing and the rental
price per unit of housing in tract        in the baseline; and, denote Hc and rc as the total stock
of housing and the rental price per unit in tract         for a specific counterfactual experiment. We
link the change in the housing stock and the change in the rental price per unit between the
baseline and the experiment as follows:


                                    ln Hc /Hb      = E · ln rc /rb                                       (19)


where E is the assumed elasticity of housing supply in tract . Our estimates for E for each
tract in Los Angeles are from Baum-Snow and Han (2020). We also consider experiments when
we set E for all     equal to 0 and, separately, to 0.5 to understand the sensitivity of our results
to assumptions about the elasticity of housing supply.44 In our view, 0 is a natural lower bound
for the elasticity of housing supply, although Baum-Snow and Han (2020) estimate about 10
percent of tracts in Los Angeles have a negative elasticity. We set E to 0.5 as a high value to
  42
     In the event households begin to understand the importance of Opportunity Atlas scores once public policy
conditions on these scores, our simulations are potentially subject to a Lucas critique.
  43
     Housing demand in tract for a type  household without a voucher is  w /r and is equal to std/r for
a type- household with a voucher.
  44
     We are grateful to Nate Baum-Snow and Lu Han for sharing their estimates with us. We use their 2001
estimates of floorspace elasticity from the linear specification and the finite mixture model.




                                                     38
understand the sensitivity of our results if housing supply in Los Angeles is more elastic than
the data suggest.45
       Before discussing our results, we mention a few nuances in the baseline simulation. Given
estimated preferences, we adjust rental prices and the housing stock in each tract from what
we observe in the 2000 Census to generate a stationary distribution of types in each tract. In
computing this baseline given the data, we assume a tract-level housing supply elasticity of
E = 0.25 for all tracts in Los Angeles. We use the same baseline in all experiments. We chose
this value to keep the deviation of baseline rental prices from the data low, while at the same
time maintaining an elasticity of housing supply within the range estimated by Baum-Snow
and Han (2020) for tracts in Los Angeles. Rental prices in the baseline and in current data are
very similar. When we regress log rental prices in the baseline against log rental prices in the
data for the 1,748 tracts in our sample, the R2 of the regression is 0.78. The coefficient on log
rental prices in the data is 1.04 with a standard error of 0.013, implying relatively expensive
tracts in the data are even more expensive in the baseline. When we regress the Opportunity
Atlas score for all 1,748 tracts on log rents in the data and then in the baseline, the coefficients
are 1.50 and 1.68, respectively. These coefficients imply that for a household to increase its
Opportunity Atlas score from the 37.1 percentile to the 52.1 percentile ­ this is a change from
the bottom 10 percent of Opportunity Atlas tracts to the top 10 percent ­ the predicted change
in log rents in the data is 0.226 and in the baseline is 0.253.


4.1       Fixed Opportunity Atlas

       We consider two possibilities in our simulations. The first, which we discuss now, is that
the Opportunity Atlas score for each tract does not change from the baseline. Later on, we
allow each tract's Opportunity Atlas score to depend deterministically on the steady-state mix
of types occupying the tract. Although we allow rents to endogenously adjust, for reasons we
discuss later we assume that household preferences for amenities in all locations remains fixed
in all simulations even when the type and racial composition, or the Opportunity Atlas score
of the location, changes.
  45
    We experimented with a high value of E equal to 0.25 for all tracts, which is the 93rd percentile of tract-level
supply elasticities for Los Angeles. These results are almost identical to our baseline.



                                                        39
       The top panel of Figure 7 shows how the various alternate voucher policies affect the ag-
gregate average annual adult earnings of all children of renting households in Los Angeles in
millions of dollars relative to current policy.46 The thick lines show results evaluated at the
baseline elasticity of supply and the thin black and red lines show sensitivity of results to this
elasticity. The dashed blue line shows the positive impact to adult earnings of children of house-
holds offered a voucher, relative to baseline; the dotted red line shows the negative impact of
the policy on children of households not offered a voucher; and the solid black line shows the net
impact for all children. At X = 100, there are no impacts at all since this experiment replicates
current policy. The policy that maximizes the aggregate earnings of all children in Los Angeles
at the baseline supply elasticity is X = 10 which limits the voucher-eligible neighborhoods to
the top 10% of all Opportunity Atlas neighborhoods. At this policy, the total net impact to
adult annual earnings of children is $28.0 million, about $18 per year per child.47 This net
benefit reflects a positive benefit of $43.1 million to all children of households offered a voucher
and a loss of $15.2 million to all children of households not offered a voucher. The policy that
maximizes the benefit to only the children of households offered a voucher is X = 20. This
policy yields an aggregate improvement in the adult earnings of children of households offered
a voucher of $43.3 million. There are no extra costs to the government from implementing this
policy, as the number of housing-voucher offers to households is assumed to not change.
       The top panel of this figure also shows how varying the elasticity of housing supply affects
our results. When the housing supply elasticity is low, E = 0 for all tracts , the relationship
of total net benefits to Percent of Eligible falls; and when the housing supply elasticity is high,
E = 0.5 for all , this relationship increases. The intuition for these results is straightforward.
The benefits of those receiving housing vouchers do not vary much with the assumed elasticity
of supply; changes in tract-level rental prices are small relative to the large benefit of accepting
a voucher. In contrast, the housing supply elasticity affects the location decisions of those not
offered a housing voucher, the red dashed lines. As the elasticity falls, rental prices tend to rise
in the Opportunity Atlas neighborhoods where vouchers can be used; this increase causes some
  46
     For any given policy experiment, we know the cross-sectional steady state distribution of locations of
households offered a voucher and households not offered a voucher. We use these distributions to compute
the average Opportunity Atlas score of children of both sets of households. We then convert this averaged
Opportunity Atlas score, which is a percentile of the age-26 income distribution, into an level of annual income.
  47
     The average number of children per renting household for the 1,634,030 renting households is 0.93.


                                                       40
            Figure 7: Analysis of Various Voucher Policies: Fixed Opportunity Atlas

                                                                                                                             Offered a Voucher




                          Aggregate Impact on Annual Earnings ($ millions)
                                                                       40
                                                                                                                             Total
                                                                                 high                                        Not Offered

                                                                                 low


                                        0             20




                                                                                 high

                                                                                 low
                          -20




                                                                             0          20             40           60           80          100
                                                                                        Percent of Tracts Where Voucher Can be Used


                                                         (a) Aggregate Impact, Adult Earnings of All Children
                          Fraction Living in a Tract that Accepts Vouchers
                           0        .2        .4       .6       .8      1




                                                                             0          20             40           60           80          100
                                                                                        Percent of Tracts Where Voucher Can be Used

                                                                                                  offered=0      offered=1



                         (b) Impact on Location Choices, Households Offered Voucher

Notes: For various experiments restricting where voucher recipients can live (X = 10, 20, . . . , 100, with X = 10
corresponding to the top 10 percent of Opportunity Atlas tracts, and so forth), the top panel of this figure
shows the aggregate impact to annual adult earnings of children of households offered a voucher (dashed blue
line), children of households not offered a voucher (red dotted line), and all children of renting households in
Los Angeles (solid black line). The baseline results are for E from the Baum-Snow and Han (2020) data, the
thicker lines. The results for Elow and Ehigh are for E = 0 and 0.5 for all , respectively. The bottom panel
shows the frequency with which households offered a location-restricted voucher choose in the baseline to live in
one of the acceptable locations (red dots); the blue plusses show the frequency households not offered a voucher
choose to live in one of the acceptable locations. In all experiments, each tract's Opportunity Atlas score is
fixed.

                                                                                                        41
households to live in other neighborhoods, presumably with lower average Opportunity Atlas
scores. The migration of these households from high- to low-Opportunity Atlas neighborhoods
reduces the aggregate benefits of the voucher.
   The bottom panel of Figure 7 shows how various policies affect the location decisions of the
24 types of households eligible to be offered a voucher for the baseline housing-supply elasticity.
The y-axis indicates the percentage of these households that choose to locate in a voucher-
eligible neighborhood. The red dots show the percentage for all households offered a voucher
and the blue plusses show the percentage of households (given the same distribution over types)
that are not offered a voucher. The gap between the red dots and blue plusses illustrates the
impact of the voucher on location choices. The figure illustrates that the policy experiments can
dramatically change where households live. For example, at X = 20, the 24-types of households
we study that are not offered a voucher live in voucher-eligible tracts only about 10 percent of
the time, whereas the households that are offered the voucher live in these tracts more than 60
percent of the time ­ about a 50 percentage point increase.
   At either X = 10 or X = 20, the policy creates enormous gains per-child for the relatively
few children of households offered a location-restriction voucher and fairly small per-child losses
for the large number of children of households not offered a voucher. To give an illustration of
the gains, Table 4 shows outcomes for each of the 24 types offered a voucher. The types are
sorted by household income, column (3), and then by housing expenditure share (not shown).
Column (5) shows average adult earnings of children in $000s in the steady state of the baseline
simulations, where households with vouchers can live anywhere. Columns (6) and (7) of the
table refer to results from the simulation that maximizes total adult earnings of all households
offered a voucher, X = 20. Column (6) is the voucher take-up rate and (7) is the improvement
in per-child adult earnings in $000s of all households offered a voucher. Column (8) is the takeup
rate at the type-specific value of X that maximizes per-child adult earnings of all households
offered the voucher, i.e. the preferred "Pref" X for that type, and columns (9) and (10) are
analogous to columns (6) and (7).




                                                 42
                            Table 4: Policy Experiments: Results by Type


                  Demographics                    Results at   X = 20         Results at Pref. X
                                         Base.    Take-Up      Treated   Pref. Take-Up Treated
            Type Race w            k      AE       Rate          AE       X        Rate        AE
             (1)    (2)     (3)   (4)     (5)       (6)           (7)     (8)       (9)         (10)
              19     H     12.0   2.88   16.7       81           8.24     20         81         8.24
             139     B     12.0   1.30   13.6        99         14.65     10         99        16.12
             142     B     12.0   1.29   12.5        99         15.09     10         99        16.62
             133     B     12.0   3.00   13.7       100         12.90     10        100        15.69
             143     B     12.0   0.53   12.1        99         14.95     10        100        17.53
              28     H     12.0   3.00   14.0       98          13.09     10         98        15.74
             136     B     12.0   0.96   10.3        96         17.08     10         95        18.88
              32     H     13.5   3.00   17.2       99           9.61     10         99        11.99
              57     H     17.7   2.57   18.6       97          10.14     10         96        11.41
             137     B     18.4   1.82   14.3        85         11.19     20         85        11.19
              49     H     18.4   2.68   16.7       88           9.84     10         76        10.45
              33     H     18.9   3.00   18.8       85           7.37     20         85         7.37
              46     H     19.8   1.97   16.9       65           7.26     20         65         7.26
              73     H     20.8   1.70   17.1       68           7.51     20         68         7.51
              65     H     21.3   1.25   22.3       70           3.40     20         70         3.40
              55     H     21.8   3.00   17.3       50           5.12     30         64         5.41
              52     H     21.9   2.54   16.3       41           4.73     30         55         5.28
              21     H     22.6   0.93   20.2       37           2.08     30         50         2.26
              30     H     23.0   2.37   18.6       41           3.64     30         55         3.90
              58     H     24.1   3.00   18.6       43           3.73     30         53         3.95
              68     H     24.7   3.00   18.7       16           0.80     50         53         1.41
              24     H     25.6   0.51   19.4       29           1.92     40         54         2.43
              76     H     26.4   1.43   19.8       19           0.52     50         53         0.85
              29     H     26.8   3.00   19.0       16           0.74     50         53         1.36
            Average 1st 9 types          15.2       97          11.83                96        13.64
            Average 2nd 6 types          17.5       77           8.06                75         8.19
            Average 3rd 9 types          18.4       32           2.80                54         3.21
            Average all types            17.0        67          7.38                75         8.23

Notes: Column (1) is a type reference number, column (2) is assigned race (B = African American and H =
Hispanic), column (3) is estimated household income in $000s and column (4) is estimated number of children.
Column (5) is average adult earnings of children in the baseline (X = 100) simulations. Columns (6) and (7)
refer to results from the simulation X = 20. Column (6) is the voucher take-up rate and (7) is the improvement
in per-child adult earnings of households offered a voucher. Column (8) is the takeup rate at the type-specific
value of X that maximizes per-child adult earnings of households offered the voucher, i.e the preferred X for
that type. Columns (9) and (10) are analogous to columns (6) and (7).


    For convenience, we have divided the table into three bands of types. The top band of 9
types with the lowest income almost always accepts a voucher. For these types the average
annual gain in adult earnings of children of households offered a voucher is an enormous $11.83
thousand per child at X = 20, shown in column (7). This estimate includes experiences

                                                      43
of children of households that do not accept the voucher. For reference, the average expected
adult income of children of these households is $15.2 thousand (column 5) implying the increase
in income of $11.83 thousand is equivalent to a 78% raise. At X = 20, the middle band of 6
types accepts a voucher with probability that ranges from 65 to 88 percent; for most of the
types in this band, X = 20 is the value that maximizes adult earnings of children of households
offered a voucher, shown in column (8). For these types, at X = 20, the average annual gain
in adult earnings of children of households offered a voucher is $8.06 thousand per child. The
reduction in the benefit per-child relative to the 9 types of the top band reflects the lower
take-up rate. Finally, at X = 20, the takeup rate of the bottom band of 9 types ranges from
16 to 50 percent. Since the takeup rate of these types is low, the impact of the voucher on
adult earnings of children is only $2.80 thousand per year. Shown in column (8), these types
would all prefer a voucher with fewer location restrictions. Even at the preferred value of X
for these types, the takeup rates are still relatively low at 54%, on average. Overall, the impact
on adult earnings of children of households of the 24 types offered a voucher is maximized at
X = 20 because the take-up rate is high and the benefits of take-up are large for the 15 types
of households in the top two bands of Table 4.
   One might wonder why the average voucher takeup rate is 67% in the X = 20 policy
experiment when the simulated MTO takeup rate with the same type mix of households is
only 26.2 percent. After all, when X = 20 households with vouchers can live in only one of
350 tracts, but in the MTO experiment households could choose to live in one of 508 tracts
with a poverty rate less than 10%. The difference can be explained by the nature of the policy
simulations. The takeup rate in the X = 20 policy simulation is computed based on the steady-
state. In contrast, we do not compute a steady state of the MTO policy experiment. Rather,
any household that is offered a voucher must move to an eligible neighborhood in the first year
and after that the household can live in any neighborhood. Had the MTO voucher been offered
every year, presumably some households that refused the voucher in the first year may have
eventually have taken it up, and given high moving costs, may have stayed in the neighborhood
for quite some time.
   Finally, it may seem surprising that there are any aggregate gains to adult earnings of
children from a voucher policy. Consider an environment, different from ours, where (a) all


                                               44
households have one child, (b) each household consumes one unit of housing, (c) the housing
supply is fixed in all tracts and (d) no housing units are vacant. In this example, any voucher
policy that encourages people to move out of a "bad" neighborhood and into some other "good"
neighborhood displaces existing residents out of the good neighborhood. The voucher policy
yields a reshuffling of the population but since all housing units in all neighborhoods are always
occupied, the aggregate impacts of the voucher policy are zero.48
       There are three reasons why vouchers in our framework may yield positive aggregate impacts
to the adult earnings of children. First, some households do not have children and a voucher
policy that replaces childless households with households with children in high Opportunity
Atlas score neighborhoods will yield improvements to aggregate earnings of children. Second,
households consume differing quantities of housing. Even if the housing stock is fixed, a voucher
policy may wind up generating increases in adult earnings in the aggregate by swapping one
relatively rich household with children in a high Opportunity Atlas score area for two relatively
poor households also with children.


4.2       Varying Opportunity Atlas

       A concern with the analysis of the previous section is that we hold the Opportunity Atlas
scores fixed in every location while moving a possibly large number of households from one set
of locations to a different set of locations. In other words, we assumed that the Opportunity
Atlas score of a neighborhood does not depend on who lives in that neighborhood. In this
section, we allow each neighborhood's published Opportunity Atlas score to vary according to
a simple function of the race and income of the residents of that neighborhood. Any voucher
policy that changes neighborhood composition may also change the adult earnings of children
of that neighborhood.
       For each policy experiment, X = 10, 20, . . . , 100 , we construct alternative Opportunity
Atlas measures for each tract as follows. First, for each of the two published Opportunity
Atlas scores we use in our analysis ­ the child's expected percentile in the age-26 nationwide
income distribution given household income of the 25th percentile and the 75th percentile of the
  48
    This result also requires that the effects of neighborhoods on adult earnings of children are independent of
neighborhood composition; we return to this in a moment.



                                                      45
nationwide income distribution ­ we regress the published score multiplied on average household
income and the percentages of the neighborhood that are African American and Hispanic.49
We then use the regression coefficients to predict the Opportunity Atlas in each tract given the
average household income and share of African American and Hispanic households resulting
from the steady state of the policy experiment. We next add the residuals from the regression.50
Finally, one we have revised estimates of the Opportunity Atlas scores in hand for household
income in the 25th and 75th percentiles in the income distribution, we use a linear interpolation
procedure to impute an Opportunity Atlas score to any household given the income of that
household.
       Before discussing our results, we wish to highlight important caveats. First, and obviously,
correlation does not imply causation. Although racial shares and household income are highly
correlated with the Opportunity Atlas scores, this does not imply that changing the racial
composition or average income of a neighborhood will change the Opportunity Atlas score
of that neighborhood. For example, high-income households may simply be more willing to
pay higher rents that may be required to live in high Opportunity Atlas neighborhoods, thus
inducing a correlation of the two series; this does not mean that moving lower-income households
into a neighborhood will reduce the Opportunity Atlas score of that neighborhood.
       Second, and equally importantly, we assume each type's unobserved amenities from living
in a neighborhood, the ln A term in equation (9), stays constant even if the racial composition
or the average income of the neighborhood changes. Households may care about fixed neigh-
borhood amenities that may be correlated with racial composition, average household income,
and even Opportunity Atlas scores in the baseline. But, we assume households do not directly
care about race or income of their neighbors or the Opportunity Atlas score. Related, if the
racial or economic composition of a neighborhood changes we assume that the neighborhood
amenities that households value do not change. This is a very strong assumption that we make
for two reasons. First, in many models where households care about the composition of their
neighbors, multiple equilibria may exist. It is unclear in our environment how to check for
  49
     The income and race regressors for each of the 1,748 tracts are generated using data from our 144 household
types. See Appendix D of Davis, Gregory, Hartley, and Tan (2021) for details.
  50
     This ensures tract-level Opportunity Atlas scores change only when there is a change relative to the data
of either household income or racial composition.



                                                      46
the presence of multiple equilibria and then how to select the appropriate equilibrium in the
presence of multiplicity. Additionally, and related, households in these models need to form
expectations about the composition of neighborhoods, and in rational-expectations equilibria
these expectations must be consistent with outcomes, as documented by Davis, Gregory, and
Hartley (2019). Computing an equilibrium is computationally very costly in our environment
as it requires solving for expectation-consistent racial and economic composition of each of the
1,748 tracts in Los Angeles, in addition to market-clearing rents in those tracts.51

            Figure 8: Analysis of Various Voucher Policies: Varying Opportunity Atlas

                                                                                                                             Offered a Voucher
                          Aggregate Impact on Annual Earnings ($ millions)
                                                                       40




                                                                                                                             Total
                                                                                                                             Not Offered
                                                      20




                                                                                 Thick Lines: Varying Opp. Atlas
                                                                                 Thin Lines: Fixed Opp. Atlas
                        -20            0




                                                                             0          20             40           60           80          100
                                                                                        Percent of Tracts Where Voucher Can be Used




Notes: For various experiments restricting where voucher recipients can live (X = 10, 20, . . . , 100, with X = 10
corresponding to the top 10 percent of Opportunity Atlas tracts, and so forth), this figure shows the aggregate
impact to annual adult earnings of children of households offered a voucher (dashed blue line), children of
households not offered a voucher (red dotted line), and all children of renting households (solid black line).
Each tract's Opportunity Atlas score is allowed to vary depending on the income and racial composition of the
tract. The thin lines copy results from the baseline housing supply elasticity in Figure 7.


       The results of the policy experiments when Opportunity Atlas scores are allowed to vary
are shown in Figure 8, which plots the aggregate improvement in adult earnings of children of
households offered a voucher (blue dashed line), the aggregate loss of adult earnings of children
of households not offered a voucher (red dotted line), and the net aggregate gain (solid black
  51
    Also, as discussed by Davis, Gregory, and Hartley (2019), we would need instrumental variables to estimate
type-specific preferences for the Opportunity Atlas score of the neighborhood and demographic and economic
composition of neighbors.

                                                                                                         47
line). Restricting vouchers to be used in the top 10% of Opportunity Atlas tracts (X = 10)
maximizes the total gain in adult earnings of children in this environment.52 At this policy,
total net impact to adult annual earnings of children is $33.1 million, which is greater than the
equivalent estimate of $28.0 million when we assumed Opportunity Atlas scores were invariant
to policy. The net benefit of $33.1 million can be decomposed into a positive benefit of $39.2
million of all children of households offered a voucher and a loss of $6.1 million of all children of
households not offered a voucher. Relative to the analysis in which Opportunity Atlas scores are
fixed, shown again for reference as the thin lines in Figure 8, the improvement in the net effect
arises from the fact that the aggregate loss in annual earnings to children of households not
offered the voucher shrinks from $15.2 million to $6.1 million. This occurs because the racial
and economic composition of relatively low Opportunity Atlas score neighborhoods changes
such that Opportunity Atlas scores in those neighborhoods improve.


5       Conclusion
      We estimate household preferences over all Census tracts in Los Angeles using an infinite
horizon, discrete-choice model that includes moving costs, and where households have prefer-
ences for consumption, housing and location-specific amenities. We allow preferences to vary
across the population of renting households by categorizing the population into 144 types. We
estimate preferences separately for each type.
      We then ask what would happen if Los Angeles were to convert its existing housing assistance
program to one where all housing assistance is in the form of housing vouchers that can only
be used in the top X percent of Opportunity Atlas neighborhoods. We find that X = 20
maximizes the aggregate earnings of children of renting households offered location-restricted
vouchers. The children of households accepting these vouchers experience substantial gains to
annual income, but the children of households not offered vouchers experience small losses on
average, as some households move from locations that are most impactful on adult earnings
to locations that are less impactful. On net, the gains far outweigh the losses and ultimately
housing vouchers appear to have significant potential to improve intergenerational mobility.
 52
      In the experiments in this section, tracts are restricted based on Opportunity Atlas scores in the baseline.




                                                        48
References
Arcidiacono, P., and R. A. Miller (2011): "Conditional Choice Probability Estimation of Dynamic Dis-
  crete Choice Models with Unobserved Heterogeneity," Econometrica, 79, 1823­1867. 10

Baum-Snow, N., and L. Han (2020): "The Microgeography of Housing Supply," Working Paper, University
  of Toronto. 3, 38, 39, 41

Bayer, P., F. Ferreira, and R. McMillan (2007): "A Unified Framework for Measuring Preferences for
  Schools and Neighborhoods," Journal of Political Economy, 115(4), 588­638. 5, 24

Bayer, P., R. McMillan, A. Murphy, and C. Timmins (2016): "A Dynamic Model of Demand for Houses
  and Neighborhoods," Econometrica, 84(3), 893­942. 4, 7

Bergman, P., R. Chetty, S. DeLuca, N. Hendren, L. F. Katz, and C. Palmer (2019): "Creating
  Moves to Opportunity: Experimental Evidence on Barriers to Neighborhood Choice," NBER Working Paper
  26164. 2, 3, 36

Bhutta, N., and B. J. Keys (2016): "Interest Rates and Equity Extraction During the Housing Boom,"
  American Economic Review, 106(7), 1742­1774. 11

Bishop, K. C. (2012): "A Dynamic Model of Location Choice and Hedonic Valuation," Working Paper,
  Washington University in St. Louis. 9

Bishop, K. C., and A. D. Murphy (2011): "Estimating the Willingness to Pay to Avoid Violent Crime: A
  Dynamic Approach," American Economic Review, 101(3), 625­629. 7

Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2007): "Report to Congress on Credit Scoring and Its Effects
  on the Availability and Affordability of Credit," . 11

Brown, M., S. Stein, and B. Zafar (2015): "The Impact of Housing Markets on Consumer Debt: Credit
  Report Evidence from 1999 to 2012," Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 47(S1), 175­213. 11

Chetty, R., J. Friedman, N. Hendren, M. R. Jones, and S. R. Porter (2018): "The Opportunity
  Atlas: Mapping the Childhood Roots of Social Mobility," NBER Working Paper No. 25147. 5, 30, 32

Chetty, R., and N. Hendren (2018): "The Impacts of Neighborhoods on Intergenerational Mobility I:
  Childhood Exposure Effects," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133(3), 1107­1162. 33

Chetty, R., N. Hendren, and L. F. Katz (2016): "The Effects of Exposure to Better Neighborhoods on
  Children: New Evidence from the Moving to Opportunity Experiment," American Economic Review, 106(4),
  855­902. 2

Chyn, E. (2018): "Moved to Opportunity: The Long-Run Effects of Public Housing Demolition on Children,"
  American Economic Review, 108(10), 3028­3056. 2

Davis, M. A., J. Gregory, and D. A. Hartley (2019): "The Long-Run Effects of Low-Income Housing
  on Neighborhood Composition," Unpublished Paper. 47

Davis, M. A., J. Gregory, D. A. Hartley, and K. T. Tan (2021): "Appendix for Neighborhood Effects
  and Housing Vouchers," Working Paper. 12, 25, 33, 46

Davis, M. A., and F. Ortalo-Magne (2011): "Household Expenditures, Wages, Rents," Review of Economic
  Dynamics, 14(2), 248­261. 23

Durlauf, S. N. (2004): Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics chap. Neighborhood Effects, pp. 2174­
  2230. Elsevier B.V., Edited by J.V. Henderson and J.F. Thisse. 29


                                                     49
Ewens, M., B. Tomlin, and L. C. Wang (2014): "Statistical Discrimination or Prejudice? A Large Sample
  Field Experiment," The Review of Economics and Statistics, 96(1), 119­134. 15

Galiani, S., A. Murphy, and J. Pantano (2015): "Estimating Neighborhood Choice Models: Lessons from
  a Housing Assistance Experiment," American Economic Review, 105(11), 3385­3415. 3, 4, 34

Gallagher, J., and D. Hartley (2017): "Household Finance after a Natural Disaster: The Case of Hurri-
  cane Katrina," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 9(3), 199­228. 11

Goering, J., and J. Kraft (1999): "Moving to Opportunity for Fair Housing Demonstration Program, Cur-
  rent Status and Initial Findings," available at: https://www.huduser.gov/portal/Publications/pdf/mto.pdf.
  29

Green, R., and S. Malpezzi (2003): A Primer on U.S. Housing Markets and Housing Policy. Urban Press
  Institute. 23

Hotz, V. J., and R. A. Miller (1993): "Conditional Choice Probabilities and the Estimation of Dynamic
  Models," The Review of Economic Studies, 60(3), 497­529. 9

HUD.gov     (2021):        "Housing      Choice      Vouchers     Fact   Sheet,"      available         at:
 https://www.hud.gov/program offices/public indian housing/programs/hcv/about/fact sheet. 18

Jacob, B. A., and J. Ludwig (2012): "The Effects of Housing Assistance on Labor Supply: Evidence from
  a Voucher Lottery," American Economic Review, 102(1), 272­304. 32

Kennan, J., and J. R. Walker (2011): "The Effect of Expected Income on Individual Migration Decisions,"
  Econometrica, 79(1), 211­251. 4, 7

Kling, J. R., J. B. Liebman, and L. F. Katz (2007): "Experimental Analysis of Neighborhood Effects,"
  Econometrica, 75(1), 83­119. 29

Leventhal, T., and J. Brooks-Gunn (2000): "The Neighborhoods They Live in: The Effects of Neighbor-
  hood Residence on Child and Adolescent Outcomes," Psychological Bulletin, 126(2), 309­337. 29

Olsen, E. O. (2003): Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the United States chap. Housing Programs for Low-
  Income Households. University of Chicago Press, Robert A. Moffitt, editor. 18

Phillips, D. (2017): "Landlords Avoid Tenants who Pay with Vouchers," Economics Letters, 151(C), 48­52.
  15

Popkin, S. J., M. K. Cunningham, E. Godfrey, B. Bednarz, and A. Lewis (2002): "CHA Relocation
  Counseling Assessment," The Urban Institute Final Report. 15

Ross, S. L. (2011): "Social Interactions within Cities: Neighborhood Environments and Peer Relationships,"
  in The Oxford Handbook of Urban Economics and Planning, ed. by N. Brooks, K. Donaghy, and G.-J. Knaap,
  chap. 9. Oxford Handbooks. 29

Rust, J. (1987): "Optimal Replacement of GMC Bus Engines: An Empirical Model of Harold Zurcher,"
  Econometrica, 55(5), 999­1033. 7, 9

Sanbonmatsu, L., J. R. Kling, G. J. Duncan, and J. Brooks-Gunn (2006): "Neighborhoods and
  Academic Achievement: Results from the Moving to Opportunity Experiment," Journal of Human Resources,
  41(4), 649­691. 29

Yinger, J. (1986): "Measuring Racial Discrimination with Fair Housing Audits: Caught in the Act," American
  Economic Review, 76(5), 881­893. 15



                                                    50
