                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   ENDOGENOUS IMMIGRATION, HUMAN AND PHYSICAL CAPITAL FORMATION,
                   AND THE IMMIGRATION SURPLUS

                                          Isaac Ehrlich
                                             Yun Pei

                                       Working Paper 28504
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28504


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2021




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Isaac Ehrlich and Yun Pei. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Endogenous Immigration, Human and Physical Capital Formation, and the Immigration Surplus
Isaac Ehrlich and Yun Pei
NBER Working Paper No. 28504
February 2021
JEL No. F22,F43,J11,J24,O15

                                           ABSTRACT

We evaluate the economic consequences of immigration in a two-country, two-skill, overlapping-
generations framework, where immigration, population, human and physical capital formation,
and economic growth are endogenous variables. We go beyond extant literature by integrating
physical capital in our model. This enables the derivation of new insights about the induced-
immigration effects of exogenous triggers, including pull and push factors and policy variables,
on the dynamic evolution of the "immigration surplus" in the short run versus the long run, in
destination vs. source countries and in the global economy. The policy shifts we analyze include
the easing of constraints on potential migrants' labor and physical capital mobility, and the role of
physical capital endowments. We also discuss the policy implications of asymmetries in the net
benefits from immigration across destination and source countries.


Isaac Ehrlich
Department of Finance and
Department of Economics
and Center for Human Capital
State University of New York at Buffalo
Buffalo, NY 14260-1520
and NBER
mgtehrl@buffalo.edu

Yun Pei
Department of Economics
University at Buffalo, SUNY
Buffalo, NY 14260
yunpei@buffalo.edu
1. Introduction
The growing quantitative importance of immigration in the U.S. and throughout the world in the
last half century has brought about renewed interest in the economic consequences of immigration,
especially for receiving countries, where large immigration flows have brought about significant
economic, demographic, and political challenges. The immigrant population stock has risen
continuously worldwide, and has multiplied by about 3 times since 1970 from 84.5 million, or
2.3% of the world population, to 271.6 million, or 3.5% of the world population in 2019. In the
U.S., which has been historically the largest immigration host country, immigration reached a peak
of 14.8% as a percentage of the population in 1890, but had then continuously declined since about
1910, especially from 1929 to 1970. However, a modern new wave of immigration to the U.S. has
also begun in that year, rising sharply from 9.6 million, or 4.7% of the U.S. population, to 40
million in 2010 or 12.9%, and to 44.8 million, or 13.7% of the population in 2018 (see Figure 1).3

Discreet changes in immigration laws 4 may explain some of the sharp turning points in
immigration flows in Figure 1, but the varying trends in the pace of immigration in the U.S. and
throughout the world require a deeper explanation. We ascribe them, more generally, to the role
of major immigration triggers, or "pull" and "push" factors in destination and source countries,
using a general (global) equilibrium analysis. These triggers can induce changes in human and
physical capital formation and affect the volume and composition of immigration flows or waves,
which generate added effects on the economy's equilibrium growth paths. We use this approach
to asses both the growth, demographic, and distributional consequences of immigration triggers in
the sending and receiving countries, as well as their impact on the net benefit from immigration to
native populations in these countries ­ what is generally termed the "immigration surplus" (IS).

Our approach offers some new insights concerning the economic and policy implications of
immigration. The bulk of the extant literature on these topics tends to focus on the outcomes for
current generations of natives and immigrants in receiving countries. Much less attention has been
paid to the long-term consequences of immigration on the outcomes for future generations of
natives and immigrants in both destination (D) and source (S) countries and the global economy.

In the conventional literature, more immigration generally involves contrasting shifts in labor
supply in the destination and source countries  the analysis largely abstracts from the possibility
that immigrants can bring along not just their labor capacity but (claims for) physical capital as
well. In that case, the upward shift in labor supply in D, for example, inevitably depresses the wage
rate of native workers in D and thus raises the return to native owners of physical capital in D.
Abstracting from any significant changes in human and physical capital and fertility, the short-
term, or static IS generated by labor supply is always positive. The reason is that the returns on the
economy's fixed capital stock, assumed to be exclusively owned by natives, necessarily outweighs
the loss of wages to native workers due to the overall increase in output, which is now produced
at lower wages and higher returns to capital for natives in D. However, this analysis misses a

3
  As per the Migration Policy Institute, U.S. Immigrant Population and Share over Time, 1850-Present.
https://www.migrationpolicy.org/programs/data-hub/charts/immigrant-population-over-time.
4
  Such as the Immigration Act of 1903 and the Naturalization Act of 1906 that placed restrictions on admissible
immigrants, and the Immigration and Naturalization Act of 1965 (the Hart-Celler Act) that relaxed many restrictions
on immigrations.

                                                        2
critical aspect of migration by considering it an exogenous event rather than an endogenous choice
variable, motivated by immigrants' desire for a better life for themselves and their offspring in the
destination country. As we show in this paper, while immigration flows due to any external
immigration trigger will generally (but not always) generate a positive IS for natives of country D
in the short term, or what we call the "static" case, the longer-term surplus may turn negative,
depending on the type of trigger that induces the immigration flow. Emigration flows in country S
may generally (again, not always) generate the opposite effects.

A recent paper that addresses a number of these issues is Ehrlich and Kim [EK] (2015), which
offered the basic approach used in this paper, treating migration as well as income and population
growth as endogenous variables. One limitation of the EK model, however, is that it abstracts from
the role of physical capital in production. The estimated net benefits from migration are therefore
not directly comparable to those estimated in the conventional literature. This is because in the
absence of physical capital, that model cannot assess the short, as well as long-term dynamic
impacts of migration on factor prices, which is the channel through which the conventional
immigration surplus is determined.

Our paper attempts to fill this gap. We expand and modify the latter model to allow for the role of
physical capital as an essential factor of production as well as a reproducible (through saving) and
bequeathable asset. Human capital remains our engine of growth, but production of goods requires
both physical capital and effective labor, (augmented by human capital). Each agent (family head,
worker) lives through two periods ­ childhood and parenthood. The model allows for
heterogeneities within and across countries. Specifically, it recognizes two types of agents, high
skilled and low skilled, who differ in their ability to produce human capital; two countries which
differ in their development levels or technologies of producing both human capital and
consumption goods; and two sectors producing two types of goods, high-tech and low-tech which
employ exclusively high-skilled and low-skilled workers, respectively. 5 Finally, the decision
makers are finitely lived parents who make all consumption, investment, and fertility decisions.
Parents are altruistic toward their offspring and are assumed to derive altruistic benefits vicariously
from both the value of the human capital stock they help produce in their offspring, and the value
of the physical capital stock they bequeath to them. Fertility, thus population growth, is also an
endogenous variable, along with savings and investment in children's human capital.

A distinct characteristic of the human capital production function in this model, as well as in the
EK (2015) model, is that it allows for knowledge spillover effects across countries, as well as
across different skill groups. In this context, however, both models consider two related versions.
In the benchmark model, the analysis emphasizes the role of hierarchical knowledge spillover
effects across the skill groups. Thus, the top skill group within each country produces knowledge
spillover effect that augments the production functions of human capital of the lower skilled
workers in D (S), respectively. The same hierarchical knowledge spillover effects are assumed to
run from each skill group in D to its corresponding skill group in S. In this context, the top skill
group in country D is the source of producing knowledge spillover effects both within and across
countries. This pattern of knowledge spillover effects is essential for producing a balanced-growth
equilibrium and income distribution within and across countries in our model. We also allow,

5
 The introduction of 2 skill groups in the model is necessary to allow for potential gains from immigration in the same
way that we need to have 2 goods in each economy for potential gains from trade.

                                                          3
however, for an extended model version, which differs from the benchmark version by recognizing
two-way spillover or "diversity effects" across immigrants and natives in the destination country
(D). In this case, knowledge transfers can be two-sided, or interactive, as well as hierarchical.

To allow for numerical solutions of our complex model, we calibrate our model using the U.S. as
our destination country and the weighted average of top 15 countries sending migrants to the U.S.
as our source country. We then derive comparative dynamic effects of shifts in basic exogenous
parameters of the model that capture the total effects of major shocks or immigration triggers on
the balanced growth paths of the key control and state variables of the model. The latter include
the skill composition of migrant flows, the fertility rates and population shares of natives and
immigrants, the relative levels vs. growth rates of human and physical capital, and the level and
distribution of income across different skill groups and countries.

A portion of these shocks reflects the specific effects of the immigration flows that are induced by
the triggers on the individual market income of native populations, which is what the literature
defines as the "immigration surplus".6 In this context, we study the economic consequences of
migration by exploring three related outcomes that the EK model could not address. First, we
simulate the long-term dynamic path of the immigration surplus over the transition period, from
its static value to its long-term equilibrium value, and determine the magnitude and direction of
change of the corresponding values. Second, and related, we explore how different immigration
triggers ­ demand pull and supply push factors ­ impact the IS dynamic path and the comparison
between its static and long-term equilibrium values across D and S countries, as well as in the
global economy. Third, we explore the implications of policies affecting both skilled labor and
physical capital mobility at the individual migrant level, as well as the role of natural resources, or
fixed capital endowments that affect both the incentive to migrate as well as the net welfare
implications of immigration. This allows for a more comprehensive assessment of immigration
flows and thus population shares across countries in different levels of development.

Policy implications: An advantage of our model is that we can use it to perform policy analyses
concerning the impact of immigration policy shifts that can affect human and physical capital
formation, and thus net per-capita income and income distribution within and across countries.
Assuming free international mobility of labor and individual migrant's assets, and alternative pull
and push factors, we find that in the majority of the cases, the immigration effects are asymmetrical
within countries as well as across countries, which raises a question about the political stability of
the equilibrium solutions we derive. This indicates the reasons why most countries invoke
immigration policies that regulate specific migration flows via quotas, or apply selective
requirements on immigrants based on educational attainments, occupation, health, and work
experience, even in cases where immigration generates complementarities in innovation or the
production of human capital across natives and immigrants.

The regulatory changes we model include hypothetical as well as actually enforced regulatory
restrictions on labor and individual migrant's capital mobility by both destination and source
countries. These include restrictions on the emigration of high-skilled workers by the source

6
  Our reliance on GDP per-capita, or market income, as a measure of the gains from migration deviates from that of
EK (2015) which uses "full income" as a measure, which includes the opportunity costs of non -market activities. We
focus on per-capita income, which is the conventional measure of the immigration surplus.

                                                        4
countries, to limit the "brain drain", or similar restrictions on the immigration of low-skilled
workers in D. We also consider the impact of two types of changes involving physical capital.
They include giving preference to immigrants who bring along with them more (claims to)
physical capital and the impact of physical capital endowments, or natural resources, on
immigration flows and the IS in D, S, and the global economy.

The structure of the paper is as follows: In section 2 we briefly review extant literature that has
some bearing on our analysis. Section 3 introduces our benchmark and extended models of
immigration in an open global economy. Section 4 derives the overall equilibrium effects of
immigration triggers in our benchmark and extended models by simulating the comparative
dynamic, macro-level outcomes of three types of triggers: pull factor shocks, push factor shocks
and policy shocks and their equilibrium, steady state implications. Section 5 derives the transitional
dynamic paths of the total outcomes of three major pull and push factors and the induced
immigration effects that contribute to these outcomes. In section 6 we pull together the results of
sections 3, 4 and 5 to derive the immigration surplus for our destination and source countries as
well as the global economy. In section 7 we analyze the impact of policy interventions concerning
labor and individual migrant's capital assets, and in section 8 we simulate a model extension where
D acquires some capital endowment. In section 9 we discuss the asymmetries we find in the net
benefits from immigration across D and S. We conclude with key takeaways in section 10.


2. Literature Review
As pointed out in the introduction, Ehrlich and Kim (2015) offers a model of endogenous
immigration, which we follow in this paper as well, where human capital is the only capital asset.
To our knowledge, however, this paper is the first attempt in the literature to treat immigration,
both human and physical capital formation, population growth, and economic growth as
endogenous variables in a global equilibrium setting. In this section, we discuss some earlier
papers where the role of some of these variables is recognized and discussed.

The conventional literature has dealt with the economic costs and benefits of immigration in terms
of its impact on the per capita GDP of natives in the destination country resulting from an
exogenous rise in migration. In a static model, any rise in labor supply due to migration lowers
labor wages, but increases the return to physical capital. The higher return to physical capital
outweighs the fall in labor income due to the larger output generated through immigration.
Consequently, the net effect on natives as a whole is positive. Borjas (1995) measures the
immigration surplus in the U.S. in a static model where productivity, physical capital, and labor
supply are all fixed, and finds that the immigration surplus is less than one percent of the U.S.
GDP.

Ben-Gad (2004) examines the economic effects of exogenous immigration using a neoclassical
growth model with physical capital accumulation and elastic labor supply. When capital and labor
can adjust, the negative effects on wages and the positive effects on rate of return to physical
capital are much smaller, and consequently the benefits from immigration are even more modest.
Ben-Gad (2008) furthers expands this analysis in a neoclassical growth model by introducing
capital-skill complementarities. Because of such complementarities, an increase in the number of

                                                  5
skilled immigrants generates a much larger immigration surplus than that generated by an equal
increase in the number of unskilled immigrants. Benhabib and Jovanovic (2012) analyze migration
from the perspective of a world social planner, and argue that optimal migration that maximizes
world welfare should be much higher than the level observed in reality. Storesletten (2000) studies
the fiscal side of migration in an overlapping-generations model and finds that admitting middle-
aged high-skilled immigrants is most beneficial fiscally.

These papers have either a static model or a neoclassical growth model, so the engine of per-capita
income growth in these papers is exogenous, and these papers cannot account for the growth effects
(whether positive or negative) due to migration. Several other papers do focus on endogenous
growth, but treat migration as an exogenous variable.7 For example, Lundborg and Segerstrom
(2000) build an open-economy model with two trading countries that are similar in production
technology (North-North) but have different population sizes. Firms in both countries develop new
products by hiring workers in the R&D production. Therefore, there are efficiency gains from
workers migrating from the more populated to the less populated country. Lundborg and
Segerstrom (2002) develop a similar model where one country has a more advanced R&D
production technology than the other (North-South). There is some efficiency gain when migrants
move from South to North to engage in R&D.

Drinkwater et al. (2007) build an endogenous growth model with R&D production serving as the
engine of growth. In their model, there are two types of workers, skilled and unskilled, and
employment in R&D is relatively skill-intensive. The authors study the impact of an exogenous
increase in migration. Their simulations show that the receiving country gains from migration of
exclusively skilled migrants, because a larger volume of skilled workers creates greater incentives
to engage in R&D production. But the receiving country loses if migration is just low skilled.

In a paper addressing the role of human capital in an endogenous growth context, Zak, Feng, and
Kugler (2002) develop an overlapping-generations model where growth occurs through human
capital formation. However, there is no investment in human capital in the model, and children's
human capital increases if parents choose to lower fertility. Simulations of the model illustrate that
an inflow of low-skilled migrants can cause middle-income countries to slide back into poverty,
but such inflow to developed countries has only short run contraction effects. Overall, receiving
countries are more likely to benefit from migrants with higher levels of human capital.

While the papers discussed in the preceding paragraphs deal with similar issues we explore in this
paper and reach some similar conclusions, these papers neither treat immigration or population as
endogenous nor address the distinct contributions of physical capital to the net benefits of
immigration. We attempt to do so in the following sections.




7
  There is also a large literature on economic growth with either human capital or technological innovation serving as
the engine of growth, but in a closed economy setting. For example, Lucas (1988), Stokey (1988), Becker, Murphy
and Tamura (1990), Romer (1990), Ehrlich and Lui (1991), and Ehrlich and Kim (2007).

                                                          6
3. The Benchmark Model
Following EK (2015), our model adopts a two-country, two-skill, and two-sector overlapping
generations model, where immigration and economic growth are the endogenous variables,
investment in human capital is the engine of growth, and parents make investment decisions about
the number and human-capital levels of their offspring, thus making population and human capital
accumulation in each country endogenous variables as well. Knowledge spillover effects between
workers of different endowed skill levels within and across countries are required to support the
existence of a global dynamic equilibrium steady state. In addition, balanced global equilibrium
requires that destination and source countries differ in their levels of technology in the productions
of goods and human capital, and in their fertility rates. Unlike EK (2015), however, we allow for
the role of physical capital as the second productive asset in the economy and specify the
production functions in the economy's two sectors ­ the high-tech and low-tech sectors ­ to include
both effective labor and physical capital. This allows us to recognize the essential roles of both
human and physical capital in production, and their relevance for immigration dynamics, the
measurement of the immigration surplus, and policies affecting labor and capital assets' mobility.

3.1 The Global Economic Environment

The global economy consists of two countries linked by migration: destination () and source ()
countries. Both countries experience persistent endogenous growth. Each country includes two
types of agents, high skilled ( = 1) and low killed ( = 2), and two corresponding production
sectors, high-tech and low-tech, employing exclusively both natives and immigrant workers of
either high or low skill level ( = , , ). There are thus six distinct groups of agents in the global
economy at each point in time: high-skilled and low-skilled in ; high-skilled and low-skilled in
; and high-skilled and low-skilled who migrate from  to .8 The model assumes that both  and
 allow for labor and capital assets' mobility at the individual-migrant level, subject to
corresponding transaction and friction costs. Our calibrated simulations consider, however, the
impact of policies that lower such costs as well.

Agents live over two periods: childhood and adulthood. Adults make consumption, employment,
fertility, investments in children's human capital, savings, and migration decisions. Only adults
can migrate, and they bring their families along. Children's human capital is formed via parental
investments. Because adulthood lasts one period, any savings turn into bequest, which offspring
inherit when they become adults. Parents are thus necessarily altruistic in our model.

3.2 Human Capital Formation

The accumulation of human capital is the product of optimal parental investment decisions and is
subject to three types of knowledge spillover effects: across generations, within countries, and
across countries. The intergenerational spillover effects involve transmission of knowledge from
parents to children. The within-country spillover effects result from social interaction between the

8
 As in EK (2015) the allowance for two exogenously determined skill types of agents in our model is a critical
condition for the existence of any positive benefits from immigration to natives in  . This is because under a single
skill-type agent, immigrants would always lower the average human capital level in the population, and thus per-
capita income in  , regardless of the nature of the immigration trigger.

                                                         7
two skill, or distinct ability, population groups in each country and are hierarchical: they flow from
higher to lower skill group. The cross-country spillover effects take place across similar skill
groups in  and  and flow from  to  due to the former's technological advantage. By these
assumptions, the high-skilled group in the destination country is the source of all spillover effects
in the global economy.

The human capital formation functions are specified in continuous-time, (as in Lucas 1988), but
augmented by the respective spillover effects as follows:
                              1      1 1
                              +1 = 1                                                (1)
                                                                1
                              2            2 2 2 
                              +1     =   2   ( )
                              1            1 1
                              +1     =   1   
                                                    1
                              2            2 2 2 
                              +1     =   2    ( )
                              1            1 1    2
                              +1 =       1   (1 )
                              2            2 2    2   2 1
                              +1 =       2   (2 ) ( )


where   < 1 guarantees concave production functions of human capital. In all production
                       
functions,  and +1 ( = , , ;  = 1, 2), measure the level of human capital attained by
                                                        
parents' () and children's ( + 1) generations, and  measures the share of earning capacity a
parent in skill group  (= 1, 2) in country  (= , , ) invests in educating each of her children.9
The productivity of these investments, denoted by  , is influenced, however, by endowed
elements of heterogeneity that are skill-specific as well as country-specific. We assume that the
productivity of human capital investment is hierarchical, i.e., it is higher for the high-skilled
relative to the low-skilled group within each country ( 1 > 2 ), and the productivity is also
higher for each skill group in the more technologically-advanced destination country, , relative
to their skill counterparts in the less developed source country,  ( >  ). These hierarchical
assumptions are also part of the critical conditions for a balanced growth equilibrium to exist, as
we show later in the analysis.

The knowledge spillover effects (  ) in these human capital production functions are also
hierarchical. The hierarchy implies that the knowledge spillover effect flows from the high-skilled
in  or  ("teachers") to the low-skilled ("students") in the same country, and from skill  in 
onto the corresponding skill  in . Specifically, the spillover effects assume the following forms:

                                     1  1
                                          + 1 1
                                             
                              2
                                    = 2 2   2 2
                                                                                    (2)
                                       +     
                                      1 1   1 1
                                       -  
                              2
                                    = 2 2   2 2
                                       -     
9
  While we include physical capital in the goods production function (next subsection), we do not have physical capital
augmenting human capital in knowledge production. This would require that households make optimal allocation of
their physical capital into goods production and human capital production, which unnecessarily complicates our
model. Our qualitative results would not be affected, however, as we show later, since physical capital grows at the
same rate as human capital in the steady state.

                                                          8
                                       1  1
                                            + 1 1
                                               
                               1
                                      = 1 1   1 1
                                         -     
                                        2 2   2 2
                                         +  
                               2
                                      = 2 2   2 2
                                         -     

                                                                                                    
where  is the population size of natives with skill level  in country  , and  is the number of
workers with skill level  who have migrated from country  to country . The first two equations
specify the within-country spillover terms within  and , respectively, and last two equations
specify the cross-country spillover terms. The idea is that the "effective teacher/student ratio"
determines the intensity of the knowledge spillover. The larger the disparity between the levels of
human capital and population sizes of the two linked groups, the greater the knowledge spillover
effects. Examples of within-country knowledge spillover are social interaction among individuals
living in the same location. Examples of cross-country knowledge spillover effects include
technology transfers from both natives and immigrants in the destination country with counterparts
of comparable skills and educational backgrounds in the source country through foreign direct
investments, cross-country trade relations or various forms of social interaction.

3.3 Goods Production

Each country has two goods-producing sectors: high-tech and low-tech. For analytical simplicity,
we treat the two sectors as segmented in terms of the skill-level of the worker-groups they employ:
while both use physical capital, each employs exclusively high-skilled or low-skilled workers to
produce their distinct consumption goods and to fund the physical capital inputs they employ.
Consequently, the skill-index  (= 1, 2) represents both the skill level of employees, their capital
inputs, and the technology level of the goods they produce. The goods produced in each sector,
however, are perfect substitutes in consumption, making trade in goods irrelevant in the model.

The rationale for having segmented production sectors is two-fold. It enables us to account fully
for the role of skill, which is an exogenous variable, as opposed to acquired educational attainments
at any skill category, which is endogenously determined. Furthermore, skill, or distinct ability,
more naturally links with distinct production sectors, such as those producing high-tech and low-
tech products. And since we model the sectors as segmented, we allow the rental rates of both
human and physical capital to be determined within each production sector. The rental prices of
human and physical capital may thus deviate across sectors following an external shock but they
ultimately equalize in any balanced growth equilibrium steady state due to the balancing role of
knowledge spillover effects.10

The production functions in sector  and country  are of the Cobb-Douglas, constant returns to
scale form:
10
  We generally need to maintain both capital and labor markets segmented. Otherwise, the equalization of rates of
return to physical capital across the two sectors implies that the rental prices of human capital are also equalized at all
times, essentially defeating the distinction of two skills and thus the two production sectors. We have actually tried a
version of our model that allows for a single capital market. We found out that under a skill-biased technological
shock to the economy, which by definition affects only the high-skilled sector, the economy does not converge to a
new steady state. This problem does not exist under shocks that do not generate a change in the skill composition of
migrants.

                                                            9
                                                 1-
                       =   ( ) (  )                                             (3)

                                                                             
where   is the factor-neutral technology affecting productivity,  is the aggregate physical
                                                                                        
capital,  is the aggregate human capital and  is the aggregate working hours, and   is
the aggregate effective working hours, in each country and sector. More specifically, the four
relevant production functions are:

          1
            =  1 [1 1 +   1 1 ] [ 1 1 1
                                       +    ]
                                              1 1 1 1-
                                                                                                (4)
          2
            =  2 [2 2 +   2 2 ] [ 2 2 2
                                       +    ]
                                              2 2 2 1-
          1
            =  1 [(1 - 1 ) 1 ] [( 1
                          
                                     1  1 1 1-
                                  -  )  ]
          2    2 [( 2  2 ) 2 ] [( 2  2 ) 2 2 ]1-
           =        -             -      

                          
where  ,  and  are the capital stocks supplied by natives and migrants in  and by
                                                             
natives in , in each sector , respectively, and  ,  and  are the working hours of natives
and migrants in , and natives in  in each sector , respectively.

Labor, capital, and goods markets are competitive. Firms in each sector hire labor and rent capital
to maximize profits,

                                         1-                               
               max   ( ) (  )                     -   -    .                              (5)

The rental rates, or shadow prices of physical and human capital are therefore given by:

                                        -1          1-
                       =   ( )                (  )                              (6)
                                                  -
                             = (1 - )      ( ) (  )

                                                                               -           
so the wage rate per worker is  =   = (1 - )  ( ) (  )                                    .

3.4 Households Maximization

Parents are altruistic toward their children. For  = {, } and  = {1, 2} , each adult parent
maximizes utility from her own consumption and altruistic objectives. The maximization problem
is thus

                                     1-                         1-
                                 ( )              (+1 )
                    max                       +                                          (7)
                { , , ,+1 }       1 -              1 - 

                    . .

                                                                                      
                     +  +1 =   + (1 -    -     ) 
                                                                             1-
                              +1 = ( ) (+1 +1 ) (+1 +1 )

                                                  10
where  is the intergenerational discount factor;  denotes the inverse intertemporal elasticity of
                              
substitution in consumption;  is the number of children;   is the unit (time) cost of raising a
                                                                                    
child; and   is the unit (time) cost of financing a child's educational investment,  . The total
                                                                               
endowment of time, normalized as 1, is spent on child bearing and rearing (   ), child education
                                                                                               
(    ), and parent's labor supply ( = 1 -    -     ). Physical capital stock 
denotes the amount of inherited physical capital available to a generation- parent.

The right-hand-side of the budget constraint in equation (7) thus represents income generated by
parent's physical and human capital assets. The left-hand-side of the budget constraint, in turn,
                                              
represents parental consumption spending,  , and the total amount of savings left as bequest for
                                                
children in generation  + 1,  +1, where +1 thus represents bequest per child. We assume
that parents use rational expectations to forecast children's future rate of return to physical and
                                                          
human capital of children in generation  + 1, +1 and +1, respectively.

The parental altruism function is also specified as a general Cobb-Douglas function

                                                               1-
                    +1 = ( ) (+1 +1 ) (+1 +1 )                                (8)

                                                           
where  > 1 and 0 <  < 1. Parents value the quantity  of children, and the potential labor and
                                                                                 
capital income each child will acquire. Labor income depends on the quality +1 of the child, and
                                          
capital income depends on the assets +1 the child inherits. This altruism function includes two
components: companionship (as in Ehrlich and Lui, 1991) and bequest. Companionship implies
that parents derive the returns on the quantity and quality of offspring they have invested in raising
and educating vicariously or through interaction with their offspring. Bequest is the altruistic value
of the assets they bequeath to each child, as measured by the returns to capital. One of the benefits
of adding physical capital to the model is that it allows us to recognize in a meaningful way the
role of bequest in the growth dynamics. Since we model adulthood in equation (7) as a single
                   
period, bequest +1 equals lifetime savings in the model. Note that it is necessary to have bequest
in the model to ensure continuous physical capital accumulation across generations.

The altruism function distinguishes the offspring's labor income from income derived from
physical capital, rather than combining the two, for two reasons. First, it reflects the distinct
motives parents have for savings for, and investing in, the quantity and quality of children. For
example, small business owners may be interested in leaving their businesses (physical capital) to
their children as legacy. Similarly, farmers are often interested in leaving behind the family farm
to their children. Second, our model is an endogenous growth model, and human capital is the
engine of growth. We separate human and physical capital in the altruism function to highlight the
parental benefits from investment in the distinct capital assets.

For immigrants with skill level  = {1, 2}, each adult solves the equivalent maximization problem



                                                 11
                                     1-                  1-
                                 ( )             (+1 )
                   max                       +                                  (9)
                { , , ,+1 }       1 -             1 - 

                   . .
                                                                                         
         +  +1 = (1 -   )  + (1 -                             -     -   ) 
                          1-
        +1 = ( ) (+1 +1 ) (+1 +1 )

Migrants are assumed to possess the physical and human capital attained by natives in their source
country,  , but they also have to bear migration costs   and   in terms of foregone wage
income, representing the time costs associated with migration, and foregone nonwage income,
representing transaction costs associated with transferring their assets. Thus, individual migrants'
                                                       
labor supply is given by  = (1 -    -     -   ), and their net assets in  are
                              
given by  = (1 -   ) . Migrants are assumed to face the same time cost of raising (  )
and educating (  ) a child, as do their counterparts in country , but they enjoy the same returns
to human and physical capital as do their skill-counterparts in country .

3.5 Optimality Conditions

                                                                                             
The first-order conditions for fertility,  , human capital investment,  , and bequest +1 for
each skill group  (= 1, 2) and country, or for migrants,  (= , , ) are given respectively by

   -                                   
( )     [(  +    )  + +1 ]
                   -          -1                           1-
       = (+1 )         ( )          (+1 +1 ) (+1 +1 )                                         (10a)
                                               
  -                                 -        +1         -1    1-
( )                    = (+1 )          ( ) +1  (+1 +1 ) (+1 +1 )                             (10b)
                                                        
   -                     -                                              -
( )         = (+1 )          ( ) (1 - )+1 (+1 +1 ) (+1 +1 )                 .                 (10c)

Dividing each side of the first-order condition (FOC) for  (10b) by the corresponding sides of
the FOC for +1 (10c), we obtain the analytical solutions for bequest:

                         1
                                   1 -  1 1 1 1
                         +1 =                                        (11)
                                     
                         2
                                   1 -  2 2 2 2
                         +1      =        
                                     
                         1
                                   1 -  1 1 1 1
                         +1      =        
                                     
                         2
                                   1 -  2 2 2 2
                         +1      =        
                                     
                         1
                                   1 -  1 1 1 1
                         +1      =        
                                     
                         2
                                   1 -  2 2 2 2
                         +1      =        
                                     

                                                   12
Similarly, dividing both sides of the FOC for  (10a) by the corresponding FOC for  and
substituting +1 by its optimal value in equation (11), we obtain analytical solutions for human
capital investments for the 6 groups in equation (12) as follows:

                         1
                                 
                           =                                          (12)
                             1 ( - 1)
                         2
                                 
                           = 2
                             ( - 1)
                         1
                                 
                           = 1
                             ( - 1)
                         2
                                 
                           = 2
                             ( - 1)
                         1
                                  
                           = 1
                              ( - 1)
                         2
                                  
                           = 2
                              ( - 1)

Note that the optimal solutions for  are explicit solutions, which are independent of fertility 
and the values of human and physical capital,  and  .

3.6 Labor Mobility ­ the Migration Decision

Our point of reference is that while labor is internationally mobile, it is also subject to migration
costs, including regulatory costs. Agents have incentives to emigrate from  to , as long as the
                                                                                                 
lifetime utility of residing in  is higher than that in . The equilibrium flow of migrants,  , is
determined by the marginal worker in each skill group equalizing the utility levels from staying
and migrating as follows:

              (1 )1-      1 )1-
                        (+1       (1 )1-      1 )1-
                                            (+1
                     +          =        +                                       (13)
               1 -       1 -       1 -       1 - 
              (2 )1-      2 )1-
                        (+1       (2 )1-      2 )1-
                                            (+1
                     +          =        + 
               1 -       1 -       1 -       1 - 

For interior solutions to exist along the balanced growth path, the productivity differences between
 and  in human capital and goods production have to be large enough,  >  and   >
  ,  = {1, 2}, and the fertility marginal shadow costs must also be larger in  relative to ,   >
  . This is consistent with available data showing that developing countries with high fertility
levels are predominantly source countries of immigration while developed countries with
relatively low fertility levels are mostly destination countries for immigrants. It is also important




                                                 13
to note that the migration costs   and   have to be of a moderate level for migration to have
an interior solution.11

Note that while in reality many countries can have both immigrants and emigrants, the equilibrium
                                                                                   
flow of migrants in the model,  , refers to net migration. Furthermore,  may include
temporary migrants.12

3.7 Population Growth

Both fertility and migration contribute to population growth. Native populations in  and  evolve
as functions of their fertility rates and volume of migrants,
                              1        1 1   1 1
                              +1     =    +                                       (14)
                              2        2 2   2 2
                              +1     =   +  
                              1        1 ( 1 1
                              +1     =     -  )
                              2        2 ( 2 2
                              +1     =     -  )

One immediate proposition arising from equation (14) is that a balanced growth equilibrium in
which population growth rates are equalized within and across countries for all skills groups may
exist if, and only if, the steady state fertility rate in  exceeds that in :

                                             
                                    >                                        (15)

If equilibrium fertility rates were to equalize across countries, there would be no migration along
the balanced growth paths. Put differently, as long as fertility rates are different, migration could
persist in the balanced growth equilibrium steady state. It is for this reason that we have already
placed a constraint on fertility costs in  vs.  in section 3.6.

3.8 Balanced Growth Paths

To allow for interior solutions for our model whereby  and  remain independent states we
restrict our model's steady state equilibrium solutions to converge on balanced growth paths
(BGP). This requires some specific parametric constraints. First, to make the model tractable and
maintain our representative agent framework (in each sector of each country), we need to specify
the process of immigrant assimilation. We assume that migrants' children fully assimilate within
one generation ­ they attain the same human capital and physical capital as do natives' children.
We recognize that the process may take longer than one generation and could allow for a longer
period of assimilation. But in a perpetual growth equilibrium, migrants must ultimately assimilate,
and allowing for longer lags would not change our results qualitatively.



11
   As  has a higher fertility rate than  , we need to have some migrants flowing from  to  to maintain a constant
population ratio along the balanced growth path. If migration costs are too high, there will be too few migrants and
over time population in  will shrink to zero relative to population in , and vice versa if migration costs are too low.
12
   Temporary migrants refer to those migrants who work and live in the destination country for several years before
they go back to their home countries.

                                                          14
Second, we have already placed constraints on the relative magnitudes of a few parameter values
concerning the productivity of investment in knowledge ( >  ), the technology of goods
production (  >   ) and the shadow costs of fertility (  >   ) in section 3.6 to assure interior
solutions in these variables across sectors and countries. The conditions assuring a balanced
growth path further require the following conditions:

                                                                                1                   
1. A threshold level of parental investments in offspring's human capital in , (  ) , to guarantee
that the optimal level of investment in offspring human capital is sufficiently large to assure a
positive growth rate of human capital in , ( > 0),

              
          +1           1              1                        1
               
                  = 1 (  ) =          1
                                            = 1 +  > 1  (1 ) > 1                                       (16)
                                        - 1                   

2. Equal relative efficiency (/ ) of producing human capital across agents with different skill
levels within and across countries:

                  (1 / 1 )/(2 / 2 ) = (1 / 1 )/(2 / 2 )                                      (17)

3. Equal relative endowed productivity levels in goods production in  and :

                                  1 / 2 =  1 / 2                              (18)

While condition 1 is guaranteed by the magnitude of the coefficients representing the explicit
solution concerning human capital accumulation in equation (16), conditions 2 and 3 are parameter
restrictions that are required to guarantee the existence of a balanced growth equilibrium steady
state, linking the destination and source countries,  and .

Subject to these conditions, we derive a balanced global growth equilibrium with the following
properties:13

The steady-state growth rates of population (), human capital ( ), and physical capital ( ) are
constant and equal across skill groups within and across countries. This is illustrated in equation
(19) below, where  stands for ,  , and  , respectively:
                              1   2   1   2
                              +1  +1  +1  +1
                              1 = 2 = 1 = 2                                      (19)
                                          

Physical capital and human capital growth rates are equalized for  = {, } and  = {1, 2}:

                                          
                             +1         +1
                                 
                                    =     
                                                                                  (20)
                                        

13
  To derive balanced-growth equilibrium paths, both  and  must be in a growth regime, in the sense defined in
(Ehrlich and Lui 1991). This does not mean that this is a North-North model. Most of the immigration-source countries
for which data exist are developing countries, but having per-capita income significantly below destination countries.

                                                         15
Relative human capital and physical capital are equalized across skill groups and across countries:

                             1   2
                                    1 2
                             1 = 2   =                                          (21)
                                    1 2

A constant fraction of each skill group in  migrate to :
                             1   2  1   2
                                        
                               =      =                                         (22)
                             1 2    1 2

Relative rental rates of human capital and rates of returns to physical capital are equalized across
groups and across countries:

                             1   2
                                    1  2
                             1 = 2    = 2                                        (23)
                                    1  


3.9 Extended Model ­ Diversity Effects

Equilibrium growth paths in the benchmark model were assured by hierarchic one-sided
knowledge spillover effects flowing from the top skill group in  and  onto the lower skill group
in  and  and from both skill groups in  onto their counterparts in . But knowledge spillover
effects could also be two-sided. This idea was already implemented in Ehrlich and Kim (2015).
We briefly expound on this possibility in this section in order to reassess its implications on the
net benefits from immigration in the context of our current model by similarly allowing for two-
sided interactions between natives and migrants in the production of knowledge in country ,
which we refer to as "diversity effects". Such interactions may have an independent effect on the
net welfare effects of immigration in both  and , under the various immigration triggers we
consider in this paper, which is what this extension is designed to focus on.14

To incorporate the possible effects of diversity, we allow the productivity of knowledge generation
to be an increasing and concave function of a simple measure of diversity involving natives and
migrants. Specifically, for  = {1, 2} , the productivity of human capital production in  is
modified to be
                                             
                             (  ) =  (1 +   ) ,                                   (24)

where   is the diversity measure of population in skill group , defined as

                                               
                                       = + ,                                      (25)

14
  There is literature documenting the existence of complementarities between natives and migrants in production and
innovation. For example, Alesina, Harnoss and Rapoport (2016) indicates that birthplace diversity has a net positive
effect on productivity growth. Additional studies include Peri (2007), and Greenwood and Hunt (1995).

                                                        16
and 0    1, making the diversity effect increasing and concave in   . The diversity measure
  , in turn, is increasing in the ratio of migrants in the population,  /(  +  ). Note that the
benchmark model is a special case of the extended model, where  = 0.


4. Solving the Comprehensive Model
In this section, we implement the dynamic implications of the benchmark and extended models by
pursuing balanced growth equilibrium solutions for both. We first describe how we calibrate the
structural parameters of the model in section 4.1. We then explore the behavioral properties of the
model by exerting external shocks to its basic parameters, or immigration triggers, representing
pull, push, and policy factors through comparative and transitional dynamic analyses from which
we derive the total economic effects and the induced immigration effects of the external shocks.
Since the dynamic analyses are constrained by the objective to derive balanced growth paths, the
bulk of the comparative dynamic effects of the triggers in section 4.2, and the transitional dynamic
paths showing the total and induced-immigration effects of the triggers in section 5 are derived in
the form of ratios of the relevant outcome variables within and across countries. It is only in section
6 where we can translate the induced immigration effects of the various triggers into measures of
the net changes in the average per-capita income of the native populations (i.e., the immigration
surplus levels) in  and , and thus in the global economy.

4.1 Calibration

We calibrate the key parameters of the model by matching the basic moments of the model's
balanced growth paths ­ the growth rates of GDP per capita and fertility rates driving the
population growth ­ with the corresponding moments in the U.S., which serves as the migration
destination country in our model, over the period 1960 to 2017. We similarly calibrate the source
country as a composite country, based on the weighted average moments of the top 15 source
countries of immigration to the U.S., and with weights of individual countries computed as the
shares of the stock of immigrants from each country to the total stock of immigrants from all 15
countries.15

We calibrate the following parameters as follows: We set the inverse intertemporal elasticity of
substitution at  = 0.9, the intergenerational discount factor at  = 0.7, the scale parameter at  =
1, the exponent of fertility in the altruism function at  = 1.3 , and the human capital spillover
parameters at  1 =  2 = 0.4 , all taken from EK (2015). The capital share  , set at 1/3 , in the
Cobb-Douglas production function is a common value used in the literature. We set  = 2/3, so
the labor income share in the altruism function is the same as that in the goods production function.

The relative productivity parameters in the goods production function   /  affect the incentives
to migrate. We normalize  1 and  2 to 10, and calibrate  1 and  2 to 8.377 in order to match
15
   The top 15 countries of origins, ranked in descending number of migrants to the U.S., are Mexico, China,
India, the Philippines, Puerto Rico, Vietnam, El Salvador, Cuba, South Korea, Dominican Republic, Guatemala,
Canada,    Jamaica,     Colombia,     and    the   United    Kingdom.      See     United    Nations (2017),
https://www.un.org/en/development/desa/population/migration/data/estimates2/estimates17.asp.

                                                    17
the immigrant share of the population, (1 + 2 )/( 1 + 1 +  2 + 2 ) in  . In the
benchmark model, there is free international migration, but in reality, there are also many
restrictions imposed on the volume of immigration and emigration in the form of quotas by
especially destination countries. To mimic this aspect of immigration we have therefore imposed
an immigration target ratio of 15%, which is an upper bound of the U.S. historic immigrant share
of the population, as seen in Figure 1.

Human capital formation is the engine of growth in the model and is mostly affected by the relative
efficiency of human capital production,  /  , which reflects the ratio of the endowed
productivity of human capital production to the unit cost of investment in human capital by agents
of different skill levels in different countries. We normalize the productivity parameters of the
model as follows: 1 = 10, 2 = 5, 1 = 8 and 2 = 4, and calibrate   at the value 1.675
in order to match the annual growth rate of GDP per capita in  and  at 2%, which is the average
annual growth rate of GDP per capita in the U.S.16. One generation implicitly lasts 30 years in our
model, so the targeted growth rate per capita over a generation is 1.0230 = 1.81.

The unit cost of production capacity (time) devoted to raising a child in countries  and ,   and
  , are set to be 0.1365 and 0.0853 respectively. This allows us to target the fertility rates to be
around 1.07 in  and around 1.74 in . Since agents in the model are unisex, this calibration allows
us to match the total fertility rates of 2.14 in the U.S. and 3.48 in the 15 source countries.17 Costs
of migration in terms of time,  1 and  2 , are set to be 0.062, in order to target the fertility rate
of migrants to be around 1.33 in the model, an intermediate value between the natives in the
destination and source countries. We set the transaction costs to migrants for moving physical
capital from  to  at  1 =  2 = 0.5 to reflect the fact that while migrants are generally poor
relative to the natives, they do bring some positive capital assets with them, commensurate with
the levels they had in . We will further relax this assumption in section 7.2 of the paper.

4.2 Comparative Dynamics under the Benchmark and Extended Models

We start with the benchmark model. To derive numerically the model's basic properties, we
conduct a series of simulations that are summarized in their respective rows in Table 1. We first
derive the model's equilibrium balanced growth steady state solutions, using the calibrated
parameters specified in the previous subsection. These are shown in row 1. The solutions indicate
that the fertility in  is higher than that of both migrants and of natives in  (  >  >  ); the
physical to human capital ratio (  /  >   /  ) and rental price of human capital ( >   )
are higher in  relative to , while the rates of return to physical capital (  <   ) are higher in 
relative to  . All are consistent with the generally observed empirical evidence concerning
destination and source countries. We then introduce external shocks in the model's basic
parameters representing pull and push factors, policy instruments, and structural parameters, and
study the resulting impacts of the shocks on the model's endogenous variables in their new steady
states.



16
     See World Bank (2019), https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/ny.gdp.pcap.cd.
17
     See World Bank (2019), https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/sp.dyn.tfrt.in.

                                                          18
It is important to note that Table 1 summarizes the total impact of these exogenous shocks, not the
differential impacts of the induced migration arising from the shocks, which are the focus of our
analysis in the next section. To save on notation in the following descriptions, we omit the
superscripts  = {, } and  = {1, 2} as long as they are not needed for clarification.

Row 2 presents the steady-state effects of a pull factor shock, which we term skill-biased
technological shock (SBTS). It is illustrated through an equi-proportional rise of 20% in the
endowed productivity of human capital, or knowledge production, of the top skill groups in
countries  and  , 1 and 1 , respectively. As the Table shows, the shock raises the global
growth rate of human and physical capital ( and  ), and thus income and parents' desired fertility
level (). It also raises the skill composition of migration, 1 /(1 + 2 ), and the population
share of migrants relative to natives in , (/  ), but lowers the population share of emigrants
in  ( /  ), as   rises faster. This result is consistent with the secular increase in the skill
composition of migrants in major destination countries, including the U.S. since the 1970s, when
the digital revolution picked up steam, as documented in EK (2015). The shock also lowers the
steady state levels of the physical to human capital ratio ( / ) in both  and  , essentially
because of the rise in the average level of human capital per capita in the new steady state
equilibrium. The shock also raises the ratios of human and physical capital across skill groups
( 1 / 2 and  1 / 2 ) and across countries (  /  and   /  ), and thus income disparity
within skill groups in  and  as well as across countries.18 This pattern fits closely the evidence
concerning the impact of the digital revolution in the U.S. since the early 1970s.

Row 3 presents the steady-state effects of another pull factor shock: a rise in the opportunity costs
of fertility,   by 5% in . This shock produces some different consequences relative to those of
the SBTS. The rise in   generates a shift in parental demand for quantity toward "quality" of
children, thus lowering the fertility rate in  and increases investment () in the human capital of
each child, which, in turn, raises the global growth rate of human and physical capital formation.
The fertility cost increase in  also raises the share of migrants in the population of country ,
/  , due to the fall in natives' fertility. But unlike the SBTS shock, this pull factor raises slightly
the physical to human capital ratio in ,   /  . Although the fall in fertility induces a higher
investment in human capital, which raises the average human capital attainments of the skill groups
in , it also raises the accumulated level of physical capital, as indicated by equation (11), which
ultimately raises   /  . The faster growth of human capital in  leads to a rise in wage and
income disparities between  and  . These consequences seem to be consistent with the
consequences of migration to Germany after the fall of the Berlin Wall.

Row 4 presents the steady-state effects of a push factor shock: a fall in the productivity of goods
production in both sectors in country ,  1 and  2 , by 0.02 (or 0.2%).19 In the new steady state,
country  ends up with a larger population, so, although more people migrate from  to , the
ratio of migrants in the population of the destination country, /  , ultimately falls as the
preceding stocks of immigrants become natives. The higher population in  relative to  generates

18
  The per-capita income level in each country is measured as  =  +  .
19
  The model is somewhat sensitive to changes in the relative productivity   /  . The reason is relative productivity
represents the income difference between  and , which determines the incentives to migrate. A small but permanent
change in productivity can cause a large change in migration, disrupting the balanced population growth in  and .

                                                        19
stronger knowledge spillover effects from the skill groups in  on the corresponding groups in ,
so   /  and   /  decrease in the new steady state. These effects ultimately lead to a
reduction in the relative wage and income gaps between  and .

Row 5 presents the steady-state effects of a policy factor shock: a fall in the transaction cost of
moving capital assets for all migrants who bring (claims of) physical capital to ,  1 and  2 , by
5%. This shock increases the migration of people with more physical capital from  to . The
shock also decreases the ratio of migrants relative to the population in , /  , because of the
rising total native population in  as migrants assimilate over time. In other words, the rise in  
is larger than the rise in  in the steady state. The average levels of human and physical capital in
, however, fall relative to those in , because of the relatively lower levels of human and physical
capital of migrants to  and also of the stronger knowledge spillover effects on the formation of
  emanating from the larger population in . In the steady state, both   /  and   / 
fall as a result, lowering the income disparity between  and .

Row 6 presents a preference factor shock: the steady state outcome of a fall in the weight of labor
income relative to capital income in the altruism function, , by 5%. This shock represents a rise
in parents' preferences to bequeath their capital assets to their offspring. Not surprisingly, such
shock increases the steady state physical to human capital ratio, / , in both  and  due to the
parents' greater preference for bequest. This effect lowers the optimal level of parental investment
in human capital () which, in turn, lowers the growth rate of human capital, physical capital and
income. At the same time, the relative stocks of both human and physical capital,   /  and
  /  , as well as the relative income gap between  and  rise largely because the lower
investment in human capital in  lowers the spillover effect of knowledge from  to .

Finally, row 7 presents the steady-state effects of a knowledge spillover factor shock: a rise in the
magnitude of the knowledge spillover effects across groups and across countries,  1 and  2 , by
5%. Stronger spillover effects across groups reduce within-country inequality in both  and 
(  1 / 2 and  1 / 2 ) as lower-skilled groups benefit from faster growth rates in income.
Although this effect is also present across countries, stronger spillover effects across countries
reduce potential migrants' incentives to migrate, since they can stay in their home country and
enjoy knowledge transfer. Overall, stronger cross-country knowledge spillover leads to a smaller
population in  relative to  and reduces total spillover effects. Therefore cross-country inequality
(  /  and   /  ) increases.

Table 2 similarly presents the comparative dynamics of our extended model, which allows for
positive diversity effects, i.e., interactions between natives and migrants in the production of
human capital. To permit a comparison between the impact of shocks in the extended, relative to
the benchmark model (where  is implicitly 0), we set  = 0.2 and keep all the other parameters
equal to those in Table 1. As the results indicate, the complementary relations between natives and
migrants in the extended model lead to higher growth rates of both human and physical capital,
and thus income. In turn, fertility rates also become higher in both destination and source countries
due to the wealth effect on the demand for children. The effects of all shocks (pull factor, push
factor, policy factor, preference factor and spillover factor) in Table 2 (rows 2-7) relative to the
initial steady state (row 1) are qualitatively the same as those in Table 1.


                                                 20
5. Transitional Dynamics: Total and Induced Immigration Effects
The comparative dynamics analysis in section 4 indicates the total impact of various external
shocks on the steady state values of the key control variables of the model. These include fertility
decisions, investment in human and physical capital, and the relative magnitudes of the state and
co-state variables of the model across skill groups within and across the destination ( ) and source
() countries. In this section, we trace numerically the transitional dynamic paths generated by
some of these shocks on the values of the same or related key variables of interest in both  and .
We pursue the transitional dynamics analysis in two parts: in the first part, we trace numerically
the total effect of the external shocks on the transitional dynamic and balanced growth paths (BGP)
of these variables. In the second part, we trace numerically the transitional dynamic paths
generated by the distinct component of the total effect of the external shock that can be ascribed to
the immigration flows induced by the external shocks, or immigration triggers, which we term the
induced immigration effect.

We first present the results of two pull factors ­ a skill-biased technological shock (SBTS), and an
adverse fertility shock in the destination country.20 We also depict the effects of a principal push
­ a negative supply shock generated by a fall in the productivity of goods production in the source
country.21 We plot the total effects of these three shocks in Figure 2, and the induced immigration
effects in Figure 3. We pursue these cases below, in the context of the benchmark model. The
transitional dynamics under the extended model are qualitatively the same, so we omit them here.
We compare the quantitative impacts of the benchmark and extended models, however, in the
context of the immigration surplus analysis in sections 6 and 7.

5.1 Pull Factor: A Skill-Biased Technological Shock

We focus here on the transitional dynamic paths generated by a demand pull factor resulting from
a skilled-biased technological shock, such as the digital revolution starting in the early 1970s. We
assume that the economies in  and  are initially at an equilibrium steady state under the
benchmark model. We then apply an upward productivity shock to the technology governing
knowledge formation by the higher skill groups in both countries, 1 and 1 , which we raise
simultaneously by 20% while holding constant the corresponding parameters associated with low-
skilled workers, 2 and 2 . Panel (a) in Figure 2 illustrates the main impacts of the SBTS. The
shock affects the skill composition of migrants and the income distributions across the two skill
groups and across countries. First, the skill composition of migrants increases over time since the
rise in the technological parameter 1 increases the incentive of high-skilled workers to
immigrate from  to  . 22 Second, income inequality across groups within country increases,

20
   The SBTS trigger was already covered in EK (2015) in the context of an economy where human capital is the only
asset in the economy.
21
   We analyze additional triggers originating from government policies concerning labor and migrants' asset mobility,
as well as physical capital endowments in sections 7 and 8.
22
   There is an initial dip in both the migration flow and the skill composition of migrants. Migration flow decreases
initially because  receives a positive shock, benefitting the high skilled directly but also benefitting the low skilled
indirectly through the knowledge spillover effects. Skill composition decreases because in the very first period of the
SBTS, the high skilled group in  benefits immediately from it, while the low-skilled group has to wait until the next
period to enjoy the higher spillover effects. Hence, the incentives to migrate is lower for the high-skilled group relative
to the low-skilled group in , leading to a small initial decline in the migrants' skill composition.

                                                            21
because high-skilled groups in both countries benefit more from the SBTS. Third, income
inequality across countries also increases, as more high-skilled migrants migrate from  to  over
the transition phase as well as along the balanced growth paths (BGP).

5.1.1 Isolating the Effects of Induced Migration under SBTS

The total impact of the SBTS includes the added migration effects it induces. But what are the net
economic effects of the induced migration effects in  and  ? To answer this question, we
decompose the total SBTS effect into: (1) the component that would exist without the increased
migration; and (2) the component generated by the rise in the skill composition of migrants that
the SBTS has induced. To isolate the latter, we simulate the dynamic paths under two scenarios.
First, the skill composition of migrant flows 1 /(1 + 2 ) and the share of migrants to natives
1 / 1 are restricted to be frozen at their initial steady state equilibrium values. Second,
immigration remains unrestricted, and thus exhibits the total SBTS effect. The difference between
the two scenarios indicates the impact of induced migration, as shown in Panel (a) of Figure 3.

In country , immigration raises the population share of skilled workers. This raises the average
human and physical capital levels, thus the income per worker. Country  as a whole benefits. But
there is a difference across groups. Wage income of high-skilled workers falls in , as the larger
number of skilled migrants increases the supply of skilled workers in the unrestricted case. The
impact on low-skilled workers in  goes in the opposite direction: they gain, because the larger
share of skilled workers in the population raises the knowledge spillover effect on their human
capital level. Thus, induced immigration under SBTS lowers income inequality in .

In country , in contrast, unrestricted immigration under SBTS is a loss to  as a whole because
there are more skilled migrants emigrating (a "brain drain"), and this lowers knowledge spillover
effects on the lower-skilled group members, raising income inequality within . This is the chief
adverse result of the brain drain in the source country. Moreover, since unrestricted migration
raises income in  and lowers income in , it increases income inequality across  and .

5.2 Pull Factor: A Downward Fertility Shock in 

We now consider the transitional dynamics paths generated by another pull factor resulting from
an assumed downward fertility shock in . We identify the exogenous factor contributing to the
shock heuristically as an upward shift in the opportunity costs of bearing children, due to the rise
in the age of marriage and the rise in the labor market opportunities for females in the more
developed Western countries, relative to the less developed countries in Asia and Africa in recent
decades. Technically, we raise the fertility cost parameter in our model,   , by 5%. We then
simulate the transitional dynamic evolution in both  and , tracing it from the initial steady state.

Panel (b) in Figure 2 illustrates the results. As the shock applies to both skill types, there is no
change in the skill composition of migration. But the shock attracts more migrants, so the ratio of
migrants to natives rises in country . Since the shock is symmetric across sectors and there is no
change in the skill composition of migration, income inequality does not change across the skill
groups within countries. But income inequality between  and  rises, as a higher fertility cost in
 leads to a lower fertility and a greater investment in human capital, which in turn raises the

                                                22
growth rates of physical capital and income in , as well as the level of migration flows along
the transitional dynamic paths.

5.2.1 Isolating the Effects of Induced Migration under the Fertility Shock

As in section 5.1.1, to isolate the induced immigration effect of this shock, we simulate the
dynamic paths under two scenarios. In the first, the migrant to native ratios 1 / 1 and 2 / 2
are restricted to be frozen at their initial steady state equilibrium values. In the second, immigration
is left unrestricted, which represents the total effect of the shock. The difference between the two
scenarios indicates the impact of induced migration, as shown in Panel (b) of Figure 3.

The adverse fertility shock in  generates induced migration from  . Since migrants' average
human capital is lower than that of the natives in , the induced migration lowers the average
human and physical capital, and thus income, in . Hence, country  experiences a loss from the
rise in migration. At the same time, the latter increases the population in  relative to , so the
knowledge spillover effects from  to  become stronger, benefitting human capital formation in
. Therefore, country  gains. The net effect of immigration induced by the decline in the fertility
rate in  thus also lowers income inequality between  and .

5.3 Push Factor: A One-Period Adverse Productivity Shock in 

We focus here on the transitional dynamics of an adverse productivity shock, specific to country
, such as a decline in the productivity parameters associated with high-tech and low-tech goods.
The trigger could be a radical change in government policies, or a natural disaster that lowers the
demand for workers and induces more of them to migrate to country . One example is the Syrian
civil war that launched the immigration of millions of refugees to neighboring countries in the
Middle East and Europe between 2011 and 2016. In the simulations, we implement the adverse
shock by lowering the parameters  1 and  2 in equation (4) by 5%. We limit the negative shock
to last just a single period (generation) since such shocks are reversible. We then simulate the
transitional dynamic evolution in both  and , tracing it from the initial steady state of balanced
growth. Panel (c) of Figure 2 illustrates the results. As the shock occurs in both production sectors,
there is no change in the skill composition of migration. We obtain this result since we are not
upsetting any balanced growth condition in this experiment ­ the relative productivity ratio
 1 / 2 remains constant. During the period of the shock, the migrant population rises relative to
native population in country . However, when the shock is reversed, the population share of
migrants relative to natives eventually gets back to its pre-shock level.

Since the shock is symmetric across sectors and there is no change in the skill composition of
migration, income inequality does not change across the skill groups within countries. It does
change, however, in a non-monotonic pattern between  and  . Specifically, the cross-country
inequality first rises, as the negative productivity shock results in a loss of production and income
in . It then continuously falls, because (1)  recovers from the negative shock, and (2)  benefits
from higher knowledge spillover effects from  since the increased migration from  to  brings
about a larger population in  relative to  . Eventually, however, the cross-country income
inequality rises back again when migration from  to  returns to the original steady state, so


                                                  23
population in  rises and the knowledge spillover effects slow down relative to their original
magnitude.

5.3.1 Isolating the Effects of Induced Migration under the Productivity Shock

Following the same methodology as in section 5.2.1, we again isolate the effects of the induced
migration under the negative productivity shock in , and the results are illustrated in Panel (c) of
Figure 3. The adverse productivity shock in  induces migration to rise in . Since there is no
change in the skill composition of migration due to this shock, and migrants' average human
capital is lower than that of the natives in , the induced migration lowers the average human and
physical capital, and thus income, in  . At the same time, the rise in migration increases the
population in  relative to  , so the knowledge spillover effects from  to  become stronger,
benefitting human capital formation and the thus the income level in . While induced migration
brings about a decline in income inequality across countries,  would gain and  would lose from
restricting immigration. However, there is no change in the skill composition of migration within
the two countries, so income inequality across skill groups remains unchanged.


6. The Immigration Surplus
Following the comprehensive simulation analyses in section 5, we can now compute a critical
indicator of the reported results by assessing the net economic benefits to natives in both
destination and source countries resulting from the induced changes in migration due to their
relevant triggers. Our assessment of the net benefits is based on the conventional "immigration
surplus", but we evaluate it in both static and dynamic forms.

The conventional approach for measuring immigration surplus is based on a static or neo-classical
framework where technology is invariant, and per-capita physical capital (as well as human capital
stock, if any) are fixed. As the demand for labor is downward sloping, any rise in labor supply due
to migration, assuming that migrants do not bring any physical capital, lowers the wage rate due
to the diminishing returns to labor. At the same time, however, the rate of return to physical capital
increases, and the rise in capital income outweighs the fall in labor income. Hence, the overall net
effect on natives in the destination country is positive. By the converse logic, emigration surplus
in the source country is negative.

In our dynamic model, a discrete period represents a whole generation. But we can mimic the
conventional approach by estimating a static version of the immigration surplus. We do that by
allowing a specific external immigration trigger to effect an endogenous change in migration flows
under the restriction that the flows affect only the wage rate and the rate of return to capital in the
destination (source) country, leaving all other endogenous variables constant. We can then
compute the corresponding change in income due to these factor price changes. More specifically,
taking the destination country  as an example, we denote the weighted average per-capita income
() in  before the change in migration (time 0) as

                                     ,0
                                             1,0  1,0 +  2,0  2,0
                                          =                       ,
                                                1,0 +  2,0

                                                  24
where  1,0 =  1,0  1,0 +  1,0  1,0 1,0 is the income per capita of the high-skilled group and
 2,0 =  2,0  2,0 +  2,0  2,0 2,0 is the income per capita of the low-skilled group. We weigh
each group by its population,  1,0 and  2,0 respectively, to get the weighted average income
per capita. Similarly, we denote the per-capita income after the change in migration (time 1) as

                                            1,0  1,1 +  2,0  2,1
                                  ,1 =                           ,
                                               1,0 +  2,0

where  1,1 =  1,1  1,0 +  1,1  1,0 1,0, and  2,1 =  2,1  2,0 +  2,1  2,0 2,0. Note that
we allow only the factor prices  and  to change, while all other endogenous variables ­
population (), physical capital ( ), human capital ( ), and labor () ­ remain fixed. The static
immigration surplus,  , in , is the percentage change in income due to immigration:

                                                       ,1 -  ,0
                                , = 100 ×                       .
                                                        ,0

Our static immigration surplus measure is thus similar to the conventional measure in that the
change it represents is due to factor price movements, which is caused by the change in aggregate
labor supply due to migration. The difference, however, is that in our case, migration is an
endogenous outcome of what has triggered it, while in the conventional approach migration is
strictly an exogenous event. Another difference is that in our model migrants bring some capital
as well, which further affects factor prices. The formula is identical for computing the static IS in
the source country if the superscript  is replaced by , and the population   is replaced by
  -  . The global IS measure is similarly computed as the percentage change in the weighted
average of per capita income in the global population, which includes natives in  and  and
migrants.

More importantly, we implement a dynamic version of the immigration surplus measure to assess
the net benefits of a change in the migration flow, from its initial, static value to its dynamic
evolution over the transitional dynamic path, leading to the balanced growth equilibrium path. In
our dynamic equilibrium context, we need to measure the immigration surplus by separating from
the total economic effects of an external shock, or trigger, its induced immigration effects ­ i.e.,
the effects brought about strictly by the immigration changes induced by that trigger. To do so, we
restrict the skill composition of migrants or migrants to natives shares to stay unchanged and
compute the percentage changes in key determinants of the IS across the unrestricted and restricted
cases.

                                                       ,
Formally, the dynamic immigration surplus in ,            , is calculated as the percentage change
in per capita income, which is used to measure the benefits or losses brought about by an external
shock ­ a pull or push factor ­ to the economy, as follows:

                                                   ,   ,
                                ,                    - 
                                         = 100 ×        ,          ,
                                                        


                                                 25
           ,
where         stands for per capita income in country  at time  under free immigration and
    ,
 stands for per capita income under an experiment where we hold constant either the skill
composition of migrants (in the case of a SBTS shock) or migrants to natives ratio (in the case of
a downward fertility shock in , or an adverse productivity shock in ). In both the unrestricted
and restricted migration cases, all endogenous variables adjust along the dynamic paths. The
formula is identical for computing the dynamic IS in the source country if the superscript  is
replaced by , with the population measured as   -  in group . The global IS measure is also
the percentage change in per capita income in the global population, which includes natives in ,
natives in  and migrants.

6.1. Migration Induced IS Changes due to Alternative Triggers

In Table 3, Panel (a) summarizes the immigration surplus (IS) in the benchmark model, and Panel
(b) summarizes the IS in the extended model that allows for diversity effects. In both Panels,
positive values indicate a loss from a restrictive policy change, hence a gain in the IS due to
unrestricted migration. In addition to the IS, which we compute based on income per capita, we
also compute in Table 3 the percentage changes in other related endogenous variables: per-capita
values of human capital and physical capital. While the literature generally focuses only on the
destination country, we evaluate the IS for three groups: the natives in the destination country, the
natives in the source country, and the entire global economy. We calculate both the static and
dynamic immigration surplus along the transitional paths for the natives in both the destination
and source countries to determine if they are compatible or conflicting, as this may determine their
political stability. The reason for considering the global economy is that our model is also suitable
for studying internal migration within a country, and the welfare in the global economy can be
mapped to the welfare in a country with internal migration.23

In Panel (a) of Table 3, the effects of immigration changes on the IS are summarized by the triggers
that induced these changes. We consider three triggers: a skill-biased technological shock (SBTS)
in both  and , a downward fertility shock in , and an adverse productivity shock in . The
static IS for country , measured in terms of income per capita, is negative under SBTS, and
positive under the other two triggers. The reason is that there is a small, but temporary, decline in
migration under SBTS in the static case, as explained in footnote 19 and shown by the values of
 /  ( = 1, 2) in Table 3 relative to their initial, steady-state values in Table 1 (0.1772). In
contrast, there is a rise in migration under the downward fertility shock or the adverse productivity
shock relative to their initial steady state values in Table 1. Consistent with the conventional
measure, our static IS in  is positive (negative) when migration increases (decreases). Note that
alternative welfare indicators, including human and physical capital per capita, are zero because
both capital stocks are invariant in the short-term.24



23
   For example, we can use our model to study rural ( ) to urban ( ) migration within a country and evaluate the
welfare impact on the whole country due to various migration policies.
24
   EK (2015) computes the immigration surplus just in the case of SBTS, based on the net changes in "full income",
rather than market income per capita, which produces different quantitative results, since full income includes the
opportunity cost of time spent in non-market activities and is invariant to changes in physical capital and work time,
.

                                                         26
The static IS for country  is positive under SBTS, because having less high-skilled workers
emigrating increases their proportion in the population and generates an immediate, but very small
rise in per-capita income in  ­ just 0.01 of 1%. But the static IS for  is zero under the downward
fertility shock in  or the adverse productivity shock in . This is because in our analysis these
two shocks induce an equal change in high-skilled and low-skilled migration, and migrants also
bring their physical capital when they migrate, so the capital-to-labor ratio is maintained in , and
per-capita income is not affected. Note that this results contrasts with the conventional literature,
since it assumes that immigration involves exclusively just a pure labor transfer.

Turning now to the dynamic effects of immigration triggers on the IS, we report these effects only
after 3, 5, and 10 generations following the shock. Table 3 Panel (a) shows that under SBTS the
long-term IS rises modestly in  in terms of the change in per-capita income ­ from only 0.05 of
1% after 3 generations to only 1.16% after 10 generations ­ and falls significantly in  - by 12.8%
after 10 generations. This is because SBTS induces a rise in the skill composition of migrants, so
the skilled workers' population share, and average human and physical capital, and thus income
per capita in  increase. But as  experiences a "brain drain", its average human and physical
capital decrease, and thus per capita income continuously falls. The loss to  outweighs the gain
to , as reflected by the value of the global IS, essentially because the marginal addition by the
skilled migrants to average human and physical capital-rich  is modest, relative to the significant
loss in the capital assets-poor  country.

Under a downward fertility shock in  or an adverse productivity shock in , the IS falls in  and
rises significantly in  ­ by over 40% in the long term under both shocks. This is because under
these shocks, the migration volume increases without an increase in its skill composition.
Immigration to  lowers the average human capital level in . But the higher population in 
raises the intensity of the knowledge spillover effects, which increase the average human capital
in . As the gain in  is significantly larger than the loss in , the global IS increases. Panel (a)
thus indicates that the changes in the IS for  and  as a result of migration triggers are generally
asymmetric. We discuss the underlying source of these asymmetries in section 9.

Panel (b) reports the immigration surplus for the extended model where the IS is augmented by
diversity effects. Allowing immigration to generate complementarities in knowledge production
between migrants and natives alters the predicted total and induced immigration effects due to the
three triggers. Under all three triggers, there is a rise in the growth rates of human and physical
capital, and thus in per capita income. The faster growth rate in , in turn, increases uniformly the
rates of growth of income per capita in  due to the knowledge spillover from  to . However,
the changes in the IS due to the migration changes induced by the three triggers are again not
uniform, as discussed below.

The asymmetric welfare effects on  and  remain unchanged in the extended model under the
SBTS shock: while the IS gain becomes larger in  (1.28% after 10 periods, relative to 1.16% in
the benchmark model), the IS loss in  persists though at a slightly lower level, as in the benchmark
model. However, under a downward fertility shock in , the IS change now turns to be positive,
rather than being negative in , as was the impact in the benchmark model, while continuing to be
positive in . This is a win-win outcome due to the allowance for diversity effects in knowledge
generation. Also, under an adverse productivity shock in , the IS change turns positive in  for

                                                 27
three periods, but then slides down in a negative direction. The initial gain in  is due to the
interaction effects between natives and immigrants, but the ultimate loss in  is due to the fact that
the migrants' population ratio  /  falls as the native population in  rises over time when
older immigrant cohorts become native, and the resulting diversity effects become smaller. Since
there is no such loss in , the IS continues to be positive in , as in the benchmark model. For all
three triggers, the global IS remains the same as in the benchmark model: negative under SBTS
and positive under the other two shocks.


7. Impact of Policy Interventions
We apply the same methodology used to assess the impact of external shocks, or immigration
triggers, to assess the net benefits of immigration policy changes that affect human capital, or the
skill composition of immigrants, and their capital asset mobility. As in Table 3, we compute the
immigration surplus for both the benchmark and the extended models. These experiments produce
insights about both the static and the long-term consequences of specific immigration policies, as
well as the political stability of unconstrained immigration in view of the asymmetric
consequences that affect natives in both destination and source countries.

7.1 Immigration Policies Limiting High and Low-Skilled Migration

Our analysis in sections 5 and 6 indicates that the skill composition of migration turns out to have
a significant impact on the immigration surplus when immigration is triggered by an SBTS shock.
In the following experiments, we attempt to highlight the net welfare effects of high-skilled and
low-skilled migration restrictions on natives in  and .

The first experiment is a hypothetical policy intervention whereby country  disallows all
emigration of high-skilled workers from .25 Table 4 shows that the static effects of this restriction
on the IS turn out to be a very small loss to  (0.03 of 1%) and a positive gain (5%) to , as would
be expected under the conventional case. The dynamic outcomes, however, turn out to be
symmetrical for both  and . Table 4 shows that in this case both  and  lose a very high share
of their potential long-term per-capita income from the policy restriction, regardless of the type of
the external shocks (SBTS, fertility shock, or productivity shock) that trigger the change in the
induced migration.  is losing due to the loss of high-skilled migrants who can raise the average
human capital level in the population, and thus income per capita. Although  no longer
experiences a "brain drain",  also loses because the knowledge spillover effects it obtains from
 become quite modest. In other words, allowing for some high-skilled migration from  to  not
only benefits , but also benefits , because it exerts a beneficial effect on a still relatively large
group of high-skilled workers in  , which also generates a significant spillover effect on low-
skilled workers in . Allowing free high-skilled migration, relative to none, which is what Table
4 shows, turns out to be a win-win situation for both  and , and therefore the global economy
under all three triggers.
25
  This experiment as well as the following one in Table 5 have been offered originally in EK (2015) using just SBTS
as the immigration trigger and relying on just human capital as a productive asset. The qualitative results we derive
are nevertheless similar, although the quantitative effects are somewhat different in our case where we compute the
IS based on GDP, or market income, rather than "full income" per-capita.

                                                         28
The second experiment is the opposite hypothetical experiment whereby country  disallows all
low-skilled immigration from  to . Table 5 indicates that, except for the static case where both
 and  lose from the restriction, over time the dynamic outcomes become asymmetric for the two
countries:  gains whereas  loses from the policy restriction, regardless of the external shock that
triggers the induced migration. The gain in  occurs because by disallowing low-skilled migrants,
thus assimilating only high-skilled migrants, the long-term average human and physical capital,
and therefore income per capita rise over time. In contrast,  loses because by remaining with a
large low-skilled population, average human and physical capital, and thus income per capita in 
fall over time. Furthermore, knowledge spillover effects from  to  and from high-skilled to low-
skilled in  become weaker, which increase the loss in . And since the loss in  exceeds the gain
in , the global economy loses from a full restriction on low-skilled immigration. Unrestricted
low-skilled migration is thus a gain to  and the global economy, but a loss to .

The IS outcomes of bans on either high-skilled or low-skilled migration that are reported in Panel
(a) in Tables 4 and 5 under the benchmark model are reconsidered using the extended model that
allows for complementarities between natives and immigrants in knowledge production. Panel (b)
in Tables 4 and 5 reports the changes in the immigration surplus when high-skilled and low-skilled
migration are disallowed, respectively. Compared to Table 4 Panel (a), the results are identical
qualitatively in Panel (b), but the magnitudes of the net gains from unrestricted high-skilled
migration are larger quantitatively in the extended, relative to the benchmark model. This is
because the complementarity between natives and migrants increases the growth rates in both 
and , which strengthens the conclusion that allowing for some positive high-skilled migration is
beneficial to both  and . This may explain why some less developed countries send students to
get educated in developed countries, despite the fact that many choose to become immigrants in
: The spillover effects on their counterparts in  is an advantage to . But the outcomes in Table
5 Panel (b) remain conflicting concerning the allowance for positive low-skilled migration, which
are negative in  and positive in , although somewhat less harsh quantitatively.

7.2 Immigration Policies Motivating Migrants to Bring Physical Capital Assets

Our model allows us to extend our policy experiments to deal with regulations affecting the
mobility of individual assets, which generate distinct changes in migration flows and thus in the
net benefits to natives in  and . In this subsection, we consider a policy shift that encourages
migrants to bring more physical capital by decreasing their transaction costs of moving physical
capital from  to , which are captured in our model as reductions in the parameters  1 and  2
(see equation 9). Table 6 shows the corresponding welfare effects of reducing  1 and  2 by 5%
relative to their initial steady state values. In Panels (a) and (b) we report the consequences under
the benchmark and the extended models. We also plot the transitional dynamics of the total and
induced migration effects of these changes in Panel (a) of Figures 4 and 5, respectively.

In assessing the impact of the lowered transaction cost of migrants' capital mobility, we consider
three welfare measures, all expressed in percentage terms. The first measure is the total impact of
the policy shift, relative to the original equilibrium under the benchmark or extended models,
where there are no restrictions on migration and no accompanying shocks (row 1 of Tables 1 and
2). Since the policy in this subsection is nonrestrictive, as it involves a reduction in the costs of

                                                 29
moving capital, positive values continue to denote the welfare gains from relaxing a restrictive
policy. The second measure involves the immigration surplus, as in section 6, which captures the
per-capita income change due to the induced immigration effect of the policy shift. The third
measure is the isolated effect of the change in the flow of physical capital induced by the policy,
which is independent of the change in migration flows. This effect is assessed by constraining the
migrants-to-natives ratios to remain at the same level as in the original equilibrium. This mimics
a quota system, which the government can achieve by giving preference to immigrants with more
capital without changing the total quota of immigrants.

Under no migration restrictions, the total effect of the policy shift leads to a small static income
gain to  due to larger migration flows. But in the long run, there is a small income loss to , but
a large gain to . Although a larger inflow of physical capital increases aggregate production in ,
the larger inflow of migrants lowers the average level of human capital in  since the policy does
not affect the skill composition of migrants who have a lower level of human capital relative to
natives. The rise in the population ratio of  relative to , partly due to the wealth effects of higher
wages, and partly due to migrants becoming assimilated, increases the knowledge spillover effects
from  to . Hence, there is a significant rise in the net benefits to  from emigration, and global
welfare increases as well. There is no change in the income distribution across skills since the
policy shift does not change the skill distribution of migrants. The change in the immigration
surplus in this case indicates the same effect as that the total effect of the policy shift, although the
loss of income in  is slightly higher. The reason is that the immigration surplus does not capture
the small benefits to  from having more capital.

In the extended model (see Panel (b) of Table 6), when there are no restrictions on migration, the
rise in migration increases the diversity level and thus the growth rates in  , and leads to an
increase in income per capita through the 5th generation. But as the population in  continues to
rise relative to , the migration ratio  /  eventually falls and the diversity effects become
weaker, resulting in a loss in per capita income in  in the 10th generation.

Under the restriction that the migrants-to-natives ratios remain constant, which can be effected by
imposing a fixed migration quota with preference awarded to those bringing more capital, the
direct effects of facilitating the rise in physical capital in  is shown to yield a small static income
loss to . Although this "migrant direct investment" increases aggregate production, income per
capita among natives decreases, because while more capital means both a lesser decline in the
wage rate and a smaller rise in rate of return to physical capital, the gain in wage income cannot
fully offset the loss in capital income. The overall effect is a very tiny income loss to , as the
beneficiaries from the output increase are the immigrants. This effect is consistent with the static
immigration surplus analysis in the literature. However, in the longer term, this constrained policy
leads to a win-win situation: both  and  gain. The reason is that in this scenario, the negative
effects on human capital are eliminated when immigration is constrained, so  gains, while  also
gains due to knowledge spillover effects. These effects apply equally to the benchmark and
extended models.

There is yet an additional policy scenario that can make the policy shift discussed in this subsection
more potent: raising potential immigrants' incentive to bring more physical capital to  when they
migrate can also attract wealthier immigrants with an entrepreneurial proclivity, who could bring

                                                   30
about new process and product innovations. In this case, the net effect on the IS would turn into a
win-win situation even when there are no restrictions on immigration. This effect is equivalent to
inducing more high-skilled migrants, who are wealthier than the less-skilled immigrants. In that
case, increasing the individual incentive to bring more capital assets would also trigger an increase
in the skill composition of migrants, and thus bring about an increase in the average level of human
capital in the population, as in the case of a skill-biased technological shock.


8. Capital Endowment
Our theoretical model has so far recognized just one fundamental difference between destination
and source countries ­ their predetermined technological development levels in producing both
knowledge and goods, and thus their income levels and fertility choices. Both countries are
otherwise assumed to share identical competitive economic environments. In reality, however,
there are differences in natural resources that may also separate  and , one of which is physical
capital endowments in the form of land or natural resources. An advantage of having physical
capital in the model is that it allows us to study the implications of such heterogeneous capital
endowments on immigration. In this section, we extend the structure of the benchmark model by
adding a fixed capital endowment      as a factor affecting the production functions of goods and
exploring its impact on immigration flows and the resulting immigration surplus. We motivate this
analysis by linking the simulated experiment with historical and stylized examples illustrating the
impact of the discovery of resource endowments on immigration.

We assume that country  receives a physical capital endowment such as land that is rich in natural
resources and good climate, which can be thought of as a special form of capital that augments the
productivity of effective labor and capital, and thus enhances the technology of goods production.
Specifically, the goods production functions associated with sector  = {1, 2}, can be specified as
follows:
                                                                 1-
                         =   (  ) ( ) ( 
                                         )                                           (26)

Equation (26) has the same specification as equation (3) except that     = 1 in the benchmark
model. Note that an increase in    raises overall factor productivity, and thus the wage rate and
                                   

the rate of return on physical capital.

In the simulation experiment, we raise      , by 1%, to 1.01. We plot the transitional dynamics of
total and induced migration effects of the endowment shock in Panel (b) of Figures 4 and 5,
respectively. In Panels (a) and (b) of Table 7 we also assess quantitatively the total effect of the
endowment shock and the dynamic evolution of the immigration surplus due to the induced
immigration triggered by the shock, under both the benchmark and extended models,
respectively.26 In so far as the total endowment effect on the economy is concerned, the increased
endowment and the enhanced productivity it generates are a windfall for , so income per capita

26
  The total effect and the immigration surplus measures are calculated in the same way as in section 7. Recall that
immigration surplus shows the impact of the induced immigration effect of the shock, which is only a small part of
the total impact of the shock.

                                                        31
rises in . The higher productivity level in  also attracts more immigrants to move from  to ,
and this increases the knowledge spillover effects generated by  , benefitting  as well. The
capital endowment shock in  is thus beneficial to both  and  (see Panels a and b in Table 7).

In so far as the impact on the immigration surplus is concerned, however, the capital endowment
effect is similar to the one we obtained in section 7.2 when providing an incentive to immigrants
to bring more capital. A higher migration leads to a small static gain in income per capita in .
But over the long run, the higher immigration volume lowers the average human capital level and
decreases income per capita in , starting after the third generation. The higher immigration also
raises the population level of  relative to , so that the knowledge spillover effects from  to 
become much stronger. This raises the IS in  and the global IS.27

In the extended model, higher migration initially increases the diversity effect in  , which
increases the growth rates of human capital, physical capital and income. So the IS turns positive
through the 5th generation (see Panel b of Table 7). But as migrants become assimilated, the
population in  rises, so the migrants-to-natives ratio declines, causing a decline in diversity and
a loss in IS in the 10th generation.

To some extent, this exercise sheds some light on the Louisiana Purchase by the U.S. in 1803 and
the Homestead Act of 1862. The fertile land endowment encouraged westward population
expansion and settlement, as well as a significant increase in foreign migration, which is similar
qualitatively to the rise in migration over a few generations generated by our simulation. Our
results also provide a possible explanation for why the U.S. placed restrictions on immigration in
the late 19th century (e.g., via the Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882) and the early 20th century (via
the Immigration Act of 1903 and the Naturalization Act of 1906). This may be explained by our
simulation exercise, which indicates that the initially positive effects generated by the endowment
shock on D's IS last through a few generations, but then start diminishing going forward.


9. Cross-Country Asymmetries in the Immigration Surplus
Our simulation exercises allow us to draw several policy inferences concerning the dynamic
economic consequences of immigration. First, while the rise in migration is always beneficial to
the destination country and harmful to the source country in the conventional short term or static
case, the long-term dynamic implications can be very different, depending on the immigration
triggers that induce the change in migration. In our simulations based on the benchmark model,
the only external shock that leads to long-term benefits to the destination country is the SBTS,
which raises the skill composition of migration. The long-term benefits in this case take place
because immigration flows that have a higher share of skilled immigrants raise the average human



27
   Another way of modeling is that the capital endowment extends the existing capital stock as,  =
  (       +   ) (   )1- , where            = 0 in the benchmark model. Such is the situation in Norway with the
discovery of oil. In this case,  faces a positive increase in static IS along with higher migration, but IS turns negative
in the long run. Note that in this subsection, we are using  as a receiver of the endowment. If  receives the capital
endowment, the results are opposite: IS increases in  and decreases in .

                                                           32
capital of all workers in D over time.28 Under immigration triggers that produce no increase in the
skill composition of migrants, D loses in the long term despite a short-term gain, as migrants have
lower average human capital, while S gains from the spillover knowledge effects conferred by a
rise in the population shares of D relative to S due to perpetual migration. We emphasize the role
of perpetual migration since over time past migrants become natives ­ by our simplifying
assumption after only one generation ­ the asymmetry in educational attainments persists between
new flows of immigrants and natives.

Second, the induced migration effects tend to be asymmetrical in the destination and source
countries, not just in the short run, but in the long run as well. Based on our immigration surplus
analysis as summarized in Tables 3-7, the only two long-term win-win situations for the destination
and source countries in the benchmark model occur if S does not disallow skilled migration and if
D restricts the migration ratio to remain constant when migrants are induced to bring in more
physical capital. In the extended model, which allows for diversity effects, the additional win-win
equilibrium occurs when a negative fertility shock in D induces additional migration. In all other
cases, including the capital endowment case, there is a long-term gain to one country but a long-
term loss to the other country from the added migration induced by an external shock or a policy
change.

The underlying reason for the asymmetrical welfare effects is that free migration may inevitably
impose negative externalities on natives in either the destination or source countries, since
individual decisions to migrate do not consider any adverse impact on natives in either D or S.
Thus, while there exists a balanced growth equilibrium under unrestricted migration, it may be
unstable politically. Note that in this paper we consider only the economic consequences of
migration, and ignore the fiscal consequences of immigration in D. The latter have been estimated
to worsen the IS for natives in D in the short term (see NAS 2017). This asymmetry in the net
welfare effects of immigration helps rationalize the fact that most countries have intervention
policies regulating the migration of labor or even the transfer of capital assets. It also explains why
countries often resort to bilateral diplomacy to reach bargaining solutions concerning the flow of
immigration.29

A superior market solution is to internalize the externalities by pricing and compensation a la
Coase (1960). Specifically, as migrants impose costs on the destination and/or source countries,
governments can make migrants pay for these costs and redistribute the revenue to individuals
who are adversely affected. This approach would be a Pareto improvement, as it assures that
natives in D and S are not adversely affected while migrants become better off in terms of the
impact on their individual incomes due to migration. For example, Becker (2011) argues that
charging immigrants a fee, say $50,000 per person, would be a more efficient system than the
quota system existing in many developed countries. Another superior approach is to promote
economic growth in the source countries. One example is to make more investments in human

28
   In this context, it is worth noting that the channels of net benefits of migration in a destination country are very
different in the short term versus the long term. In the short term, benefits are derived from changes in prices, i.e., the
decrease in wage rate and the increase in rate of return to capital. However, in the long term, benefits come about
when average human capital increases.
29
   An example is the U.S. aid to the Northern Triangle states of Central America (Guatemala, Honduras, and El
Salvador) since 2014, when immigration waves by children were triggered by adverse economic shocks in these
countries, which brought immigration from these countries to its lowest level in 2017.

                                                            33
capital in S, especially in education by reducing the financial cost of investment in human capital,
which in turn reduces the incentive to emigrate. But this solution may require public investment
in higher education as well as a conducive economic environment that provides an adequate rate
of return to investment in higher education.30 Another strategy for both D and S is to lower the
economic and political risks associated with capital inflows from D to S in the form of foreign
direct investment, which tends to enhance productivity and technology transfers and lower income
inequality between the destination and source countries.


10. Conclusion
This paper is closely related to an earlier paper by EK (2015), where immigration, population
growth, and income growth and distribution are treated as endogenous variables in an overlapping
generations, balanced growth global equilibrium setting, with human capital serving as an engine
of growth in both destination (D) and source (S) countries. Both papers recognize two distinct
groups of workers ­ high and low skill ­ who are employed exclusively in high-tech and low-tech
sectors, and allow for knowledge spillover effects across the skill groups within and across
countries. Both papers also develop the analysis using two models ­ a benchmark model where
knowledge spillover effects are hierarchical, and an extended model allowing for
complementarities, or diversity effects, between natives and migrants in knowledge production.
EK (2015) recognized human capital, however, as the sole factor of goods production.

The main innovation of our paper is the inclusion of physical capital as a complementary factor of
goods production, and an asset that immigrants can bring along with them as they move from S to
D. Residents of each country can thus invest their accumulated physical capital in either their own
economy or the economy of the other country, and leave it as bequest to their offspring, as our
model emphasizes. Having two distinct assets in the economy has also enabled us to add new
insights concerning the economic consequences of immigration. The first is the ability to offer a
more complete assessment of the net benefits from immigration, or the "immigration surplus" to
the native populations in D and S, and thus to the global economy (G). More specifically, we assess
the immigration surplus under both "static" conditions, as does the conventional literature, as well
as over the transition phase leading to a new balanced growth steady state. While our estimated IS
is always positive in country D in the short term, whenever D receives more immigrants, this is
not necessarily the case in the long run, where the value of the IS may turn negative along the
transitional growth paths. Conversely, while the IS often assumes a zero value in S initially due to
the rise in emigration, its ultimate long-run value may turn positive. This depends largely on the
type of external shock that induces changes in the flow and skill composition of immigration. For
example, a downward fertility shock in D or an adverse productivity shock in S increases migration
from S to D, which initially generates a positive IS in D and a zero IS in S. But in the long-run IS
turns negative in D and positive in S. In general, we obtain positive IS for D in the long run only
if the average levels of human and physical capital eventually rise.



30
  Ehrlich, Cook and Yin (2018) show that the Morrill Act, which pioneered the establishment of public higher
education had been successful in raising productivity growth rates in the U.S. relative to the UK, which did not have
such a public system until the first decade of the 20th century.

                                                         34
A fair question that is worth discussing in connection with the dynamic effects of endogenous
immigration reported in Tables 3-7, which document the long-term effects of pull and push factors,
is that they are estimated over many generations into the future, so the policy implications we have
discussed in sections 6-9 apply only in the very distant future. But as Tables 3-7 indicate, the
dynamic implications of the long-term effects are detected within 3 to 5 generations as well and
remain consistent into the distant future, so the direction of change they manifest may be relevant
for the development of immigration policies that apply in the near and intermediate terms as well.

A critical inference underscored in the paper is that the treatment of immigration as an endogenous
variable highlights the role of external shocks that are behind the observed migration flows. This
implies that the total economic effect of an immigration trigger is often incompatible with the
welfare benefits of the added migration induced by the trigger. For example, an SBTS increases
the growth rates of per-capita income in both D and S but also the flow and skill composition of
new immigrants from S to D. Consequently, the long-term induced immigration effects on per-
capita income and the IS are positive in D but significantly negative in S. While the long-term total
effects of SBTS raise income inequality both within and across countries, the induced immigration
effects diminish income inequality within D, but increase it within S as well as across D and S.
Likewise, the total effects of a downward fertility shock in D are positive in D and S in the long
term, but the long-term induced immigration effects are positive only under the extended model
due to diversity effects. And while the total effects of the fertility shock increase income inequality
across D and S, its induced immigration effects decrease the cross-country inequality. In contrast,
the total economic effects of an adverse productivity shock in S are negative in both D and S, but
their long-term induced immigration effects have adverse effects in D but beneficial effects in S.
However, both the total and the induced immigration effects lower the cross-country inequality,
due to the knowledge spillover effects on S generated by the rise in migration flows. Neither the
fertility shock in D nor the adverse productivity shock in S, however, affect within-country
inequalities, as they do not generate any changes in the skill composition of migrants.

Physical capital also plays a distinct role in this context. The conditions for a balanced growth
equilibrium require that the physical to human capital ratios remain constant across the high-tech
and low-tech production sectors within each country. However, these ratios can change as a result
of external shocks representing different pull or push factors, or as a result of government policies
that favor immigrants who may bring along with them physical capital, or `immigrant investment
funds". Our analysis shows that a reduction in high transaction costs of physical capital, which
results in more (claims to) capital brought along by migrants, will also attract a higher immigration
from S to D. Such induced migration may have a neutral effect on the skill composition in the
destination economy, in which case the initial IS would be positive but the long-term effect of the
induced immigration will turn negative because the added migration lowers the average level of
human capital in the economy. In the long term, then, both average human and physical capital per
capita would fall, reducing income per capita and the immigration surplus.31 Lastly, our capital

31
  While we focus on the per-capita terms in the paper in evaluating the immigration surplus, it is also important to
point out that in reality, many policies emphasize consequences of immigration that apply to aggregate GDP, not per-
capita GDP. One potential reason is that there may be some social externalities from having a bigger sized economy.
For example, a larger GDP may imply a greater international influence, both economically and politically. If this is
indeed the case, then there are additional benefits from having more migrants or attracting migrants with more capital,
both of which increase aggregate GDP.

                                                          35
endowment experiment illustrates the distinct relevance of physical capital for immigration. When
country D receives a physical capital endowment, it increases output and the wage rate in D and
attracts more migrants from S. However, the induced migration effect is negative for D, as migrants
have lower average human capital, while it is positive for S, as knowledge spillover effects become
stronger.

A critical feature of the global equilibrium analysis we derive in this paper is that in the majority
of the long-term equilibrium consequences of immigration, the immigration surplus is asymmetric
across D and S. This is the case in both our benchmark model and the extended model where we
allow for complementarity in knowledge production between natives and immigrants of similar
skills, which produces higher net benefits to natives in D, but still negative benefits to those in S.
This asymmetry indicates that although our model helps explain the existence of a locally stable
balanced growth steady state equilibria, such equilibria may not be politically stable and require
government intervention. This may explain why virtually all sovereign nations do not allow free
labor mobility and constrain immigration through varied immigration policies.

Finally, while we have tried to emphasize the general applicability of our model in assessing the
consequences of different external shocks and alternative public policies, we need to emphasize
some of its limitations as well. The balanced-growth equilibrium and segmented production sectors
under which the model is developed is intended to eliminate corner solutions in which immigration
triggers can lead to the absorption of source countries into their destination targets. At the same
time, these constraints limit the degree to which we can vary some key parameters of the model
and fully assess the quantitative benefits from immigration that may apply to just one country or
one sector of the economy. The dynamic estimates of the immigration surplus are limited also
because they apply just to their impact on the per-capita income of natives. This leaves out benefits
to the immigrants who derive psychic benefits from extended family unification, which takes place
when close relatives of natives are given preference under quota systems. The same applies to
other non-economic benefits from providing asylum to victims of dictatorial and authoritarian
regimes. Furthermore, while we allow for the production of both high-tech and low-tech goods,
we abstract from their distinct consumption benefits, which rules out any consideration of the
impact of immigration on international trade in goods. In addition, our analysis of the economic
effects of immigration does not address the fiscal consequences of immigration. An integrated
model that combines international trade in goods with international labor and capital mobility or
the economic and fiscal consequences of immigration, however, are way beyond the scope of this
paper and are left for future work.




                                                 36
References
Alesina, Alberto, Johann Harnoss, and Hillel Rapoport. 2016. "Birthplace Diversity and Economic
       Prosperity." Journal of Economic Growth, 21 (2), 101-138.

Becker, Gary S. 2011. "The Challenge of Immigration ­ a Radical Solution." London: Institute of
       Economic Affairs.

Becker, Gary S., Kevin Murphy, and Robert Tamura. 1990. "Human Capital, Fertility, and
       Economic Growth." Journal of Political Economy, 98 (5), part 2, S12­S37.

Ben-Gad, Michael. 2004. "The Economic Effects of Immigration ­ a Dynamic Analysis." Journal
      of Economic Dynamics and Control, 28 (9), 1825-1845.

Ben-Gad, Michael. 2008. "Capital-Skill Complementarity and the Immigration Surplus." Review
      of Economic Dynamics, 11 (2), 335-365.

Benhabib, Jess, and Boyan Jovanovic. 2012. "Optimal Migration:                      A   World
      Perspective." International Economic Review, 53 (2), 321-348.

Borjas, George J. 1995. "The Economic Benefits from Immigration." Journal of Economic
       Perspectives, 9 (2), 3-22.

Coase, Ronald H. 1960. "The Problem of Social Cost." Journal of Law and Economics, 3
       (October), 1-44.

Drinkwater, Stephen, Paul Levine, Emanuela Lotti, and Joseph Pearlman. 2007. "The Immigration
      Surplus Revisited in a General Equilibrium Model with Endogenous Growth." Journal of
      Regional Science, 47 (3), 569-601.

Ehrlich, Isaac, Adam Cook, and Yong Yin. 2018. "What Accounts for the US Ascendancy to
       Economic Superpower by the Early Twentieth Century? The Morrill Act­Human Capital
       Hypothesis ." Journal of Human Capital, 12 (2), 233-281.

Ehrlich, Isaac and Jinyoung Kim. 2007. "The Evolution of Income and Fertility Inequalities over
       the Course of Economic Development: A Human Capital Perspective." Journal of Human
       Capital, 1 (1), 137-174.

Ehrlich, Isaac and Jinyoung Kim. 2015. "Immigration, Human Capital Formation, and
       Endogenous Economic Growth." Journal of Human Capital, 9 (4), 518-563.

Ehrlich, Isaac, and Francis T. Lui. 1991. "Intergenerational Trade, Longevity, and Economic
       Growth." Journal of Political Economy, 99 (5), 1029­1059.




                                              37
Greenwood, Michael J., and Gary L. Hunt. 1995. "Economic Effects of Immigrants on Native and
      Foreign-Born Workers: Complementarity, Substitutability, and Other Channels and
      Influence." Southern Economic Journal, 61 (4), 1076­1097.

Lucas, Robert E. 1988. "On the Mechanics of Economic Development." Journal of Monetary
       Economics, 22 (1), 3­42.

Lundborg, Per, and Paul S. Segerstrom. 2000. "International Migration and Growth in Developed
      Countries: A Theoretical Analysis." Economica, 67 (268), 579-604.

Lundborg, Per, and Paul S. Segerstrom. 2002. "The Growth and Welfare Effects of International
      Mass Migration." Journal of International Economics, 56 (1), 177-204.

National Academies of Science, Engineering, and Medicine (NAS). 2017. The Economics and
       Fiscal Consequences of Immigration. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.

Peri, Giovanni. 2007. "Immigrants' Complementarities and Native Wages: Evidence from
       California." NBER Working Paper 12956.

Romer, Paul M. 1990. "Endogenous Technological Change." Journal of Political Economy, 98
      (5), part 2, S71-S102.

Stokey, Nancy L. 1988. "Learning by Doing and the Introduction of New Goods." Journal of
       Political Economy, 96 (4), 701-717.

Storesletten, Kjetil. 2000. "Sustaining Fiscal Policy through Immigration." Journal of Political
        Economy, 108 (2), 300-323.

United Nations. 2017. International Migrant Stock: The 2017 Revision. New York: United
       Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division.

World Bank. 2019. World Development Indicators. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Zak, Paul J., Yi Feng, and Jacek Kugler. 2002. "Immigration, Fertility, and Growth." Journal of
       Economic Dynamics and Control, 26 (4), 547-76.




                                              38
                              Table 1. Comparative Dynamics under the Benchmark Model


                                                                                        
 Parameter Shift              1         1       1          1          1       1    +1 /  2                  1         1 /
                                                                                2
                              = 2      =  2     = 2        = 2       =  2     =   = +1 / = 2
                                                                                        
                                                                                                            = 2        1
                                                                                                                     ( + 2 )

 1. Initial steady state      1.0680 1.7401     1.3308     0.1811    0.1132   0.1132    1.8109   5.6569     5.6589         0.5

 2. 1 = 12, 1 = 9.6           1.0759 1.7546     1.3432     0.1811    0.1132   0.1132    2.1731   8.9234     5.6589     0.5188

 3.   = 0.1433                1.0145 1.7440     1.3247     0.1901    0.1132   0.1132    1.9015   5.6569     6.3930         0.5

 4.  1 =  2 = 8.357           1.0713 1.7401     1.3323     0.1811    0.1132   0.1132    1.8109   5.6569     5.6589         0.5

 5.  1 =  2 = 0.475           1.0711 1.7401     1.3363     0.1811    0.1132   0.1132    1.8109   5.6569     5.6589         0.5

 6.  = 0.6333                 1.0669 1.7429     1.3251     0.1720    0.1075   0.1075    1.7204   5.6569     5.6589         0.5

 7. 1 =  2 = 0.42             1.0680 1.7401     1.3308     0.1811    0.1132   0.1132    1.8109   5.2088     5.2106         0.5




Parameter Shift             1 / 1     1 / 1      1/ 1      1 / 1      1 / 1    1 / 1   1 /1        1 / 1       1 /2     1 / 2
                           = 2 / 2   = 2 / 2   =  2/ 2   =  2 / 2   =  2 / 2 =  2 / 2 = 2 /2     =  2 / 2    =  1 / 2 =  1 / 2


1. Initial steady state    0.1772    0.2507    0.5578    0.2188     2.8194    7.1892    1.5935    0.6700      5.6569       5.6569

2. 1 = 12, 1 = 9.6         0.2057    0.2294    0.4270    0.1671     3.7053    9.4712    1.5973    0.6667      8.2770       8.2770

3.   = 0.1433              0.2411    0.2351    0.5598    0.2035     4.7746    13.1326   1.6370    0.6348      5.6569       5.6569

4.  1 =  2 = 8.357 0.1100            0.3001    0.5543    0.2180     1.3421    3.4126    1.5890    0.6786      5.6569       5.6569

5.  1 =  2 = 0.475 0.1093            0.3005    0.5545    0.2188     1.3311    3.3736    1.5839    0.6781      5.6569       5.6569

6.  = 0.6333               0.2425    0.2035    0.6889    0.2685     5.1294    13.1576   1.6030    0.6620      5.6569       5.6569

7. 1 =  2 = 0.42           0.1971    0.2355    0.5578    0.2188     3.1353    7.9947    1.5935    0.6700      5.2088       5.2088



       Benchmark parameters:  = 0.9 ,  = 0.7 ,  = 1 ,  = 1.3 ,  = 1/3 ,  = 2/3 , 1 =  2 = 0.4 ,  1 =
        2 = 10,  1 =  2 = 8.377, 1 = 10, 2 = 5, 1 = 8, 2 = 4,  1 =  2 =  1 =  2 = 1.675,
         = 0.1365,   = 0.0853,  1 =  2 = 0.062,  1 =  2 = 0.5.




                                                                    39
              Table 2. Comparative Dynamics under the Extended Model with Diversity Effects


                                                                                        
 Parameter Shift              1         1       1          1          1       1    +1 /  2                  1         1 /
                                                                                2
                              = 2      =  2     = 2        = 2       =  2     =   = +1 / = 2
                                                                                        
                                                                                                            = 2        1
                                                                                                                     ( + 2 )

 1. Initial steady state      1.0691 1.7422     1.3326     0.1811    0.1132   0.1132    1.8595   5.6569     6.0461         0.5

 2. 1 = 12, 1 = 9.6           1.0771 1.7569     1.3453     0.1811    0.1132   0.1132    2.2393   8.9234     6.0997     0.5190

 3.   = 0.1433                1.0159 1.7467     1.3270     0.1901    0.1132   0.1132    1.9673   5.6569     6.9608         0.5

 4.  1 =  2 = 8.357           1.0720 1.7415     1.3335     0.1811    0.1132   0.1132    1.8428   5.6569     5.9112         0.5

 5.  1 =  2 = 0.475           1.0718 1.7415     1.3375     0.1811    0.1132   0.1132    1.8427   5.6569     5.9100         0.5

 6.  = 0.6333                 1.0684 1.7456     1.3274     0.1720    0.1075   0.1075    1.7805   5.6569     6.1664         0.5

 7. 1 =  2 = 0.42             1.0692 1.7424     1.3328     0.1811    0.1132   0.1132    1.8642   5.2088     5.5831         0.5




Parameter Shift             1 / 1     1 / 1      1/ 1      1 / 1      1 / 1    1 / 1   1 /1        1 / 1       1 /2     1 / 2
                           = 2 / 2   = 2 / 2   =  2/ 2   =  2 / 2   =  2 / 2 =  2 / 2 = 2 /2     =  2 / 2    =  1 / 2 =  1 / 2


1. Initial steady state    0.1648    0.2603    0.5366    0.2104     2.6678    6.8051    1.5940    0.6695      5.6569       5.6569

2. 1 = 12, 1 = 9.6         0.1931    0.2391    0.4087    0.1598     3.5557    9.0925    1.5980    0.6662      8.2686       8.2686

3.   = 0.1433              0.2278    0.2453    0.5326    0.1935     4.6493    12.7947   1.6378    0.6342      5.6569       5.6569

4.  1 =  2 = 8.357 0.1003            0.3076    0.5403    0.2124     1.2239    3.1382    1.5893    0.6783      5.6569       5.6569

5.  1 =  2 = 0.475 0.0998            0.3079    0.5405    0.2132     1.2257    3.1072    1.5842    0.6778      5.6569       5.6569

6.  = 0.6333               0.2306    0.2126    0.6550    0.2552     5.0358    12.9240   1.6038    0.6614      5.6569       5.6569

7. 1 =  2 = 0.42           0.1849    0.2449    0.5346    0.2096     2.9973    7.6457    1.5941    0.6694      5.2088       5.2088



       Parameters:  = 0.2; the other parameters are the same as in the benchmark model.




                                                                    40
                     Table 3. Immigration Surplus due to Induced Free Migration by Triggers

(a) Benchmark Model                               Destination                                 Source                        Global
                                 3rd generation     5th generation 10th generation               10th generation              10th generation
Trigger               Static                                                         Static                        Static
                                  after a shock      after a shock  after a shock                 after a shock                after a shock
1. Skill-biased technological shock in  and 
Income               -0.0006          0.05              0.26            1.16          0.01           -12.84        -0.009            -3.40
Human Capital            0            0.03              0.25            1.16          0.01           -13.04           0              -3.46
Physical Capital         0            0.05              0.26            1.13          0.01           -12.45         0.01             -3.35
  1    1              0.1755
 /                                   0.1763            0.1781          0.1847        0.2463          0.2354
2 / 2                 0.1764         0.1763            0.1770          0.1818        0.2486          0.2378
2. Downward fertility shock in 
Income               0.001           -0.08              -0.19           -0.62           0            45.52         0.02              42.03
Human Capital          0               0                  0               0             0            49.91           0               41.64
Physical Capital       0             -0.09              -0.25           -0.95           0            36.54         -0.03             41.14
                    0.1813
 /                                  0.1923             0.2030          0.2270        0.2462          0.2264
3. Adverse productivity shock in 
Income                0.05           -0.12              -0.19           -0.28           0            41.85         0.65              17.41
Human Capital          0               0                  0               0             0            42.74           0               17.74
Physical Capital       0             -0.05              -0.28           -0.46           0            40.14         -0.70             16.65
  /                 0.2858          0.1684             0.1433          0.1240        0.4044          0.2917


(b) Extended Model                                Destination                                 Source                        Global
                                 3rd generation     5th generation 10th generation               10th generation              10th generation
Trigger               Static                                                         Static                        Static
                                  after a shock      after a shock  after a shock                 after a shock                after a shock
1. Skill-biased technological shock in  and 
Income               -0.0004           0.02             0.21            1.28         0.002           -12.63        -0.007            -2.58
Human Capital            0            0.001             0.20            1.34         0.002           -12.60           0              -2.63
Physical Capital         0             0.05             0.21            1.18         0.002           -12.66        0.008             -2.63
1 / 1                 0.1636         0.1643            0.1660          0.1722        0.2561          0.2452
2 / 2                 0.1644         0.1642            0.1649          0.1695        0.2583          0.2475
2. Downward fertility shock in 
Income               0.002           0.05               0.31            1.84            0            49.20         0.02              45.01
Human Capital          0             0.19               0.62            2.71            0            53.69           0               44.74
Physical Capital       0             -0.05              0.04            1.02            0            39.90         -0.03             43.88
                    0.1696
 /                                  0.1797             0.1897          0.2125        0.2568          0.2375
3. Adverse productivity shock in 
Income               0.05          0.43                 -0.04           -2.82           0            40.86         0.68              14.27
Human Capital          0           0.40                 -0.04           -2.88           0            41.62           0               14.39
Physical Capital       0           0.90                 0.23            -2.38           0            39.40         -0.72             13.98
                    0.2708
 /                                0.1662               0.1345          0.1146        0.4275          0.2995


          Notes: Values for "Income", "Human Capital", and "Physical Capital" are percentage changes in income, human
          capital, and physical capital per capita. Our measures of the changes in the immigration surplus are based on the per-
          capita income changes. Positive values mean loss from restricting migration, hence gain from unrestricted migration.
          The ratio   /  denotes the evolving population ratio of migrants to natives of each skill group in  or  when
          migration is unrestricted. As the table shows, these ratios evolve differently for the two skill groups under SBTS, but
          their evolution is the same in the case of the other two shocks.



                                                                       41
               Table 4. Immigration Surplus due to Allowing High-Skilled Migration by Triggers

(a) Benchmark Model                             Destination                                 Source                        Global
                               3rd generation     5th generation 10th generation               10th generation              10th generation
Trigger              Static                                                        Static                        Static
                                after a shock      after a shock  after a shock                 after a shock                after a shock
1. Skill-biased technological shock in  and 
Income                 0.03           11.15           30.93           73.63        -5.00              92.93      0.84              93.45
Human Capital           0             12.55           32.49           74.45        -5.00              94.37        0               93.51
Physical Capital        0              9.64           28.65           72.25        -5.00              89.23      -1.01             92.78
2. Downward fertility shock in 
Income                 0.03           11.33           31.97           77.91        -5.09              93.57      0.85              94.86
Human Capital           0             12.63           33.73           78.90        -5.09              94.91        0               94.95
Physical Capital        0             10.00           29.23           75.94        -5.09              90.08      -1.03             94.24
3. Adverse productivity shock in 
Income                 0.07           13.37           32.57           70.93        -8.62              95.88      1.60              94.28
Human Capital           0             14.90           34.43           71.95        -8.60              96.76        0               94.35
Physical Capital        0             11.79           29.76           69.22        -8.60              93.56      -1.65             93.65


(b) Extended Model                              Destination                                 Source                        Global
                               3rd generation     5th generation 10th generation               10th generation              10th generation
Trigger              Static                                                        Static                        Static
                                after a shock      after a shock  after a shock                 after a shock                after a shock
1. Skill-biased technological shock in  and 
Income                 0.03           13.58           34.97           77.04        -4.87              93.99      0.83              94.34
Human Capital           0             15.84           37.21           78.04        -4.87              95.28        0               94.45
Physical Capital        0             10.39           31.32           75.23        -4.87              90.63      -1.00             93.62
2. Downward fertility shock in 
Income                0.03         13.76              35.96           80.87        -4.96              94.61      0.84              95.64
Human Capital          0           15.92              38.38           82.01        -4.96              95.80        0               95.77
Physical Capital       0           10.76              31.89           78.57        -4.96              91.46      -1.02             94.99
3. Adverse productivity shock in 
Income               0.07         15.81               36.16           73.89        -8.79              96.45      1.62              94.86
Human Capital          0          18.03               38.53           75.05        -8.78              97.24        0               94.96
Physical Capital       0          12.97               32.31           71.85        -8.78              94.34      -1.67             94.20


          Notes: Values for "Income", "Human Capital", and "Physical Capital" are percentage changes in income,
          human capital, and physical capital per capita. Our measures of the changes in the immigration surplus are
          based on the per-capita income changes. Positive values mean loss from restricting migration, hence gain
          from unrestricted migration. 1 / 1 is restricted to be 0 under the policy restriction here.




                                                                     42
               Table 5. Immigration Surplus due to Allowing Low-Skilled Migration by Triggers

(a) Benchmark Model                             Destination                                 Source                        Global
                               3rd generation     5th generation 10th generation               10th generation              10th generation
Trigger              Static                                                        Static                        Static
                                after a shock      after a shock  after a shock                 after a shock                after a shock
1. Skill-biased technological shock in  and 
Income                0.005          -16.28          -32.94          -63.68        10.99              86.63      0.14              67.00
Human Capital           0            -16.75          -33.69          -64.64        11.03              86.84        0               66.82
Physical Capital        0            -15.21          -31.44          -62.00        11.03              86.15      -0.17             67.23
2. Downward fertility shock in 
Income                0.005          -16.28          -33.21          -65.09        11.10              85.81      0.14              69.85
Human Capital           0            -16.64          -34.16          -66.69        11.12              86.11        0               69.57
Physical Capital        0            -15.50          -31.49          -62.43        11.12              85.13      -0.17             70.22
3. Adverse productivity shock in 
Income                 0.01          -17.87          -32.47          -59.17        21.47              93.93      0.26              77.15
Human Capital           0            -18.38          -33.41          -60.36        21.55              94.13        0               77.02
Physical Capital        0            -16.80          -30.69          -56.88        21.55              93.47      -0.28             77.32


(b) Extended Model                              Destination                                 Source                        Global
                               3rd generation     5th generation 10th generation               10th generation              10th generation
Trigger              Static                                                        Static                        Static
                                after a shock      after a shock  after a shock                 after a shock                after a shock
1. Skill-biased technological shock in  and 
Income                0.005          -15.05          -30.78          -60.89        11.51              88.06      0.14              68.32
Human Capital           0            -15.40          -31.43          -61.73        11.55              88.26        0               68.16
Physical Capital        0            -14.19          -29.46          -59.37        11.55              87.61      -0.17             68.51
2. Downward fertility shock in 
Income               0.005        -15.00             -30.97          -62.42        11.63              87.49      0.14              71.50
Human Capital          0          -15.22             -31.77          -63.82        11.66              87.77        0               71.26
Physical Capital       0          -14.48             -29.50          -60.04        11.66              86.84      -0.17             71.81
3. Adverse productivity shock in 
Income               0.01         -16.06             -29.92          -55.88        23.39              94.58      0.26              77.84
Human Capital          0          -16.46             -30.73          -56.94        23.49              94.76        0               77.72
Physical Capital       0          -15.17             -28.35          -53.81        23.49              94.14      -0.28             77.99


          Notes: Values for "Income", "Human Capital", and "Physical Capital" are percentage changes in income,
          human capital, and physical capital per capita. Our measures of the changes in the immigration surplus are
          based on the per-capita income changes. Positive values mean loss from restricting migration, hence gain
          from unrestricted migration. 2 / 2 is restricted to be 0 under the policy restriction here.




                                                                     43
          Table 6. Welfare Change due to Migrants Bringing More Physical Capital (decreasing  )

(a) Benchmark Model                              Destination                                 Source                        Global
                                3rd generation     5th generation 10th generation               10th generation              10th generation
Policy restriction   Static                                                         Static                        Static
                                 after a shock      after a shock  after a shock                 after a shock                after a shock
1. Total impact of the shock
Income                0.003         -0.03              -0.05           -0.13           0            23.03          0.07             9.63
Human Capital           0             0                  0               0             0            25.22            0              9.61
Physical Capital        0           -0.03              -0.08           -0.21           0            19.11         -0.007            9.26
  /                  0.1877        0.1805             0.1751          0.1581        0.2656          0.2885
2. Immigration surplus due to induced migration
Income                0.004        -0.05             -0.07           -0.14            0                18.05      0.05              8.31
Human Capital           0            0                 0               0              0                19.37        0               8.33
Physical Capital        0          -0.06             -0.10           -0.22            0                15.54      -0.06             7.96
3. Impact of the shock when migration ratio is restricted to remain constant
Income               -0.0007        0.02              0.02           0.007            0                0.83       0.02              0.52
Human Capital           0            0                 0               0              0                0.96        0                0.48
Physical Capital        0           0.03              0.03            0.02            0                0.59       0.06              0.56


(b) Extended Model                               Destination                                 Source                        Global
                                3rd generation     5th generation 10th generation               10th generation              10th generation
Policy restriction   Static                                                         Static                        Static
                                 after a shock      after a shock  after a shock                 after a shock                after a shock
1. Total impact of the shock
Income                0.003         0.09              0.12           -0.43             0            22.82         0.08              8.59
Human Capital            0          0.13              0.17           -0.39             0            24.92           0               8.49
Physical Capital         0          0.07              0.10           -0.33             0            19.06         -0.01             8.41
                      0.1745
 /                                 0.1685           0.1626          0.1463          0.2769          0.2971
2. Immigration surplus due to induced migration
Income                0.004         0.08              0.10           -0.43            0                17.92      0.06              7.46
Human Capital            0          0.14              0.17           -0.40            0                19.19        0               7.42
Physical Capital         0          0.04              0.07           -0.34            0                15.52      -0.07             7.27
3. Impact of the shock when migration ratio is restricted to remain constant
Income               -0.0007        0.02              0.02           0.007            0                0.82       0.02              0.49
Human Capital            0            0                0               0              0                0.95        0                0.44
Physical Capital         0          0.03              0.03            0.02            0                0.58       0.06              0.52


         Notes: Values for "Income", "Human Capital", and "Physical Capital" are percentage changes in income,
         human capital, and physical capital per capita. Our measures of the changes in the immigration surplus are
         based on the per-capita income changes. The ratio  /  denotes the evolving population ratio of
         migrants to natives of each skill group in  or  when migration is unrestricted. The evolution of the ratios
         is the same for the two skill groups here.




                                                                      44
                       Table 7. Welfare Change due to Increasing Capital Endowment in 

(a) Benchmark Model                             Destination                                 Source                        Global
                               3rd generation     5th generation 10th generation               10th generation              10th generation
Policy restriction   Static                                                        Static                        Static
                                after a shock      after a shock  after a shock                 after a shock                after a shock
1. Total impact of the shock
Income                 0.34         0.41              0.40            0.28            0            33.40         0.36              13.75
Human Capital           0             0                 0               0             0            36.85           0               13.23
Physical Capital        0           0.35              0.34            0.16            0            27.29         -0.08             13.13
  /                  0.1895        0.1821            0.1750          0.1509        0.2682          0.3051
2. Immigration surplus due to induced migration
Income                0.004         -0.07             -0.10           -0.21          0                25.04      0.06              11.70
Human Capital           0             0                 0               0            0                26.93        0               11.69
Physical Capital        0           -0.09             -0.15           -0.34          0                21.44      -0.08             11.21


(b) Extended Model                              Destination                                 Source                        Global
                               3rd generation     5th generation 10th generation               10th generation              10th generation
Policy restriction   Static                                                        Static                        Static
                                after a shock      after a shock  after a shock                 after a shock                after a shock
1. Total impact of the shock
Income                 0.34        0.58               0.64            -0.09           0            33.26         0.37              12.35
Human Capital           0          0.19               0.25            -0.51           0            36.59           0               11.73
Physical Capital        0          0.48               0.58            0.03            0            27.35         -0.08             12.00
  /                  0.1772       0.1698             0.1623          0.1392        0.2798          0.3135
2. Immigration surplus due to induced migration
Income              0.005           0.10              0.15            -0.58          0                24.96      0.07              10.60
Human Capital         0             0.19              0.25            -0.51          0                26.79        0               10.50
Physical Capital      0             0.03              0.09            -0.47          0                21.48      -0.08             10.31


         Notes: Values for "Income", "Human Capital", and "Physical Capital" are percentage changes in income,
         human capital, and physical capital per capita. Our measures of the changes in the immigration surplus are
         based on the per-capita income changes. The ratio  /  denotes the evolving population ratio of
         migrants to natives of each skill group in  or  when migration is unrestricted. The evolution of the ratios
         is the same for the two skill groups here.




                                                                     45
           Figure 1. Immigrants Share of the United States Population, 1850-2018
                  (% of the United States population that is foreign born)




Source: The United States Census Bureau, "Historical Census Statistics on the Foreign-Born Population of
the United States: 1850-2000" and Pew Research Center tabulation of 2010 and 2018 American Community
Survey (IPUMS).




                                                  46
                    Figure 2. Transitional Dynamics by Immigration Triggers

                                   (a) Skill-Biased Technological Shock




                                    (b) Downward Fertility Shock in 




                            (c) One Period Adverse Productivity Shock in 




Notes: In panels (b) and (c), we plot the transitional dynamic paths of migrant-to-native population ratios,
the ratio of per-capita income in  relative to , and the ratio of per-capita income in the high-tech sector
relative to the low-tech sector following the adverse fertility and productivity shocks, respectively. In panel
(a) we plot similar transitional paths following an SBTS shock, except that we exhibit the transitional
dynamic path of the skill composition of migration rather than the migrant-to-native population ratio, which
exhibits a very similar dynamic pattern. We chose to do so since this is the only case where the shock affects
the skill composition of migration.


                                                      47
               Figure 3. Impact of Induced Migration by Immigration Triggers

                                  (a) Skill-Biased Technological Shock




                                   (b) Downward Fertility Shock in 




                            (c) One Period Adverse Productivity Shock in 




Notes: We plot the simulated time paths of average per-capita income in  and average per-capita income
in  when either the skill composition of migration (SBTS, panel a) or the migrant-to-native ratio (adverse
fertility and productivity shocks, panels b and c) are held constant, relative to the case when migration is
unrestricted.




                                                    48
  Figure 4. Transitional Dynamics Paths of Policies Affecting the Role of Physical Capital

                          (a) Motivating Migrants to Bring More Capital to 




                        (b) Expanding the Economy's Capital Endowment in 




Notes: We plot the transitional dynamic paths of migrant-to-native population ratios, the ratio of per-capita
income in  relative to , and the ratio of per-capita income in the high-tech sector relative to the low-tech
sector, following the policy change motivating migrants to bring more capital to  (panel a), and the shock
expanding the economy's capital endowment in  (panel b).




                                                     49
  Figure 5. Impact of Induced Migration of Policies Affecting the Role of Physical Capital

                        (a) Motivating Migrants to Bring More Capital to 




                      (b) Expanding the Economy's Capital Endowment in 




Notes: We plot the simulated time paths of average per-capita income in  and average per-capita income
in  when migrant-to-native ratio is held constant, relative to the case when migration is unrestricted,
following the policy change motivating migrants to bring more capital to  (panel a), and the shock
expanding capital endowment in  (panel b).




                                                  50
