                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           IN-KIND TRANSFERS AS INSURANCE

                                        Lucie Gadenne
                                         Samuel Norris
                                        Monica Singhal
                                       Sandip Sukhtankar

                                      Working Paper 28507
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28507


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2021




We thank Mia Giuriato, Lydia Kim, Eric Robertson, and Elizabeth Spink for excellent research
assistance, Vikas Dimble for help with obtaining data, and Amy Finkelstein, Peter Ganong, Rema
Hanna, Krishna Pendakur, Remy Levin, Lee Lockwood, Erzo Luttmer, Karthik Muralidharan,
Paul Niehaus, Florian Scheuer, Sheetal Sekhri, and numerous seminar participants for comments.
We are grateful to the International Growth Center (IGC) and Harvard University's Asia Center
for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Lucie Gadenne, Samuel Norris, Monica Singhal, and Sandip Sukhtankar. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
In-Kind Transfers as Insurance
Lucie Gadenne, Samuel Norris, Monica Singhal, and Sandip Sukhtankar
NBER Working Paper No. 28507
February 2021
JEL No. H42,H53,I38,O12,Q18

                                         ABSTRACT

Recent debates about the optimal form of social protection programs have highlighted the
potential for cash as the preferred form of transfer to low income households. However, in-kind
transfers remain prevalent throughout the world. We argue that beneficiaries themselves may
prefer in-kind transfers because these transfers can provide insurance against price risk.
Households in developing countries often face substantial price variation as a result of poorly
integrated markets. We develop a model demonstrating that in-kind transfers are welfare
improving relative to cash if the covariance between the marginal utility of income and price is
positive. Using calorie shortfalls as a proxy for marginal utility, we find that in-kind transfers
improve welfare relative to cash for Indian households, an effect driven entirely by poor
households. We further show that expansions in the generosity of the Public Distribution System
(PDS)--India's in-kind food transfer program--result not only in increased caloric intake but
also reduced sensitivity of calories to prices.

Lucie Gadenne                                   Monica Singhal
Department of Economics                         Department of Economics
University of Warwick                           University of California, Davis
Coventry CV4 7AL                                One Shields Avenue
UK                                              Davis, CA 95616
l.gadenne@warwick.ac.uk                         and NBER
                                                msinghal@ucdavis.edu
Samuel Norris
Harris School of Public Policy                  Sandip Sukhtankar
University of Chicago                           Department of Economics
1307 E 60th St                                  University of Virginia
Room 3053                                       Charlottesville, VA 22904
Chicago, IL 60637                               srs8yk@virginia.edu
United States
samnorris@uchicago.edu
1     Introduction
A central question in the design of social protection programs is the optimal form of transfers
to the poor. Historically, in-kind transfers have been the primary type of anti-poverty
program. These transfers remain prevalent and important: approximately 44% of safety net
beneficiaries around the world receive in-kind transfers (Honorati, Gentilini and Yemtsov,
2015), and over 90% of low-income countries have social protection programs that include
in-kind transfers (World Bank, 2014). In recent years, however, there has been a dramatic
shift among academics and policymakers toward unconditional cash as the preferred form
of transfer, spurred by the success of GiveDirectly in East Africa (Haushofer and Shapiro,
2016) and growing interest in universal basic income programs worldwide (Banerjee, Niehaus
and Suri, 2019).
     The textbook rationale for cash transfers is that beneficiaries (weakly) prefer cash to in-
kind. Justifications for in-kind transfers therefore rely on transfers meeting a social objective,
such as pecuniary redistribution (Coate, Johnson and Zeckhauser, 1994) or targeting (Nichols
and Zeckhauser, 1982), or on the belief that beneficiaries given cash will maximize the
"wrong" utility function (either due to intra-household conflicts or simply a paternalistic view
(see Currie and Gahvari, 2008)). However, in contrast to the textbook intuition, beneficiaries
themselves often report a preference for in-kind relative to cash in contexts as varied as
Ecuador, India, and Malawi (Hidrobo et al., 2014; Khera, 2014; Gentilini, 2016).
     We demonstrate that in-kind transfers can be welfare improving relative to cash from
the perspective of the beneficiary household in the presence of commodity price risk. A
common feature of many developing countries is the lack of market integration (Atkin, 2013;
Allen, 2014), and households often face substantial variation in prices of basic consumption
goods.1 In-kind transfers provide implicit insurance against this risk since the value of the
transfer rises automatically with the local market price of the transferred good. Indeed,
beneficiaries who prefer food transfers to cash frequently mention the fear of unstable prices
as a reason for their preference (Khera, 2014).
     We derive a condition under which households prefer in-kind transfers, provide an em-
pirical test of whether this condition is satisfied in the context of India, and examine the
effects of a large scale in-kind transfer program on households. Our focus is on questioning
the fundamental premise that cash delivers higher expected utility to the recipient; a full
   1
     In addition to these studies on India (Atkin, 2013) and the Philippines (Allen, 2014), a plethora of
evidence exists on the lack of market integration and subsequent internal price variation in various other
countries; for example Uganda (Gollin and Rogerson, 2014), Sierra Leone (Casaburi, Glennerster and Suri,
2013) and Peru (Sotelo, 2020). One way to gauge the extent to which integration matters is provided by
Atkin and Donaldson (2015), who show that the effect of distance on trade costs in Ethiopia and Nigeria is
four to five times that in the United States.


                                                    1
welfare analysis would also need to consider the relative social cost of provision.2
      We begin with a simple model to demonstrate that when prices vary across states of the
world, the optimal policy will provide price-indexed cash transfers that equalize marginal
utility of income across states. Absent storage technology, households face a trade-off be-
tween the desire to smooth consumption and the gains from substitution toward cheaper
consumption in low price states. Therefore, the marginal utility of income and optimal
transfers may theoretically increase or decrease with respect to price.3
      In practice, price-indexed transfers are often infeasible because local prices are difficult
for governments to observe at high frequency and in real time.4 We therefore consider the
choice between two common second-best alternatives: price-invariant cash transfers and
in-kind transfers. We show that inframarginal in-kind and cash transfers with the same
expected value have different effects on household welfare when prices vary. Households will
prefer in-kind transfers as long as the high marginal utility states are also the high price
states. Intuitively, in this case, in-kind transfers better approximate the optimal policy.
Specifically, we show that households prefer in-kind to cash as long as a simple condition
holds: the covariance between the marginal utility of income and price is positive.
      Indeed, the reason that marginal utility of income might be higher in high-price states
is not relevant for our test. It might be because of higher prices directly, or because incomes
tend to be lower in high-price states of the world, or for some other reason. This means that
even if a causal estimate of the effect of prices on marginal utility were available, it would
not be appropriate for determining whether an in-kind transfer would be preferred by the
household. Instead, our test would still rely on the covariance between prices and marginal
utility. This test is along the lines of a sufficient statistics approach (Chetty, 2009) and
analogous to recent work estimating the welfare effects of Medicaid (Finkelstein, Hendren
and Luttmer, 2019). Since the relevant relationship can be estimated without instruments
for prices, our test can be applied in a wide variety of empirical settings.
      A challenge when implementing this test is to find an appropriate empirical proxy for the
   2
      Estimating the social cost is challenging: in-kind procurement often interacts with distortionary produc-
tion subsidies and purchase guarantee schemes. In some cases, transfers may be financed externally through
aid organizations. In addition, there may be differences in administrative costs or corruption (Banerjee et al.,
2021). Finally, we note that certain behavioral models predict that households will misallocate cash trans-
fers (Currie and Gahvari, 2008), or treat in-kind transfers as non-fungible, even when they are inframarginal
(Hastings and Shapiro, 2018). These issues are outside the scope of this paper.
    3
      This result parallels prior work on welfare effects of price variability (Waugh, 1944) and price stabilization
(Turnovsky, Shalit and Schmitz, 1980).
    4
      It is well known that "community price surveys in developing economies are either absent or suffer quality
problems" (Gibson and Rozelle, 2005). In the Indian case, Khera (2014) notes that "it is not `technically
simple' to index cash transfers; one needs to consider several factors--including local variation in prices,
adequate infrastructure requirements to collect such information, and frequency of indexing the amount."



                                                         2
marginal utility of income. Our primary measure is an indicator for falling below minimum
calorie requirements. The key assumption underlying this measure is that the marginal utility
of income rises when households fall below minimum requirements. A vast literature has
documented the negative consequences of calorie shortfalls, demonstrating long-run effects
of even short-term episodes. Undernutrition has been shown to worsen health, human capital
accumulation, and earnings.5 Calories have low substitutability across periods and with other
types of (non-food) consumption goods, so the curvature of utility with respect to calories
is likely to be high, particularly for households close to minimum requirements.6
      We implement the model test in the context of India, using National Sample Survey
(NSS) data from over 500,000 households across 28 states and ten years. The average Indian
household is exposed to substantial risk from food price fluctuations, as it spends 52% of its
budget on food, with 9% spent just on rice--the most commonly consumed food staple and
the focus of our analysis. We use an indicator for meeting minimum calorie requirements
(MCR) from the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) as well as calories per capita
as (inverse) proxies for the marginal utility of income.7 Forty percent of households in our
sample fall short of minimum recommended calorie intake guidelines.
      Increases in the price of rice are significantly negatively associated with caloric intake:
a 10% increase in the market price is associated with 1.1 percentage points fewer households
(equivalent to 13 million individuals nationwide) meeting the MCR and a 0.7% decline in
calories consumed by the average household. These findings are entirely driven by below-
median socioeconomic status (SES) households. In the context of the model, these results
demonstrate empirically that in-kind transfers are preferable to cash for poorer households--
precisely the group generally targeted by safety net programs.
      We next turn to providing direct causal evidence on the effects of India's flagship in-
kind transfer program: the Public Distribution System (PDS). The PDS is one of the largest
in-kind transfer programs in the world, providing food transfers to nearly a billion people
in 180 million eligible households (Balani, 2013). The program provides (mainly) rice and
wheat every month at substantially below-market prices through a network of over 500,000
designated shops. The primary goal of this analysis is to demonstrate that expansions in the
PDS do in fact lead to decreased sensitivity of calories to prices "on the ground"--consistent
with the insurance mechanism posited in the model--and to quantify the magnitude of these
   5
     For a summary of the medical literature see Victora et al. (2008); for literature in economics see Currie
and Almond (2011).
   6
     We do not attempt to construct a marginal utility measure using total real consumption because we lack
local price measures for most non-food consumption.
   7
     We use MCR as shorthand for the ICMR's caloric guideline for the "sedentary" (lowest) level of exertion
calculated by age and gender and aggregated to the household level.



                                                      3
effects. To the best of our knowledge, previous work has not analyzed the effect of in-kind
transfer programs on the sensitivity of outcomes to prices.
     We examine the causal effects of the PDS on caloric intake and the calorie-price relation-
ship using newly collected administrative data on state-level PDS policy changes between
2003-12, a period between major national policy changes. We use variation in the mandated
PDS price as well as expansions in eligibility to instrument for PDS value : the actual value
of the subsidy received by households, defined as the quantity of rice obtained from the PDS
multiplied by the difference between the market price of rice and the PDS price paid by
beneficiaries (first stage F =37).
     We first document large effects of PDS expansions on the level of calories. A Rs. 100
increase in PDS value (the average non-zero PDS transfer) leads to a 10.7 percentage point
increase in households meeting the MCR and a 6.4% increase in calories per capita. Overall,
we estimate that PDS policy changes led to 40 million additional individuals meeting MCR
thresholds over the study period.
     Increases in PDS generosity also substantially reduce the sensitivity of calories to market
prices. A Rs. 100 increase in PDS value reduces the sensitivity of calories to market prices by
73%, with estimated sensitivity for the average household reaching zero for a PDS transfer
worth Rs. 135. This is only one-third larger than the average non-zero transfer, indicating
that the PDS as implemented during our study period already provides a substantial amount
of insurance against price risk.
     To alleviate concerns about policy endogeneity and omitted variables bias, we demon-
strate that trends in calories prior to eligibility expansions are flat. Our results are also
robust to controlling for political cycles and generosity of the National Rural Employment
Guarantee Scheme (India's other major welfare program), and are similar when we restrict
the sample to states that are not major suppliers to the PDS or identify effects based solely
on either price or quantity variation in the PDS. Finally, we demonstrate that the impact
of the PDS on market prices is too small--by at least two orders of magnitude--to explain
our results.
     This paper contributes to several literatures. First, understanding the potential insur-
ance value of in-kind transfers is important for the larger ongoing debate around the world
regarding the appropriate design of social protection programs. Numerous recent studies
have highlighted the benefits of unconditional cash transfers (Haushofer and Shapiro, 2016;
Banerjee, Niehaus and Suri, 2019).8 Previous studies have proposed other rationales for
in-kind transfers: they can improve targeting (Nichols and Zeckhauser, 1982; Besley and
Coate, 1991; Lieber and Lockwood, 2019), the well-being of non-targeted households by re-
  8
      See also Blattman et al. (2017); Egger et al. (2019); Ghatak and Muralidharan (2020).


                                                     4
ducing market prices of transferred goods (Coate, Johnson and Zeckhauser, 1994; Cunha,
De Giorgi and Jayachandran, 2018), and the efficiency of imperfectly competitive food mar-
kets under some conditions (Coate, 1989). However, although some in the policy community
have highlighted the potential insurance benefits of in-kind transfers (Kotwal, Murugkar and
Ramaswami, 2011; Dreze, 2011), this rationale has been largely unstudied in the academic
literature. The influential and comprehensive Currie and Gahvari (2008) review of cash ver-
sus in-kind transfers does not even mention it, and papers that empirically test the impact
of different transfer modalities (Hidrobo et al., 2014) generally do not focus on mechanisms.
One exception is Gadenne (2020) who models the PDS as a non-linear commodity tax system
in which two potential advantages (relative to a linear commodity tax) are redistribution
and insurance.
     Second, we speak to a longstanding literature on household exposure to price variability
and its consequences. This literature has generally assessed the welfare effects of price risk
relative to price stabilization (Waugh, 1944; Turnovsky, Shalit and Schmitz, 1980; Bellemare,
Barrett and Just, 2013). While stabilization and dual pricing policies are still used, many
critics have argued that they are both expensive and ineffective (Rashid, 2009; Bellemare,
Barrett and Just, 2013). Moreover, the empirical literature on price risk is limited (Bellemare
and Lee, 2016), and to the best of our knowledge, previous studies have not considered the
possibility of insuring against--rather than attempting to reduce--price variability.
     A related literature examines the specific issue of price shocks and food security.9 Nu-
merous studies have examined the effect of food price shocks on nutrition, with mixed find-
ings.10 Our study complements this literature by demonstrating the implications of this
empirical relationship for the design of optimal social protection programs without requiring
an instrument for prices, a major challenge in this literature.
     Finally, we provide new evidence on the effects of the PDS, which is an important
program in and of itself: it is India's flagship food security scheme, and it directly affects
two-thirds of the population. The program has been criticized for corruption and mis-
targeting (Niehaus et al., 2013; Dreze and Khera, 2015), while the (surprisingly) limited
rigorous evidence on its causal effects is mixed (Kochar, 2005; Tarozzi, 2005; Kaul, 2014).
Our results--finding that the PDS does improve nutrition by allowing households to reach
   9
      Barrett (2002) reviews the literature on food security in general, emphasizing the importance of risk as
an important component of food security but noting that "most of the literature nevertheless fails to address
issues of risk and uncertainty." An older literature has considered how producer choices may be distorted
by food price risk and poorly integrated markets (Fafchamps, 1992; Saha and Stroud, 1994; Barrett, 1996).
   10
      A number of papers show that positive food price shocks lead to worse nutrition (for example, Brinkman
et al. (2010) and the various World Food Programme studies cited therein). However, a significant number of
careful analyses also find non-existent or positive relationships (Jensen and Miller, 2008; Behrman, Deolalikar
and Wolfe, 1988).



                                                      5
minimum caloric requirements--suggest that the time period of study might be important
(our paper and Kaul (2014) study later expansions as compared to the older findings that
find little or no effect). In addition, we highlight a previously unstudied effect of the PDS:
reducing caloric sensitivity to local prices. These results suggest a perhaps bigger role for the
PDS in providing food security than previously understood, and may help explain why large
numbers of beneficiaries report preferring in-kind food transfers from the PDS over equiv-
alent value cash transfers (Muralidharan, Niehaus and Sukhtankar, 2017a). Indeed, during
the current Covid-19 crisis, the PDS has assumed an even more important role: not only as
the main food security and social welfare program, but explicitly as a bulwark against local
food price shocks (Roy, Boss and Pradhan, 2020).
     The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 develops a framework for
examining the welfare effects of cash versus in-kind transfers. Section 3 discusses the context
and data. Section 4 presents evidence on price risk in India and provides an empirical test of
the model. Section 5 examines the effects of the PDS program on households and the extent
to which it mitigates households' sensitivity to price risk. Section 6 concludes.

2      Theoretical framework
2.1     Optimal insurance policy
We begin with a simple model focusing on the welfare of a unitary household facing a
varying price in one of several consumption goods. We derive three key results. First,
the optimal insurance policy consists of price-indexed transfers that equate the marginal
utility of income across states of the world. Second, optimal transfers may theoretically be
increasing or decreasing with respect to price. Third, if the government must instead choose
between price-invariant cash or in-kind transfers, the household will prefer in-kind if and
only if the marginal utility of income is higher in the high-price states of the world. Consider
a household consuming several goods and assume that the price pj of one of the goods, j ,
varies across states of the world with mean p   ¯j and density f (pj ). The prices of all other
goods are fixed. For simplicity, we abstract from potential effects of transfers on market
prices.11 The household has income y and preferences characterized by the indirect utility
function v (·). We assume that y is fixed but relax this assumption below.
      We first characterize the optimal insurance policy: price-indexed (state-dependent)
transfers. The optimal break-even insurance menu specifies a set of transfers for each pos-
sible value of pj , which we write x(pj ), such that the expected value of these transfers,
  11
    In some settings, in-kind transfers reduce market prices (Cunha, De Giorgi and Jayachandran, 2018;
Jim´enez-Hern´
             andez and Seira, 2021). However, we do not observe this in our empirical context (see Sec-
tion 5.4).


                                                  6
  x(pj )f (pj )dpj , is equal to 0.12 However, all the results derived below hold if the net ex-
pected value of the transfer is positive.
     The optimal transfer x(pj ) for a given price pj is thus the one that maximizes v (p, y +
x(pj ))f (pj )dpj - µ x(pj )f (pj )dpj , where µ is the marginal utility of income and p is the
vector of all good prices. The first order condition tells us that the optimal menu equates
the marginal utility of income vy (p, y + x(pj )) in all states of the world:

                                       vy (p, y + x(pj )) = µ, pj                                        (1)

     The optimal policy will transfer larger amounts to households in states with higher
marginal utility of income. Optimal transfers x(pj ) will therefore be increasing in the price
if the marginal utility of income is itself increasing in the price. Taking the derivative of
Roy's identity with respect to income, we can write the derivative of the marginal utility of
income with respect to price in the following way:

                                                   vy (p, y + x(pj ))
                           vyp (p, y + x(pj )) =                      j ( - j )                          (2)
                                                            pj
     where j is the budget share the household spends on good j ,  is the coefficient of
relative risk aversion, and j is the income elasticity of demand for good j . The sign of this
expression will depend on ( - j ). Intuitively, if households are not very risk averse, they
prefer transfers in the low price state to take advantage of higher purchasing power. As
risk aversion increases, the value of consumption smoothing increases, leading households
to prefer transfers in the high price state.13 This result is related to Turnovsky, Shalit and
Schmitz (1980), who show that households will be better off with varying prices than with
price stabilization if their demand elasticities are high relative to their risk aversion. The
amounts transferred across states of the world are increasing in j : the higher the budget
share spent on the good, the greater the sensitivity of marginal utility to price.

2.2     Extending the model
A key advantage of this approach is that we do not need to explicitly specify all potential
components of the utility function: because agents are optimizing, the derivative of marginal
utility with respect to price will continue to be sufficient to assess the welfare effects of
transfers.
  12
     This policy replicates the outcome the household could achieve with access to complete Arrow-Debreu
securities.
  13
     The higher the income elasticity j , the more consumption of the good is increasing with income,
making income in the low price states of the world relatively more attractive.  also captures the possibility
of substitution to other goods.



                                                     7
     As an illustrative example, we consider the case in which income co-varies with local
prices. This is likely, since local prices themselves will be affected by local supply and demand
conditions if there is a lack of market integration. Allowing household income to co-vary
with prices, we obtain the following expression for the derivative of the marginal utility of
income with respect to price:

                                           vy (p, y + x(pj ))              y pj
                   vyp (p, y + x(pj )) =                      j ( - j ) -                              (3)
                                                    pj                     pj y
     The additional term on the right-hand side captures the effect of allowing income to
be correlated with prices: a positive derivative implies that high price states of the world
are also high income states of the world. If this term is positive and sufficiently large, the
marginal utility of income will decrease with the price even if  > j . This formulation allows
an arbitrary correlation between income and prices, which we might expect to be different
(for example) between households who are producers versus consumers of the good.
     However, the form of optimal transfers continues to be determined solely by the deriva-
tive of the marginal utility of income with respect to price. Specifically, transfers will be
increasing with respect to price if and only if this derivative is positive.

                               x (pj ) > 0  vyp (p, y + x(pj )) > 0                                    (4)

     vyp reflects risk aversion and income elasticity and allows for price-income correlations.
This derivative will also capture the effects of potential correlations between pj and the prices
of other goods,14 as well as other dimensions of household behavior such as savings, storage,
and home production.

2.3     Cash versus in-kind transfers
In practice, implementing the optimal state-contingent policy requires observing local prices
in real time and at high frequency, which is infeasible in most developing country contexts
(Gibson and Rozelle, 2005; Khera, 2014). We therefore consider the impact on the house-
hold's utility of two widely used second-best transfer policies: a price-invariant cash transfer;
and an in-kind transfer of a fixed amount z of the good. Our aim is to compare the welfare
impact of two equivalent expected value policies, so we assume that both policies transfer
an amount z p  ¯j to the household on average across all states of the world. We also assume
the in-kind transfer is inframarginal (the household consumes more than z of the good for
  14
    Until now, the j indexing on the derivative of marginal utility with respect to price has been implicit
since only the price of the in-kind good has varied; to account for other prices varying as well, one would
index the derivative vypj .



                                                    8
all possible prices pj ).15 Finally, we assume that prices are not affected by either cash or
in-kind transfers.
     The welfare effect of introducing a cash transfer can then be written as:

                                     WC = z p
                                            ¯j       vy (p, y )f (pj )dpj                               (5)

       and the welfare impact of the in-kind transfer as:

                  WK = z p
                         ¯j       vy (p, y )f (pj )dpj + z     vy (p, y )(pj - p
                                                                               ¯j )f (pj )dpj           (6)

       Plugging (5) into (6) we obtain:

                             WK = WC + z          vy (p, y )(pj - p
                                                                  ¯j )f (pj )dpj                        (7)

    where the second term is simply the transfer amount z multiplied by the covariance
between the marginal utility of income and prices. Using a linear approximation of vy (p, y )
           p, y ) we obtain:16
around vy (¯

                            WK  WC + zvyp (¯
                                           p, y )                  ¯j )2 f (pj )dpj
                                                             (pj - p                                    (8)

     Expression (7) shows that in the presence of price risk the in-kind transfer is not equiv-
alent to the cash transfer from the household perspective, even though the expected mon-
etary value of both transfers is the same. Moreover, as long as the covariance between the
marginal utility of income and prices is positive (or, equivalently, as long as the derivative
of the marginal utility of income with respect to price is positive--see expression (8)), the
in-kind transfer is welfare improving with respect to the cash transfer. Therefore:

                                    WK > WC  vyp (p, y ) > 0                                            (9)

     This is because the in-kind transfer effectively transfers more to the household in states
of the world in which the price is high and it values extra income more: in other words, it
more closely approximates the optimal insurance contract. In Appendix A1, we demonstrate
that the in-kind transfer will be equivalent to the optimal transfer for particular parameter
values, but in general will underperform the optimal transfer because it scales the transfer
  15
      This assumption holds for 93% of households in our empirical context. Our results below will also hold
if transfers are marginal but households can engage in resale at the market price. Otherwise, the welfare
gain from in-kind transfers will be reduced as a result of distortion to the consumption bundle.
   16
      Here p
           ¯ indicates the vector of mean prices.



                                                      9
value with respect to price only as a function of the in-kind transfer quantity, rather than
as a function of the household's preferences.

2.4    Model implementation
In practice, we do not observe marginal utility of income directly and therefore rely on
consumption-based measures as empirical proxies. Our main measure is an indicator for
households failing to meet minimum calorie requirements. This allows us to capture total real
food consumption--a substantial share of total consumption--in a single measure derived
solely from quantity data. The identifying assumption is that an increased likelihood of
failing to meet minimum requirements is associated with an increase in the marginal utility
of income. This assumption is likely to be satisfied since calories have low substitutability
(both intertemporally and with non-food consumption), and the curvature of the utility
function with respect to calories near the threshold is likely to be high.
      Note that we are unable to construct an accurate measure of total real consumption
because we do not have local price measures for 25% of food consumption and 87% of non-
food consumption. However, if we deflate expenditure by the limited price vector available
and use this as an outcome, we find very similar results to the calorie results presented below
(see Appendix A2.3 for a discussion of the data limitations and results).
      An important interpretation consideration arises if the observed calorie gradient with
respect to price reflects costly consumption smoothing mechanisms on the part of house-
holds (Chetty and Looney, 2006). In this case, observing a positive relationship between
the likelihood of failing to meet caloric thresholds and price is a sufficient but not neces-
sary condition for in-kind transfers to be welfare improving relative to cash. Observing no
relationship could still be consistent with a preference for in-kind, if in-kind transfers better
allow risk-averse households to be less reliant on costly smoothing behaviors.

3     Context and data
3.1    Context
We examine the predictions of the model empirically in the context of India. The Indian
context is ideal for studying these issues for a number of reasons. First, as much prior research
has documented, markets are not well-integrated, and local prices are subject to volatility
arising from (for example) weather shocks (Rosenzweig and Udry, 2014). Substantial price
differences persist across regions, and temporary shocks to local prices are frequent (Atkin,
2013). Second, as we discuss below, a substantial share of the population fails to meet basic
caloric requirements. Finally, India has one of the world's largest in-kind transfer programs:


                                               10
the Public Distribution System (PDS).
     The PDS is one of India's oldest and most important anti-poverty programs, dating
back to several months before independence in 1947. The PDS provides goods such as rice
at significantly subsidized rates to eligible households via a widespread network of Fair Price
Shops.17 The program operates much like in-kind transfer programs across the rest of the
world: the government procures goods directly from producers in a few agricultural states
and then sells them to households at below-market prices.18 Eligible households can buy
up to a certain quantity of grains each month based on entitlements listed on ration cards,
although in practice the PDS shops may not always have enough for each household to
purchase its entire allocation.19
     Before 2000, eligibility was largely restricted to poor households, in particular those
considered to be Below Poverty Line (BPL). The PDS has grown more generous over the
last twenty years, with large nation-wide expansions in 2000 and 2013. In 2000, 6 million
households became newly eligible, and PDS generosity was increased for the very poorest
households. In 2013, the National Food Security Act further expanded eligibility to 75% of
the rural population. Between these two federal changes, many states expanded their own
PDS generosity.

3.2     Data
Our main source of data is the 59th through 68th rounds of the National Sample Survey
(NSS), covering January 2003 through June 2012. This covers most of the period between
2000 and 2013, when the basic structure of the program stayed the same but generosity was
dramatically increased in many states. We begin our sample period in 2003 because the NSS
does not consistently identify many districts before the 59th round. June 2012 is the end of
the survey period for the 68th round.
     The NSS is a repeated cross-sectional survey that asks households about their expendi-
ture in each of about 350 categories over the past 30 days. For a subset of these categories
where the units are well-defined, it also records the quantity consumed. In addition, the
  17
      The PDS also provides wheat, kerosene for cooking fuel, and less commonly sugar, salt, and other local
grains.
   18
      One explicit goal of the PDS is to provide a price floor for farmers selling agricultural products. Before
the spring and winter harvests, the Commission for Agricultural Costs and Prices sets a guaranteed mini-
mum price for key crops at which it will purchase from farmers if necessary. Geographic centralization of
production--in 2016-17, 78% of all rice procured was from the top 6 (out of 29) states (FCI, 2018)--means
that effects of the PDS on producers are concentrated away from most of our sample. In Table 8 we show
that our results are similar when we exclude PDS-producing states.
   19
      Direct transfers of in-kind goods to households are rare outside of emergency relief situations. Accounting
for a below-market price the household must pay for the in-kind good modifies the implicit transfer amount--
from zpj in our baseline model to z (pj - pP  j
                                                DS
                                                   )--but does not affect the model test.



                                                       11
survey contains basic demographic information like household size and composition, reli-
gion, caste, landholding, assets, education and occupation. We categorize households by the
year-quarter in which they were surveyed.
     As is standard for empirical work in India, we exclude Union Territories and Delhi due
to small sample sizes in these regions (see, for example, Imbert and Papp (2015)). The 65th
and 67th rounds did not include the expenditure survey, so we do not observe household
outcomes in the periods July 2008 to June 2009 and July 2010 to June 2011. In total, our
sample includes 524,911 households spread across 28 states.
     We use the NSS in two main ways. First, we follow Deaton and Tarozzi (2005) and use
unit values--expenditures divided by quantities--as the basis to measure local rice prices.
Second, we use the NSS to construct measures of caloric intake, which we use as outcome
variables. Appendix A2 provides further details on the NSS and data construction.
3.2.1    Unit values
India lacks measures of prices that are for individual items, cover the entire country, and vary
at the local level. To overcome this challenge, we construct unit values from expenditure
                                     expenditureijt
and quantity information: U Vijt =        qijt
                                                    for good j consumed by household i in time
t.20 Using unit values rather than prices is standard practice in the literature that uses
the NSS (Subramanian and Deaton, 1996; Deaton and Tarozzi, 2005) as well as in work on
rural prices elsewhere (Sotelo, 2020). We remove observations that appear to result from
transcription or data errors; see Appendix A2.2 for more details.
     The smallest consistently-identified geographic units in the NSS are districts interacted
with a rural/urban ("sector") indicator, and most of our analysis conditions on fixed effects
at this level. However, for sample size reasons we measure local prices at a slightly higher
level. Instead of districts we use NSS regions, groupings of "contiguous districts having
similar geographical features, rural population densities and crop-pattern" that are likely
to face similar price shocks. The 10th percentile region-sector-quarter has 23 consumers of
market rice and the 25th percentile has 42; compared to 4 and 6 at the district-sector-quarter
level (Table A1). There are 140 region-sectors, and we measure prices using the mean unit
value at the region-sector-quarter level.
     We test the validity of the unit-value measures of prices by comparing unit values to
prices from the Rural Price Survey (RPS). The RPS is a market-level survey of prices for
many of the goods in the NSS. However, it covers only a limited subsample of rural areas, and
a lack of documentation makes it impossible to determine the sampling frame. We therefore
  20
    The NSS data includes both expenditure and quantity information for goods purchased from the market
and the PDS, so we observe unit values separately for market goods and for goods purchased from PDS
shops.


                                                  12
do not use it for our main analysis. However, within the overlapping sample (about 25% of
the NSS sample areas), we find an over-time correlation in NSS unit values and RPS prices
for rice of nearly 0.60 (see Table A2). Moreover, we show below that results using RPS prices
are identical to those using NSS unit values in the overlapping sample.
3.2.2   Household characteristics
Since our object of interest is the price risk faced by individual households over time, we
control for permanent household characteristics (indeed, if the same households appeared in
the NSS in different rounds, we would control for household fixed effects). The most im-
portant of these is household permanent income, which we proxy for using a socioeconomic
status (SES) index. We construct this index by regressing log per-capita expenditure on
caste, occupation, education of household head, land possessed, and the number of house-
hold members in the 18 bins defined by the intersection of age (0-17, 18-54, 55+), gender,
education (below primary, primary, above primary), and district-sector-season, round, and
period fixed effects. The SES index is the predicted value from this regression, standardized
to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one. When we split the sample by above-
and below-median SES, we construct the cutoff using NSS weights within state-rounds.
     We use several other household characteristics as controls and as dimensions of hetero-
geneity to examine. We capture economies of scale in consumption using log household size.
Religion and Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe status (constitutional status for historically
discriminated-against groups), as well as the type of cooking fuel used all determine the type
of food that households eat and therefore calories consumed. We use landholding as a proxy
for households' ability to produce food commodities. We define landholding households as
owning more than 0.01 hectares of land, which allows us to proxy for the ability to engage
in agricultural production.
3.2.3   Calorie requirements
As discussed above, the relevant parameter for determining the welfare effects of in-kind
relative to cash is the correlation between marginal utility of income and prices. If this
relationship is positive, households will prefer an in-kind transfer to a cash transfer with equal
expected value. Our main empirical proxy for marginal utility of income is an indicator for
whether the household fails to meet a minimum recommended caloric intake. We interpret
an increased likelihood of failing to meet basic calorie requirements as associated with an
increase in the marginal utility of income.
     We estimate household-level caloric intake using the information on total consumption
of each item (including consumption from the market, the PDS, and home production) com-
bined with estimates of the caloric value of each item (Gopalan et al., 1980). To contextualize

                                               13
caloric consumption, we rely on age × gender specific guidelines for caloric intake from the
Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) (Rao and Sivakumar, 2010) and calculate the
total household requirement. The ICMR provides separate caloric guidelines for different lev-
els of exertion: sedentary, moderate work, and heavy work. We focus on the lowest of these,
the "sedentary" guideline, to define the minimum calorie requirement (MCR) by age and
gender. On average, individuals consume 2,102 calories per day, while the ICMR estimates
that 1,904 would be necessary on average given our NSS sample's age-gender composition.
Average consumption of course obscures substantial heterogeneity: only 61% of households
meet the MCR, falling to 56% of households below the median SES (Table 1).21

4      Empirical tests of preference for in-kind transfers
4.1     Price exposure and variability
Indian households face considerable exposure to price risk. Table 1 shows that the average
household spends 52% of its budget on food and 9% on rice alone. In our empirical analysis,
we focus on rice because it comprises a substantial portion of household food expenditure, it
is consumed throughout the country, and it is one of the main goods provided through the
PDS system. In line with our assumption of inframarginality in Section 2, only 6.6% of all
households and 8.8% of below-median SES households consume rice from the PDS but not
from private sources during the 30 day recall period.
     We next examine variation in market rice prices over time and across areas (Table 2).
Deflating by the all-India CPI, the mean price of rice is Rs. 9.86 per kilogram.22 Taking
out district-sector fixed effects, the standard deviation of the residual is 0.83. Household
characteristics do not explain this variation: the standard deviation is unchanged when we
include household controls and the SES index. We then include year-quarter fixed effects to
capture common shocks across areas.23 The residual standard deviation decreases to 0.61.
Including district-sector-season fixed effects reduces it further slightly to 0.59. In theory, the
government could address price shocks that are common across areas as well as predictable
seasonal variation using other policy instruments. We therefore use the residual variation
in the final column to estimate caloric responses to price variability to focus on the type of
  21
     We do not have data on consumption by individual, hence are restricted to calculating calories at the
household level (and reporting results per capita for convenience). Of course, calories may be unevenly
distributed within households, implying that individuals may not meet MCRs even in households that
consume sufficient calories overall (Brown, Calvi and Penglase, 2018; D'Souza and Tandon, 2019).
  22
     We convert all nominal values to 1999 Rupees using the all-India CPI from the World Bank. One US
dollar was 43 rupees in 1999.
  23
     We also control for NSS round effects to account for any potential differences in survey procedure or
instruments. Because not all households are surveyed within the scheduled time, NSS round fixed effects
can be included separately from year-quarter fixed effects.


                                                   14
price risk that the government can likely only address by using in-kind transfers. In practice,
this provides a conservative estimate of the true price risk faced by households since they
may not actually be able to smooth common cross-area or seasonal shocks.
     The remaining rows of Table 2 show the same summary statistics by demographic
groups. Unsurprisingly, the average prices faced by urban households are higher than rural
households, as are average prices for above-median SES households compared with below-
median.

4.2    Price variability and calories consumed
Our primary outcome measure is an indicator for the household falling below the MCR; we
also examine calories per capita as an outcome. Ex ante, it is not obvious that high rice
price states will be associated with lower caloric intake: high price states could also be high
income states; households may be able to substitute toward other goods; and the relationship
is estimated given existing anti-poverty programs and household smoothing mechanisms.
     In Table 3 we regress the calorie outcome cidrt on log market rice prices prt :

                        cidrt = prt + Xidrt  + da + t + round + eidrt                      (10)

     where i indexes household, d indexes district-sector, r indexes region-sector, a indexes
agricultural season (quarter of year), and t indexes the year-quarter in which the survey
took place. We control for district-sector × season fixed effects (da ) to account for place-
specific agricultural cycles, year-quarter fixed effects (t ) for national changes in policy and
economic growth, and NSS round fixed effects (round ). We additionally control for household
characteristics Xidrt including log household size, religion and Scheduled Caste/Scheduled
Tribe status, land ownership, cooking fuel used and the SES index. Regressions are estimated
using NSS weights, and standard errors are clustered at the region-sector level, the level of
our price variation.
     We want our estimates to capture the empirical relationship between market rice prices
and the marginal utility of income, allowing covariance of income and prices as well as sub-
stitution across goods in response to changes in relative prices. We therefore do not control
for current household expenditure or other commodity prices. These estimates will capture
the average effect of price variation given any existing household insurance mechanisms as
well as access to social safety nets, including the PDS.
     Column 1 shows our preferred specification, regressing the likelihood of meeting the
MCR on log market rice prices, controlling for district-sector-season fixed effects, year-
quarter and NSS round fixed effects, the SES index, and household controls. A 10% increase
in the price of rice decreases the likelihood that households meet the MCR by 1.1 percentage

                                              15
points, and this effect is significant at the 1% level. The SES index and household con-
trols are meant to capture household permanent income and characteristics that are likely
to affect diet and calories directly. However, if we exclude these, we still see a decrease in
the likelihood of meeting MCR of 0.8 percentage points for every 10% increase in the rice
price (column 2). We lose some precision, but the estimates are still significant at the 10%
level. In column 3, we include district-sector fixed effects but not district-sector × season
fixed effects to allow for seasonal variation in our price measure. The coefficient is almost
identical to our baseline estimate, indicating that caloric shortfalls have similar sensitivity to
seasonal and non-seasonal sources of price variation. In column 4, we remove year-quarter
and NSS round fixed effects. The coefficient increases in magnitude (though the difference is
not statistically significant), suggesting that households are not easily able to insure against
shocks that are common across areas.
     Finally, we compare our main estimates to results using prices from the Rural Price
Survey, which collects prices directly from markets. Column 5 presents results using the
baseline price measure (NSS unit values), restricting to the subsample of rural districts where
the RPS is conducted. Column 6 presents the baseline specification using the RPS price
measure. Reassuringly, the estimates are almost identical and in both cases are statistically
significant (p < 0.01). The calorie-price sensitivity is also much higher for this subsample: a
10% increase in price is associated with a 2.9 percentage point decrease in the likelihood of
meeting the MCR.
     We next examine heterogeneity in calorie-price sensitivity by demographic categories
that are commonly used to target policy: SES status, rural versus urban, and landowning
(Table 4). We find that a 10% increase in rice prices is associated with a 2.2 percentage point
reduction in the likelihood of meeting MCR for below-median SES households and a 1.8
percentage point reduction for rural households. These effects are statistically significantly
larger than those for above median SES and urban households, for which the estimates are
small and insignificant.24 We then divide the rural sample into landless and landowning
households. The estimate for landless households is larger in magnitude, but we cannot
reject equality of effects between landless and landowning.
     One possible explanation for the observed heterogeneity is that above-median SES,
urban households, and rural landowning households are simply further away from the MCR
and therefore have lower sensitivity to falling below this threshold. To distinguish this
explanation from underlying differences in caloric sensitivity to prices, we estimate effects
  24
    The effect for rural households is smaller than for the RPS sample in Table 3. This may possibly reflect
the fact that RPS data is collected from a fixed set of 603 villages/markets chosen because they are ones
that "rural agricultural labourers visit;" see http://mospi.nic.in/price-collection-survey for more
details.


                                                    16
using the log of calories per capita as our outcome variable (Table 5). Our baseline estimate
for the full sample implies that a 10% increase in the market price is associated with a
0.7% reduction in calories per capita (p < 0.05, column 1). We again see that the effects
are concentrated among below-median SES and rural households (columns 2 and 4). This
cannot be explained by differences in the average levels of prices or variability across the
groups: in fact, as shown in Table 2, average prices and the residual standard deviations are
higher for above median SES and urban households. It is also unlikely to be due to calorie
satiation: in the cross-section, calories increase with respect to expenditure throughout the
expenditure distribution (see Figure 1). In contrast, the coefficients for rural landless and
landowning are very similar, suggesting that the higher sensitivity of meeting the MCR for
landless households reflects that they are closer to the calorie threshold (columns 6 and 7).
This is unsurprising, since landless households in rural areas are poorer than landholding
households on average.
     In the context of the theory, these results indicate that in-kind transfers will improve
welfare for the average household relative to equal expected value cash transfers. This result
is driven by poorer households, precisely those typically targeted by safety net programs.
Although we do not observe a significant correlation between prices and caloric intake for
above median households, we cannot rule out welfare gains from in-kind relative to cash
transfers. Recall that if households are engaging in costly consumption smoothing behavior,
our test provides a sufficient but not necessary condition for in-kind transfers to be welfare
improving relative to cash.
     What do these results imply about the costs of price risk to households? On average,
our full-sample results indicate that a 10% increase in rice prices (1.2 SDs of the within-
district-sector price variation; see Table 2) is associated with 1.1 percentage points fewer
households--or approximately 13 million individuals extrapolating from India's population
in our study period--meeting the MCR. Our results also indicate a negative calorie-price
gradient for poorer households, implying that many households already below the MCR
experience further shortfalls below minimum requirements when prices rise. Moreover, these
correlations exist despite government welfare programs including the PDS. Finally, as Chetty
and Looney (2006) argue, the welfare consequences of risk are likely underestimated given
the actions highly risk-averse households take to smooth consumption.25 Taken together,
these results suggest substantial losses in welfare from price variability.
  25
    Indeed, there is a long tradition of documenting these actions in the context of India, for example the
accumulation of bullocks (Rosenzweig and Wolpin, 1993) as well as female migration for marriage (Rosenzweig
and Stark, 1989).




                                                    17
5      Empirical evidence on the role of in-kind transfers
We next turn to estimating the causal effect of in-kind transfers on household outcomes.
Our goal in this section is not to compare in-kind and cash transfers: the results in Section 4
have already provided an empirical test of the welfare effect to the household of an equal
expected value in-kind versus cash transfer, and a full welfare analysis would require the
(unobserved) relative social cost of provision. Rather, the primary aim of this analysis is to
show that expansions in in-kind transfers do in fact causally reduce sensitivity of calories to
prices "on the ground"--consistent with the insurance mechanism posited in the model--and
to determine the empirical magnitude of these effects.
     To do this, we exploit policy variation in the PDS, India's flagship in-kind transfer
program.26 Most PDS policy is set at the state level. While the federal government provides
significant funding for the PDS, states are responsible for transport and storage, and typically
devote additional resources to increase program breadth or decrease prices. The generosity
of the program therefore varies across states and over time. We use this policy variation to
instrument for observed PDS value and examine the effects of PDS generosity on household
caloric intake and the sensitivity of calories to prices.

5.1     PDS policy variation
There is no comprehensive data source for state PDS policies. We therefore construct mea-
sures of PDS generosity at the state-year level on both the price and quantity margins as
follows. We observe statutory PDS prices in the Foodgrain Bulletin, an annual govern-
ment report.27 The Bulletin is not comprehensive, so we additionally surveyed newspaper
databases to identify other policy changes and to get more exact information on the date of
Bulletin price changes. Combined, we have as complete a dataset of PDS price changes as
is possible.
     The quantity component of PDS value reflects both the number of eligible households
and quotas per eligible household. However, there is no consistent source of information on
changes to either. To identify policy changes in eligibility, we use NSS data to find sharp
breaks in observed PDS value received by households and then check in newspapers and state
records to see if there was a policy change at that time. Specifically, we simulated potential
  26
     Analyzing the "on the ground" effects of the PDS is particularly relevant given potential problems with
targeting, rationing and leakage (Government of India Planning Commission, 2005; Niehaus et al., 2013;
Dreze and Khera, 2015). In addition, corruption in distribution might increase precisely during high-price
periods (Hari, 2016).
  27
     When different card types are charged different prices, we use the BPL price in all calculations. This is
by necessity--our data do not list card type--but the vast majority of households using the PDS pay BPL
prices (Niehaus et al., 2013).



                                                     18
policy changes for each state s and year-quarter t in the following way. We ran regressions of
PDS value on state and time fixed effects; controls for household characteristics and known
policies; and an indicator for being in state s after time t. Whenever the coefficient on the
indicator was larger than Rs. 10 in absolute value, we checked newspapers and state records.
If we found explicit, credible mention of an increase in eligibility, we coded that period as
an eligibility increase for the given state. We find five such eligibility increases, which we
list in Table A3. Changes in quotas for eligible households are often small and ad hoc and
difficult to identify cleanly in the data. We therefore do not exploit this source of variation
in our quantity instrument.
      The generosity of the PDS as observed in the NSS increased dramatically over the study
period. Panel A of Figure 2 shows that average real PDS rice prices more than halved over
our study period, from over Rs. 5 to 2. Panel B shows that while quantities for beneficiaries
stayed roughly constant, the number of beneficiaries more than doubled, from 20% to 45%
of households. This translated into a 300% increase in the value of the PDS subsidy over
the period (Panel C), from Rs. 14 to 45 (average across all households). Figure A1 plots
the share of households consuming PDS rice against per-capita expenditure, deflated to the
1999 price level. We display this relationship for 2008 and earlier, before most of the big
expansions in eligibility, and for 2009 and after. Households became more likely to access
the PDS at all expenditure levels over time, but the gains were most pronounced for very
poor households.

5.2     PDS value and instruments
We calculate the subsidy value vidrt for each household using information on the observed
market prices prt , PDS prices pP
                                rt
                                  DS                                  P DS 28
                                     , and observed PDS consumption qidrt . The value of
the PDS rice subsidy can be written as:

                                       vidrt = (prt - pP
                                                       rt
                                                         DS P DS
                                                           )qidrt

     Differences between market prices and PDS prices are substantial, leading to a large
transfer to households. The average price for PDS rice was Rs. 3.5 per kilogram, compared to
a market price of Rs. 9.9. In our sample, the average monthly transfer adds up to Rs. 109 for
rice beneficiaries (conditional on obtaining PDS rice), 4.9% of the Rs. 2,205 average monthly
expenditure. This is likely the single largest government transfer for most households: in
comparison, transfers from the National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (NREGS),
  28
    We define market prices and PDS prices by the mean region-sector-year-quarter unit values (the average
unit value observed in a region-sector in each time period). The market unit value is based on the 88.3% of
households that consume rice from the market; the PDS unit value is based on the 25.7% of households that
consume rice from the PDS.


                                                    19
India's other major social welfare program made up only 1.8% of beneficiaries' expenditure
in Andhra Pradesh in 2012 (Muralidharan, Niehaus and Sukhtankar, 2017b).
     To isolate changes in PDS value driven by policy changes, we instrument PDS value
by changes in states' PDS policies. Our first instrument is simply pBP st
                                                                          L
                                                                            , the statutory PDS
price of rice charged to families classified as BPL--the vast majority of PDS beneficiaries--in
state s at time t. Panel A of Figure A2 shows a particularly striking example of changes in
PDS prices, when Andhra Pradesh lowered the PDS rice price from Rs. 5 to 2 in 2008, and
then to Rs. 1 four years later.
     Our second instrument is an indicator Eist equal to 1 if household i is in a state s in
which a major PDS eligibility increase has occurred prior to the survey date. Panel B of
Figure A2 shows the importance of additionally accounting for this variation, highlighting
the increase in PDS value when Odisha universalized the PDS in a poor region of the state,
approximately doubling PDS participation in one year.

5.3      Empirical strategy
We examine the direct effect of PDS generosity on caloric outcomes as well as the effect of
the PDS on the sensitivity of calories to market prices. Our first estimating equation is

                   cidrst = 1 vidrst + 2 prst + Xidrst  + da + t + round + eidrst                          (11)

where s indexes states (other indices as previously defined), cidrst is our calorie outcome
measure, prst is the market price, and 1 is the coefficient of interest. Standard errors
are clustered at the state level, which is the level of PDS policy variation. All regressions
are estimated using NSS weights. We instrument for observed PDS value vidrst with three
instruments: the statutory PDS price at the time the household was surveyed, an indicator
for whether the household was surveyed after a major eligibility expansion in its state, and
the interaction between the two.29
     To determine the effect of the PDS on caloric sensitivity to market prices, we estimate

        cidrst = 1 prst + 2 prst × vidrst + 3 vidrst + Xidrst  + da + t + round + eidrst .                 (12)

       We instrument for vidrst as above and for prst × vidrst using our three instruments as well
  29
    de Chaisemartin and D'Haultfoeuille (2020) decompose the two-way fixed effect estimand into a weighted
average of treated area-period-specific effects, and point out that since those weights may be negative, under
heterogeneous treatment effects the conventional estimand may be opposite-signed from the group-specific
average treatment on treated effects. We calculate these weights in the differences-in-differences estimate of
the effect of the expansions on outcomes in Figure A3 (the theory to compute these weights for continuous
regressors does not yet exist), and find that all but 13 of the 2,756 treated area-periods have positive weights.



                                                       20
as their interactions with the market price. Our main coefficient of interest is 2 , which is
identified by comparing the correlation between rice prices and calorie outcomes at different
levels of instrumented PDS generosity.
     The key identifying assumption is that policy changes in PDS generosity are not en-
dogenous to local conditions or correlated with other unobserved changes which might affect
calories or calorie-price sensitivity directly. For example, we might be concerned that expan-
sions of the PDS occur during good economic times or in response to calorie shortfalls.
     In Figure 3 we plot estimates obtained using an event-study specification for the eligi-
bility expansion instrument, with the first stage in Panel A and the second stage in Panel
B.30 We see no differential trends in the average PDS value in the years before the reform.
However, PDS value vidrst begins to increase immediately following the reforms. Within five
years, vidrst increases by Rs. 40 on average, approximately 40% of the mean PDS transfer
received by beneficiaries during our study period. Panel B of Figure 3 also provides no
evidence of changes in caloric intake before a policy is implemented, supporting the parallel
trends assumption.

5.4     Results
Table 6 contains first stage results for Equation 11 for the overall sample and for below-
median SES households (Table A4 contains the first stage for all demographic subgroups).
The coefficients for PDS price decreases and eligibility increases are both strongly significant
and have the expected signs in the full and below-median SES samples (F -stats 36.6 and
32.5 respectively). Reducing the government-mandated BPL price by one rupee increases
the value of the PDS transfer by Rs. 9.7. On average, our increases in eligibility increase
the value of the PDS by Rs. 51/month, 2% of average total household expenditure.
     Panel A of Table 7 presents our results on the effects of PDS generosity on the likelihood
a household meets the MCR. An increase of Rs. 100 in PDS value leads to a 10.7 percentage
point increase in the likelihood that the household meets the MCR (column 1). Panel C of
Figure 2 shows that PDS value increased by Rs. 30.1 over the study period; extrapolating to
the entire population implies that the expansions in PDS generosity increased the number
of people meeting the MCR by just over 40 million. Calories per capita also increase by 6%
for every Rs. 100 of PDS value (column 3; marginally insignificant with p-values of 0.111).
     Panel B of Table 7 demonstrates that expansions in PDS generosity also decrease house-
hold sensitivity to market prices. The first row shows the implied effect of an increase in the
market price for a household without any (instrumented) PDS consumption; the second row
  30
    With small and frequent changes to PDS prices, our price instrument is not conducive to this type of
graph; we show below that results go through with the expansion instrument only.



                                                  21
shows the interaction of market price and a Rs. 100 increase in PDS value; and the third row
provides the predicted effect of market rice price at the mean PDS value. A 10% increase in
prices for a household without any (instrumented) PDS consumption decreases the likelihood
the household meets the MCR by 2.4 percentage points (column 1). However, increasing the
PDS value to the average amount (Rs. 29.6) decreases the effect to 1.9 percentage points.
Our results imply that households' caloric intake would no longer be sensitive to market
prices if they received a Rs. 137 transfer from the PDS, which is roughly one-third larger
than the average non-zero transfer. This also implies that the PDS as implemented during
the study period provided households with substantial insurance against price risk. We ob-
serve similar patterns when we use log calories per capita as the outcome measure (column
3).
     In columns 2 and 4, we restrict the sample to below median SES households. The point
estimates imply larger impacts of the PDS for this group as compared to the full sample.
These results should be interpreted as the effect of a hypothetical Rs. 100 increase in PDS
value; in practice, poorer households are more likely to access the PDS.31

5.5     Robustness
In Table 8, we find that these results are robust to various alternative choices of samples and
specifications. First, restricting the sample to only those states that are not major suppliers
of rice to the PDS makes no qualitative difference to the results; the coefficients are very
similar, suggesting that the results are not driven by procurement or unobserved positive
shocks to supply. Next, adding controls related to election cycles as well as the rollout of
the NREGS, the other big social welfare program, makes no observable difference to either
coefficients or statistical significance. We continue to see mitigating effects of PDS value
on caloric sensitivity to prices when we instrument for PDS value using policy variation in
prices alone (column 3) or eligibility expansions alone (column 4). . In Table A6 we include
wild cluster bootstrap p-values at the state level and find almost no change in the effect of
the PDS on caloric sensitivity (Panel B).
      Finally, in-kind transfers like the PDS could directly affect market prices, as found
by Cunha, De Giorgi and Jayachandran (2018) in a different context. We address this in
Table A7, where we regress market rice prices on instrumented PDS value. Across specifica-
tions, we find very small effects of the PDS on prices. Using our baseline set of instruments,
we find that an additional Rs. 100 of PDS generosity decreases market prices by an insignif-
   31
      Note that the complier population (those for whom increases in policy generosity lead to on the ground
increases in PDS value) are different than for the full sample. In Tables A4 and A5 we show results for
all subgroups. In brief, the PDS increases caloric intake and reduces sensitivity to market prices for all
subsamples, and consistent with Table 4 reduces sensitivity of urban and rich households to basically zero.


                                                    22
icant 0.6%. Using our estimate of the correlation between increases in prices and crossing
the subsistence caloric threshold in Table 4 as given, this would imply a change in meeting
the MCR of 0.07 pp. This is at least two orders of magnitude smaller than our estimated
effect of a Rs. 100 increase in PDS generosity (see Panel A of Table 7), suggesting that the
potential effect of PDS expansions on market prices is too small to explain our findings.

6     Conclusion
A recent and growing body of evidence documenting the success of unconditional cash trans-
fers has changed the global debate about the optimal form of transfers to the poor, garnering
much media and policy attention and influencing the ways in which donors choose to allo-
cate funds.32 While there are of course many potential differences between cash and in-kind
transfer programs, the primary stated motivation for unconditional cash is that it is prefer-
able from the beneficiary household point of view. It is thus puzzling that beneficiaries
themselves often report a preference for in-kind transfers over cash.
     We show that in a world in which households are exposed to commodity price risk--a
common situation in many developing countries due to poor market integration--inframarginal
in-kind transfers will be welfare improving relative to cash transfers from the household per-
spective if and only if the marginal utility of income is increasing with respect to price.
Intuitively, in-kind transfers provide insurance since the value of the transfer rises automati-
cally with the price of the transferred good. Testing this condition empirically in the context
of India, we find that in-kind transfers are preferable to cash for below-median socioeconomic
status households, precisely the group generally targeted by transfer programs. In addition,
we provide the first evidence that in-kind transfers do in fact smooth household outcomes
in the face of price fluctuations, demonstrating that expansions of the Public Distribution
System not only increase caloric intake by households but also reduce sensitivity of calories
to local prices.
     We stress that our results do not imply that in-kind transfers necessarily dominate cash
transfers: a full welfare analysis would need to take into account the social cost of provision,
including potential differences in implementation. Nevertheless, they elucidate an important
advantage of in-kind transfers that should be taken into consideration in the design of social
protection programs as well as a possible explanation for why beneficiaries might report a
preference for transfers in-kind. It is important to note that the relative benefits of in-kind vs.
cash will vary geographically and over time, based on differences and changes in underlying
market integration and resulting price volatility. In addition, this potential benefit of in-
 32
   See, for example https://www.poverty-action.org/impact/cash-transfers-changing-debate-
giving-cash-poor, accessed February 12, 2021.


                                               23
kind transfers--mitigation of exposure to price risk--may be difficult to capture in existing
randomized controlled trials, which generally measure (relatively) short run outcomes. We
see this as an important area for future research, and a key advantage of the welfare test we
propose is that it does not require exogenous variation in prices and can therefore be applied
in a variety of settings.
     More broadly, our results speak to the importance of considering household exposure
to price risk in the design of safety net programs. While in-kind transfers are one way to
provide insurance, they are not the only policy instrument that could improve welfare in
the presence of price risk. For example, targeting rules for cash transfers may want to take
into account local geographic price indicators, such as the average level of staple commodity
prices or historical levels of price volatility, or proxies for household ability to smooth price
variation. In addition, improvements in digital technology are rapidly changing the landscape
for decentralized information collection, opening the possibility for (first-best) price-indexed
cash transfers. We hope that our paper serves as a starting point for further work in this
important area.




                                               24
References
Allen, Treb. 2014. "Information frictions in trade." Econometrica, 82(6): 2041­2083.

Atkin, David. 2013. "Trade, tastes, and nutrition in India." American Economic Review,
 103(5): 1629­1663.

Atkin, David, and Dave Donaldson. 2015. "Who's getting globalized? The size and
 implications of intra-national trade costs." National Bureau of Economic Research Working
 Paper w21439.

Balani, Sakshi. 2013. "Functioning of the Public Distribution System: An Analytical Re-
 port." PRS Legislative Research Policy Discussion Paper.

Banerjee, Abhijit, Paul Niehaus, and Tavneet Suri. 2019. "Universal basic income in
 the developing world." Annual Review of Economics.

Banerjee, Abhijit, Rema Hanna, Benjamin Olken, Sudarno Sumarto, and Elan
 Satriawan. 2021. "Food versus food stamps: Evidence from an at-scale experiment in
 Indonesia." MIT Working Paper.

Barrett, Christopher B. 1996. "On price risk and the inverse farm size-productivity
 relationship." Journal of Development Economics, 51(2): 193 ­ 215.

Barrett, Christopher B. 2002. "Food security and food assistance programs." Handbook
 of Agricultural Economics, 2: 2103­2190.

Behrman, Jere R, Anil B Deolalikar, and Barbara L Wolfe. 1988. "Nutrients: im-
 pacts and determinants." World Bank Economic Review, 2(3): 299­320.

Bellemare, Marc F., and Yu Na Lee. 2016. "Attitudes to price risk and uncertainty: The
 earnest search for identification and policy relevance." Canadian Journal of Agricultural
 Economics, 64(4): 599­612.

Bellemare, Marc F, Christopher B Barrett, and David R Just. 2013. "The welfare
 impacts of commodity price volatility: evidence from rural Ethiopia." American Journal
 of Agricultural Economics, 95(4): 877­899.

Besley, Timothy, and Stephen Coate. 1991. "Public provision of private goods and the
 redistribution of income." American Economic Review, 81(4): 979­984.

Blattman, Chris, Michael Faye, Dean Karlan, Paul Niehaus, and Chris Udry.
  2017. "Cash as Capital." Stanford Social Innovation Review.

Brinkman, Henk-Jan, Saskia De Pee, Issa Sanogo, Ludovic Subran, and Mar-
 tin W Bloem. 2010. "High food prices and the global financial crisis have reduced access
 to nutritious food and worsened nutritional status and health." Journal of Nutrition,
 140(1): 153S­161S.



                                           25
Brown, Caitlin, Rossella Calvi, and Jacob Penglase. 2018. "Sharing the Pie: Under-
 nutrition, Intra-household Allocation, and Poverty." SSRN Working Paper 3199129.

Casaburi, Lorenzo, Rachel Glennerster, and Tavneet Suri. 2013. "Rural roads and
 intermediated trade: Regression discontinuity evidence from Sierra Leone." SSRN Working
 Paper 2161643.

Chetty, Raj. 2009. "Sufficient statistics for welfare analysis: A bridge between structural
 and reduced form methods." Annual Review of Economics, 1(1): 451­488.

Chetty, Raj, and Adam Looney. 2006. "Consumption smoothing and the welfare con-
 sequences of social insurance in developing economies." Journal of Public Economics,
 90(12): 2351­2356.

Coate, Stephen. 1989. "Cash versus direct food relief." Journal of Development Economics,
 30(2): 199­224.

Coate, Stephen, Stephen Johnson, and Richard Zeckhauser. 1994. "Pecuniary re-
 distribution through in-kind programs." Journal of Public Economics, 55(1): 19­40.

Cunha, Jesse M, Giacomo De Giorgi, and Seema Jayachandran. 2018. "The price
 effects of cash versus in-kind transfers." Review of Economic Studies, 86(1): 240­281.

Currie, Janet, and Douglas Almond. 2011. "Human capital development before age
 five." In Handbook of Labor Economics. Vol. 4, 1315­1486. Elsevier.

Currie, Janet, and Firouz Gahvari. 2008. "Transfers in cash and in-kind: Theory meets
 the data." Journal of Economic Literature, 46(2): 333­83.

Deaton, A., and A. Tarozzi. 2005. "Prices and Poverty in India." The Great Indian
 Poverty Debate. New Delhi:MacMillan.

de Chaisemartin, Cl´   ement, and Xavier D'Haultfoeuille. 2020. "Two-Way Fixed Ef-
  fects Estimators with Heterogeneous Treatment Effects." American Economic Review.

Dreze, Jean. 2011. "The cash mantra." Indian Express.

Dreze, Jean, and Reetika Khera. 2015. "Understanding leakages in the Public Distri-
 bution System." Economic and Political Weekly, 50(7): 39­42.

D'Souza, Anna, and Sharad Tandon. 2019. "Intrahousehold nutritional inequities in
 rural Bangladesh." Economic Development and Cultural Change, 67(3): 625­657.

Egger, Dennis, Johannes Haushofer, Edward Miguel, Paul Niehaus, and
 Michael W Walker. 2019. "General equilibrium effects of cash transfers: experimental
 evidence from Kenya." National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper w26600.

Fafchamps, Marcel. 1992. "Cash crop production, food price volatility, and rural market
  integration in the third world." American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 74(1): 90­99.


                                            26
FCI. 2018. "Procurement Data for Current Marketing Season." http: // fci. gov. in/
 procurements. php? view= 87 , Accessed: April 19, 2018.

Finkelstein, Amy, Nathaniel Hendren, and Erzo F.P. Luttmer. 2019. "The value of
  medicaid: Interpreting results from the Oregon health insurance experiment." Journal of
  Political Economy, 127(6): 2836­2874.

Gadenne, Lucie. 2020. "Can rationing increase welfare? Theory and an application to
 India's ration shop system." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy.

Gentilini, Ugo. 2016. The Other Side of the Coin: The Comparative Evidence of Cash and
 in-Kind Transfers in Humanitarian Situations. The World Bank.

Ghatak, Maitreesh, and Karthik Muralidharan. 2020. "An inclusive growth dividend:
 Reframing the role of income transfers in India's anti-poverty strategy." India Policy Fo-
 rum.

Gibson, John, and Scott Rozelle. 2005. "Prices and unit values in poverty measurement
 and tax reform analysis." World Bank Economic Review, 19(1): 69­97.

Gollin, Douglas, and Richard Rogerson. 2014. "Productivity, transport costs and sub-
 sistence agriculture." Journal of Development Economics, 107: 38 ­ 48.

Gopalan, CRBV, BV Rama Sastri, SC Balasubramanian, et al. 1980. Nutrition
 value of Indian foods. National Institute of Nutrition, Indian Council of Medical Research.

Government of India Planning Commission. 2005. "Performance evaluation of Tar-
 geted Public Distribution System (TPDS)." The Programme Evaluation Organisation.

Hari, Siddharth. 2016. "Markets, subsidies, and corruption: Evidence from India." New
 York University Working Paper.

Hastings, Justine, and Jesse M Shapiro. 2018. "How are SNAP benefits spent? Evi-
 dence from a retail panel." American Economic Review, 108(12): 3493­3540.

Haushofer, Johannes, and Jeremy Shapiro. 2016. "The short-term impact of uncondi-
 tional cash transfers to the poor: experimental evidence from Kenya." Quarterly Journal
 of Economics, 131(4): 1973­2042.

Hidrobo, Melissa, John Hoddinott, Amber Peterman, Amy Margolies, and
 Vanessa Moreira. 2014. "Cash, food, or vouchers? Evidence from a randomized ex-
 periment in northern Ecuador." Journal of Development Economics, 107: 144­156.

Honorati, M, U Gentilini, and RG Yemtsov. 2015. "The state of social safety nets
 2015." World Bank.

Imbert, Clement, and John Papp. 2015. "Labor market effects of social programs: ev-
  idence from India's employment guarantee." American Economic Journal: Applied Eco-
  nomics, 7(2): 233­63.

                                            27
Jensen, Robert T, and Nolan H Miller. 2008. "The impact of food price increases on
  caloric intake in China." Agricultural Economics, 39: 465­476.

Jim´enez-Hern´andez, Diego, and Enrique Seira. 2021. "Should the government sell you
  goods? Evidence from the milk market in Mexico." Stanford University Working Paper.

Kaul, Tara. 2014. "Household responses to food subsidies: Evidence from India." University
 of Maryland Working Paper.

Khera, Reetika. 2014. "Cash vs. in-kind transfers: Indian data meets theory." Food Policy,
 46: 116­128.

Kochar, Anjini. 2005. "Can targeted food programs improve nutrition? An empirical anal-
 ysis of India's public distribution system." Economic Development and Cultural Change,
 54(1): 203­235.

Kotwal, Ashok, Milind Murugkar, and Bharat Ramaswami. 2011. "PDS forever?"
 Economic and Political Weekly, 72­76.

Lieber, Ethan MJ, and Lee M Lockwood. 2019. "Targeting with in-kind transfers:
  Evidence from Medicaid home care." American Economic Review, 109(4): 1461­85.

Muralidharan, Karthik, Paul Niehaus, and Sandip Sukhtankar. 2017a. "Direct ben-
 efits transfer in food: Results from one year of process monitoring in Union Territories."
 UCSD Working Paper.

Muralidharan, Karthik, Paul Niehaus, and Sandip Sukhtankar. 2017b. "General
 equilibrium effects of (improving) public employment programs: Experimental evidence
 from india." National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper w23838.

Nichols, Albert L, and Richard J Zeckhauser. 1982. "Targeting transfers through
 restrictions on recipients." American Economic Review, 72(2): 372­377.

Niehaus, Paul, Antonia Attanassova, Mariane Bertrand, and Sendhil Mul-
 lainathan. 2013. "Targeting with Agents." American Economic Journal: Economic Pol-
 icy, 5(1): 206­238.

Rao, BSN, and B Sivakumar. 2010. "Nutrient requirements and recommended dietary al-
 lowances for Indians." National Institute of Nutrition, Indian Council of Medical Research
 Report.

Rashid, Shahidur. 2009. Food price stabilization policies in a globalizing world. Cornell
 University Press.

Rosenzweig, Mark R, and Christopher Udry. 2014. "Rainfall forecasts, weather, and
 wages over the agricultural production cycle." American Economic Review, 104(5): 278­
 283.



                                            28
Rosenzweig, Mark R, and Kenneth I Wolpin. 1993. "Credit market constraints, con-
 sumption smoothing, and the accumulation of durable production assets in low-income
 countries: Investments in bullocks in India." Journal of Political Economy, 101(2): 223­
 244.

Rosenzweig, Mark R, and Oded Stark. 1989. "Consumption smoothing, migration, and
 marriage: Evidence from rural India." Journal of Political Economy, 97(4): 905­926.

Roy, Devesh, Ruchira Boss, and Mamata Pradhan. 2020. "How India's food-based
 safety net is responding to the COVID-19 lockdown." International Food Policy Research
 Institute Report.

Saha, Atanu, and Janice Stroud. 1994. "A household model of on-farm storage under
  price risk." American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 76(3): 522­534.

Sotelo, Sebastian. 2020. "Domestic trade frictions and agriculture." Journal of Political
  Economy, 128(7): 2690­2738.

Subramanian, Shankar, and Angus Deaton. 1996. "The demand for food and calories."
  Journal of Political Economy, 104(1): 133­162.

Sukhtankar, Sandip. 2017. "India's national rural employment guarantee scheme: What
  do we really know about the world's largest workfare program?" India Policy Forum.

Tarozzi, Alessandro. 2005. "The Indian Public Distribution System as provider of food
  security: Evidence from child nutrition in Andhra Pradesh." European Economic Review,
  49(5): 1305­1330.

Turnovsky, Stephen J, Haim Shalit, and Andrew Schmitz. 1980. "Consumer's sur-
 plus, price instability, and consumer welfare." Econometrica, 135­152.

Victora, Cesar G, Linda Adair, Caroline Fall, Pedro C Hallal, Reynaldo Mar-
 torell, Linda Richter, Harshpal Singh Sachdev, Maternal, Child Undernutri-
 tion Study Group, et al. 2008. "Maternal and child undernutrition: consequences for
 adult health and human capital." The Lancet, 371(9609): 340­357.

Waugh, Frederick V. 1944. "Does the consumer benefit from price instability?" Quarterly
 Journal of Economics, 58(4): 602­614.

World Bank. 2014. The State of Social Safety Nets 2014. The World Bank.




                                           29
Figure 1: Log calories per capita versus log expenditure per capita




              11.5




                                                                                      1
  Log calories per capita
                    11




                                                                                      Density
                                                                                      .5
  10.5        10




                                                                                      0
                            5              6                     7               8
                                           Log expenditure per capita

                      This figure plots a histogram of household log expenditure per
                      capita (right axis) against a line representing a nonparamet-
                      ric regression of log calories per capita on log expenditure per
                      capita (left axis), using data from the National Sample Survey
                      2003-12. Regression and histogram both condition on district-
                      sector-quarter fixed effects to nonparametrically adjust for prices.
                      Dashed lines represent 95% confidence interval, clustered at the
                      district-sector level.




                                                      30
       Figure 2: PDS generosity and coverage over time
                                          (a) Market and PDS prices




                    14
                                         Market price
                                         PDS price




                    12
                    10
         Price (Rs)
         6       8  4
                    2
                    0




                                  2003      2005          2007             2009            2011
                                                             Year


                                         (b) PDS quantities and reach
                    20




                                                                                                  .4                     .35
                                                                                                  Share consuming PDS grains
                             15
         Quantity (kg/month)




                                                                                                               .3
                 10




                                                                                                    .25
                    5




                                                                  Quantity (kg/month)
                                                                                                  .2



                                                                  Share consuming PDS grains
                    0




                                  2003     2005         2007           2009         2011
                                                           Year


                                              (c) Average PDS value
                    50
         PDS value (Rs/month)
            30      20   40




                                  2003      2005          2007             2009            2011
                                                             Year


This figure shows the evolution of benefit generosity in the PDS using
data from the National Sample Survey 2003-12. Panel A shows market
and PDS mean unit values over time. Panel B shows PDS quantities
for beneficiaries, and the total share of households who consume PDS
goods. Panel C shows unconditional average monthly PDS generosity
(pmkt
  rt - prt
          P DS P DS
              )qidrt . All units are deflated to 1999 rupees, which traded
at 43 to 1 with the US dollar.
                                                           31
Figure 3: Effect of PDS eligibility expansions on PDS transfer value and caloric intake
                                          (a) Effect on PDS transfer value




                    80
                    60
                    40
           Effect
                    20
                    0
                    -20




                          -6   -5    -4    -3     -2    -1      0     1    2    3   4   5   6
                                                Years relative to PDS expansion

                               (b) Effect on meeting minimum calorie requirement
                    .2
                    .1
           Effect
                    0
                    -.1




                          -6   -5    -4    -3     -2    -1      0     1    2    3   4   5   6
                                                Years relative to PDS expansion

             This figure shows event study coefficients from a regression of the out-
             come (PDS value in Panel (a) and an indicator for whether the household
             meets minimum calorie requirements in Panel (b)) on time relative to pol-
             icy expansion: yidt =  =0  1 + Xidt  + d + t + iat , for household i
             in district-sector-season d, year-quarter t at time relative to expansion  ,
             where controls include PDS rice price, log household size, SC/ST, land
             ownership, religion, cooking fuel, and SES index. Household-level SES
             is the predicted value from a regression of log expenditure per capita on
             permanent household characteristics, with district-sector-season, year-
             quarter, and NSS round fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at the
             state level.

                                                          32
           Table 1: Summary statistics: food expenditure and caloric consumption

                       Food share of     Rice share of    Total calories    Per capita
                        expenditure      expenditure       per capita         MCR         Met MCR
                            (1)               (2)              (3)             (4)           (5)
Overall                      0.52             0.09             2,097           1,904          0.61
                            (0.13)           (0.09)            (632)           (231)         (0.49)
Below median SES             0.55             0.10             1,976           1,861          0.56
                            (0.11)           (0.10)            (548)           (226)         (0.50)
Above median SES             0.47             0.06             2,295           1,974          0.69
                            (0.13)           (0.06)            (707)           (222)         (0.46)
Rural                        0.54             0.10             2,097           1,886          0.62
                            (0.12)           (0.10)            (633)           (228)         (0.49)
Urban                        0.45             0.06             2,097           1,952          0.57
                            (0.13)           (0.06)            (632)           (232)         (0.49)
Rural landless               0.54             0.09             2,003           1,877          0.55
                            (0.12)           (0.09)            (636)           (245)         (0.50)
Rural landowning             0.54             0.10             2,135           1,890          0.65
                            (0.11)           (0.10)            (627)           (221)         (0.48)
This table shows summary statistics for household food expenditures and calorie consumption from
NSS survey data 2003-12. Column (1) reports expenditure on all combined food items as a share of
total expenditure. Column (2) reports expenditure on market rice as a share of total expenditure.
Column (3) reports mean household calories per capita, estimated from the quantity and average
caloric content of all food items consumed by the household during the survey recall period. The upper
and lower 0.1% of calories per-capita are trimmed to adjust for implausibly extreme calorie figures.
Column (4) reports the household average minimum calorie requirement (MCR), which is calculated
as the average MCR of all household members based on the household demographic composition
and recommended caloric intake guidelines published by the Indian Council of Medical Research.
Column (5) reports means for an indicator that the per-capita caloric consumption of the household
met or exceeded its average MCR. Household-level SES is the predicted value from a regression of
log expenditure per capita on permanent household characteristics, with district-sector-season, year-
quarter, and NSS round fixed effects. Standard deviations in parentheses.




                                                 33
     Table 2: Summary statistics for market rice prices

                               Mean                   SD

                                (1)     (2)     (3)        (4)   (5)

Overall                         9.86    0.83   0.83    0.61      0.59
Below median SES                9.39    0.79   0.78    0.58      0.56
Above median SES               10.62    0.89   0.88    0.64      0.61
Rural                           9.18    0.76   0.76    0.55      0.54
Urban                          11.66    0.99   0.99    0.69      0.67
Rural landless                  9.33    0.79   0.79    0.56      0.54
Rural landowning                9.12    0.75   0.74    0.54      0.52

District-sector FE                      Yes    Yes         Yes   Yes
Controls                                No     Yes         Yes   Yes
Period FE                               No     No          Yes   Yes
District-sector-season FE               No     No          No    Yes
This table shows mean unit values for rice from NSS survey data
2003-12. Unit values of rice are the means of deflated average
rice expenditure per kilogram across all households from the same
region-sector-quarter. In reporting subgroup prices we use the
same overall region-sector-quarter mean; the differences across
these rows therefore reflect differences in the places and times
where different groups reside. All unit values are measured in
1999 rupees. Controls include log household size, SC/ST, land
ownership, religion, cooking fuel, and socioeconomic status (SES)
index. All households owning 0.01 hectares of land or greater are
classified as landowning. Household-level SES is the predicted
value from a regression of log expenditure per capita on perma-
nent household characteristics, with district-sector-season and pe-
riod fixed effects. Period fixed effects include year-quarter and
NSS round fixed effects.




                                34
           Table 3: Meeting the minimum calorie requirement and market prices


                                              All districts                       RPS districts
                                 (1)         (2)          (3)        (4)          (5)         (6)
Log market price rice         -0.114       -0.079       -0.115     -0.156     -0.286       -0.296
                               [0.041]     [0.044]       [0.041]    [0.042]    [0.076]      [0.080]
District-sector FE               Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes
District-sector-season FE        Yes         Yes          No         Yes         Yes          Yes
Period FE                        Yes         Yes          Yes        No          Yes          Yes
Household controls               Yes         No           Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes
SES controls                     Yes         No           Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes
Observations                   524,911     524,911      524,911    524,911     175,065      175,065
This table displays regressions of an indicator for meeting minimum calorie requirement on log market
prices for rice from NSS survey data 2003-12. Column (6) measures prices using the Rural Price
Survey (RPS); all other columns use mean NSS unit values. Columns (5) and (6) are restricted to
districts in which RPS data are available. Household controls are log household size, SC/ST, land
ownership, religion, and cooking fuel. Household-level SES is the predicted value from a regression
of log expenditure per capita on permanent household characteristics, with district-sector-season and
period fixed effects. Period fixed effects include year-quarter and NSS round fixed effects. Standard
errors in parentheses and clustered at the region-sector level.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.




                                                   35
     Table 4: Meeting the minimum calorie requirement and market prices by subsamples


                                  By median SES           By Census region        Rural by landowning
                                  Below       Above        Rural      Urban      Landless     Landowning
                                   (1)         (2)          (3)        (4)         (5)            (6)
Log market rice price            -0.219       -0.018     -0.182        0.016     -0.284         -0.152
                                  [0.055]     [0.039]     [0.052]     [0.057]     [0.088]        [0.050]
Equality of effect (p-value)                   0.00                    0.01                      0.12
Observations                     211,772     313,139      316,234     208,677     63,614        252,620
This table displays regressions of an indicator for meeting minimum calorie requirement on log rice unit
values from NSS survey data 2003-12. All specifications include district-sector-season and period fixed
effects. Household controls are log household size, SC/ST, land ownership, religion, cooking fuel, and SES
index. Median SES defined using survey weights, so observation counts are different across above and
below median groups. Household-level SES is the predicted value from a regression of log expenditure
per capita on permanent household characteristics, with district-sector-season and period fixed effects.
Period fixed effects include year-quarter and NSS round fixed effects. All households owning 0.01 hectares
of land or greater are classified as landowning. Standard errors in parentheses and clustered at the region-
sector level.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.




                                                    36
                          Table 5: Log calories per-capita and market prices by subsamples


                                       All        By median SES         By Census region       Rural by landowning
                                                  Below      Above       Rural      Urban     Landless    Landowning
                                       (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)           (7)
     Log market rice price           -0.065     -0.120       -0.016    -0.105       0.004      -0.122       -0.111
                                      [0.031]    [0.039]     [0.029]    [0.041]    [0.031]     [0.071]       [0.035]
     Equality of effect (p-value)                            0.00                   0.03                      0.86
     Observations                    524,911     211,772    313,139     316,234    208,677     63,614        252,620
     This table displays regressions of log calories per-capita on log market prices for rice from NSS data 2003-12. All
     specifications include district-sector-season and period fixed effects. Household controls are log household size,
     SC/ST, land ownership, religion, cooking fuel, and SES index. Median SES defined using survey weights, so
     observation counts are different across above and below median groups. Household-level SES is the predicted value
     from a regression of log expenditure per capita on permanent household characteristics, with district-sector-season
     and period fixed effects. Period fixed effects include year-quarter and NSS round fixed effects. All households
37




     owning 0.01 hectares of land or greater are classified as landowning. Standard errors in parentheses and clustered
     at the region-sector level.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.
Table 6: First stage of PDS value (in 100 Rs.) on instruments


                                                         Below
                                             All       median SES
                                             (1)           (2)
PDS price (Rs.)                           -0.097         -0.126
                                           (0.035)        (0.043)
Eligibility increase (=1)                 0.512           0.540
                                          (0.102)         (0.114)
Eligibility increase × PDS price          -0.116          -0.099
                                           (0.038)        (0.049)
Weak IV F-stat                             36.59           32.54
Observations                              524,911         211,772
This table regressions of PDS transfer value on PDS statutory rice
prices, PDS expansion indicator, and their interaction. PDS value
is calculated as the difference between market and PDS rice prices
multiplied by household-level PDS quantities (expressed in units
of 100). Market and PDS prices are average unit values of market
and PDS rice at region-sector-period level. Statutory rice prices are
state-mandated prices per kilogram of PDS rice for households be-
low the poverty line. Expansion indicates if a household is surveyed
in an expansion state after the date of expansion of the PDS re-
ported in Table A3. All prices are deflated to 1999 rupees. All speci-
fications include district-sector-season and period (calendar quarter
and NSS round) fixed effects. Household controls include log market
rice unit value, log household size, SC/ST, land ownership, religion,
cooking fuel, and SES index. Household-level SES is the predicted
value from a regression of log expenditure per capita on permanent
household characteristics, with district-sector-season, year-quarter,
and NSS round fixed effects. Standard errors in parentheses and
clustered at the state level.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.




                                 38
                   Table 7: Effect of PDS generosity on caloric outcomes
                                               Meets MCR               Log calories per capita
                                                         Below                        Below
                                            All        median SES         All       median SES
                                            (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)
                         Panel A: IV of outcomes on PDS value
PDS value (100 Rs.)                      0.107           0.136           0.064           0.063
                                         (0.052)         (0.063)        (0.039)         (0.039)
Weak IV F-stat                            36.59           32.53          36.59           32.53
              Panel B: IV of outcomes on PDS value and market prices
Log market rice price                   -0.243          -0.453         -0.154          -0.251
                                         (0.054)         (0.087)        (0.033)         (0.057)
Market rice price × PDS value            0.178          0.210           0.137          0.141
                                         (0.066)        (0.075)         (0.045)        (0.045)
Predicted rice elasticity,              -0.190          -0.368         -0.113          -0.194
at mean PDS value                        (0.051)         (0.095)        (0.033)         (0.057)
Weak IV F-stat                            26.20          30.24           26.20          30.24
Mean PDS value                            0.296          0.401           0.296          0.401
SD PDS value                              0.604          0.668           0.604          0.668
1st percentile PDS value                    0               0              0              0
99th percentile PDS value                 2.56            2.69           2.56            2.69
Observations                             524,911        211,772         524,911        211,772
This table shows coefficients from regressions of an indicator for meeting the minimum calorie
requirement (MCR, columns 1 and 2) or log calories per capita (columns 3 and 4) on PDS value
(in Panel A) and PDS value, market rice prices and their interaction (Panel B). In Panel A,
PDS value is calculated as the difference between market and PDS rice prices multiplied by
household-level PDS quantities (expressed in units of 100 Rs.), and instrumented for with state-
level statutory PDS prices, a dummy for state-level PDS expansions, and their interaction. In
Panel B, the same three instruments are included, as well as their interactions with market prices.
For comparison, mean per-capita expenditure is 711 Rs. All specifications include district-sector-
season and period (calendar quarter and NSS round) fixed effects. Controls include log market
rice price, log household size, SC/ST, land ownership, religion, cooking fuel, and SES index.
Household-level SES is the predicted value from a regression of log expenditure per capita on
permanent household characteristics, with district-sector-season, year-quarter, and NSS round
fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at the state level in parentheses.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,

    p < 0.01.




                                                  39
                                            Table 8: Effect of PDS generosity on caloric outcomes: robustness
                                                                          All                                                  Below median SES
                                                              Pol. econ. Price inst.        Expansion                        Pol. econ. Price inst.         Expansion
                                            No suppliers       controls     only            inst. only No suppliers           controls     only             inst. only
                                                (1)              (2)         (3)                (4)        (5)                  (6)         (7)                 (8)
                                              Panel A: IV of meeting minimum calorie requirement on PDS value
     PDS Value (100 Rs.)                       0.171            0.109            0.018        0.172           0.225           0.136           0.058           0.198
                                               (0.053)          (0.054)         (0.085)       (0.068)         (0.066)         (0.065)        (0.078)          (0.090)
     Weak IV F-stat                              32.53           34.33            8.93         17.42           69.86           29.86           9.05            16.70
                                     Panel B: IV of meeting the minimum calorie requirement on PDS value and prices
     Log market rice price                     -0.231          -0.252           -0.229       -0.282          -0.422          -0.453         -0.461           -0.475
                                                (0.048)         (0.054)          (0.073)      (0.071)         (0.075)         (0.085)        (0.093)          (0.110)
     Market rice price × PDS value              0.170           0.192           0.257         0.131            0.163          0.203          0.326             0.128
                                               (0.120)          (0.071)         (0.112)       (0.071)         (0.119)         (0.073)        (0.118)          (0.081)
40




     Predicted rice elasticity,                -0.184          -0.195           -0.153       -0.243          -0.360          -0.372         -0.331           -0.424
     at mean PDS value                          (0.058)         (0.052)         (0.062)       (0.066)         (0.108)         (0.092)        (0.094)          (0.118)
     Weak IV F-stat                             22.27           30.58             4.40         8.59            25.96           29.86           4.95            8.26
     Mean PDS value                             0.280           0.296            0.296        0.296            0.380           0.401          0.401           0.401
     SD PDS value                               0.601           0.604            0.604        0.604            0.667           0.668          0.668           0.668
     1st percentile PDS value                     0               0                0             0               0               0              0               0
     99th percentile PDS value                   2.56            2.56            2.56          2.56            2.67            2.69            2.69            2.69
     Observations                              391,176         524,911          524,911      524,911          160,154         211,772        211,772         211,772
     This table shows coefficients from regression of an indicator for meeting the minimum caloric requirement (MCR) on PDS value (in Panel A) and PDS value, market
     rice prices and their interaction (Panel B). In Panel A, PDS value is calculated as the difference between market and PDS rice prices multiplied by household-
     level PDS quantities (expressed in units of 100 Rs.), and instrumented for with state-level statutory PDS prices, a dummy for state-level PDS expansions, and
     their interaction. In Panel B, the same three instruments are included, as well as their interactions with market prices. No suppliers excludes Andhra Pradesh,
     Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Orissa, Punjab, and West Bengal, which together supply the majority of rice to the PDS. Pol. econ. controls includes controls for active
     NREGS program in district at the time of surveying (data from Sukhtankar (2017)) as well as elections at the state-quarter level, Price inst. only instruments for
     PDS value with statutory rice price instruments alone, and Expansion inst. only instruments for PDS value with expansion instruments alone. For comparison,
     mean per-capita expenditure is Rs. 711. All specifications include district-sector-season and period (calendar quarter and NSS round) fixed effects. Controls include
     log market rice unit value, log household size, SC/ST, land ownership, religion, cooking fuel, and SES index. Household-level SES is the predicted value from a
     regression of log expenditure per capita on permanent household characteristics, with district-sector-season, year-quarter, and NSS round fixed effects. Standard
     errors clustered at the state level in parentheses.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.
        Appendix for In-Kind Transfers as Insurance

A1        Comparing the optimal and in-kind transfer
In this section, we show that in-kind transfers will not equal the optimal transfer except
in special cases. As a result, the in-kind transfer will generally not provide the same wel-
fare benefit as the optimal transfer. Intuitively, the in-kind transfer provides insurance in
proportion to the in-kind transfer quantity, rather than the individual's preferences.
    To highlight this intuition, we focus on the simple case where income is fixed and only the
price of the in-kind good varies. Equation 1, restated here, tells us that the optimal transfer
x(pj ) equates the marginal value of income for all prices pj , or all states of the world:

                                          vy (p, y + x(pj )) = µ

    Taking the derivative with respect to pj ,

                                           vyp + vyy x (pj ) = 0

                                                                   vpy       j                  vyy       - 1
   Rearranging and taking advantage of the fact that               vy
                                                                         =   pj
                                                                                [   - j ] and   vy
                                                                                                      =    y
                                                                                                             ,   we
have that
                                            q j [ -  j ]
                                 x ( pj ) =                                                                 (A1)
                                                 
   where qj is consumption of the in-kind good. In contrast, for the in-kind transfer pj z ,
the marginal change in the transfer with respect to pj is z . The in-kind transfer therefore
                                                 q [ -  ]
emulates the optimal transfer if and only if z = j  j . Otherwise, it will provide either too
much or too little insurance.




    1
      These expressions follow from taking the derivative of Roy's identity with respect to pj , and from the
definition of the coefficient of relative risk aversion respectively.


                                                     41
A2      Additional notes on data
A2.1     Sample
Our data come from the Household Consumer Expenditure schedules of the 59th through
68th rounds of the Indian National Sample Survey, covering January 2003 through June 2012.
The expenditure survey was not administered in rounds 65 and 67, so we have a gap from
July 2008­June 2009 and July 2010­June 2011. We exclude Union Territories and Delhi from
our analysis, which gives 28 distinct states. In total, our sample includes 524,911 households.
    We considered including data from earlier rounds of the NSS. However, the 58th and
earlier rounds are based on the 1991 Census, rather than the 2001 Census. This presents
two difficulties. First, the weights change drastically, because of large population changes
between the two years, which presents difficulties in interpretation. Second, many district
definitions change between the 58th and 59th rounds, mostly as a result of district splits.
Creating consistent district identifiers would therefore mean using the larger 58th round dis-
tricts, limiting our geographic precision and reducing the number of unique districts by 17%.
Table A8 provides a full list of the rounds included in our analysis, and periods they cover.


A2.2     Detecting data errors in unit values
Before taking mean unit values to use as price measures, we remove some obvious data errors.
The errors seem to be arising from errors in the unit measures. Most of the obvious outliers
have quantities that are very small, which suggests that they may have been reported in
different units. In some cases, the quantity appears to be 10x or 100x too small. We identify
these using the following two methods;
    We identify outliers for all our items using two methods:

   SD rule: We first trim the top and bottom 1% of UVs by item-round to create U Vtrim .
    We then take the median and SD of U Vtrim by item-round. The idea here is to get a
    close to accurate measure of the SD for every item, since some SDs are more skewed
    than others, depending on how much of an issue outliers are for the item. Once we trim
    the the unit values, the SDs generally become very small, indicating that a few very
    big outliers are causing the SDs to be skewed. We then identify outliers as UVs outside
    15 × SDtrim above/below the median. Using 10 or anything smaller as the threshold
    seems to capture observations that could be valid data. 12 and 15 produce similar
    results, so we use the less restrictive threshold.

   Factor rule: To deal with quantities that seem to have been reported in different units,

                                              42
       we identify observations that are ... .08x-.12x, 8x-12x, 80x-120x ... greater than the
       item-round or area-period median.

    We use this procedure when we calculate the rice prices in our main analysis, and for all
prices when we construct the Laspeyres index in Section A2.3.

A2.3       Real consumption
An alternative to using calories as an outcome would be to instead use real consumption. The
main difficulty with this approach is measuring local prices for all consumption categories.
While the NSS records expenditure in each category, for we can measure prices only for those
categories that record quantities and are relatively homogenous.2 We are able to construct
unit-value prices for 73.7% of food expenditure, but only 16.7% of non-food expenditure
(food and non-food are each about half of the budget). The vast majority of the non-food
consumption for which we observe prices is fuel.
    Using unit values for food and fuel, we construct a region-sector-quarter level Laspeyres
price index. We also measure nominal expenditure, imputing the level of consumption for
PDS goods at the level of the market price in line with our inframarginality assumption and
including consumption from home production as valued by the NSS surveyors. Combining
these, we construct a measure of real consumption.3
    In Tables A9 and A10 we reproduce our main results using log real consumption as the de-
pendent variable. Table A9 shows that real consumption is lower when market rice prices are
high, indicating that higher prices are not fully offset by higher expenditures. Similarly as in
our calorie results, we observe a negative relationship between market rice prices and log real
consumption for below-median SES households, but not for above-median SES households.
Panel A of Table A10 shows the effect of the PDS on real consumption; a Rs. 100 increase
in the value of the PDS increases consumption by 5.5 percent overall, and 6.5 percent for
below-median SES households. Panel B regresses log real consumption on market prices,
PDS value, and their interaction (with PDS value and the price interaction instrumented
as discussed in Section 5). In line with our calorie results, higher prices are associated with
lower consumption but this relationship is attenuated by higher PDS transfers.




   2
     For example, "other tobacco products" measures quantities in grams, but could include different products
in different times and places.
   3
     We considered using only food and fuel nominal expenditure to match the price index, but this would
overstate the extent to which real consumption drops when prices are high as households substitute away
from food and fuel consumption.


                                                     43
A3   Appendix Exhibits

                                       Figure A1: Share purchasing PDS by per-capita expenditure
                   .8
     Share purchasing PDS grains
       .2        .40        .6




                                   5                 6                  7                 8           9
                                                            Log expenditure per capita

                                                         2008 and earlier            2009 and later


           Figure shows share of households consuming PDS rice before and after 2008. The
           histogram shows the distribution of per-capita income, in 1999 rupees. The exchange
           rate was 43 rupees to one USD.




                                                                     44
                              Figure A2: Example PDS policy changes
                            (a) Statutory PDS rice prices in Andhra Pradesh




            6
                                                               Rs.2                 Rs.1
            5
PDS rice price
 3         42
            1




                           2003                2006                   2009             2012
                                                        Year

                           (b) Share of population consuming PDS in Odisha


                                  Share consuming PDS rice




                                                                                           100
            .5




                                  PDS value



                                                                                                               80
Share consuming PDS rice




                                                                                           PDS value (Rs/month)
                  .4




                                                                                             40        60
     .3




                                                                                           20
            .2




                                                                                           0




                           2002        2004       2006         2008          2010   2012
                                                     Year

    Panel A shows monthly average PDS rice prices in Andhra Pradesh,
    measured using NSS unit values. Vertical lines highlight two statutory
    price reductions.Panel B shows the share of households consuming PDS
    rice (left axis) and average PDS value (right axis) in Odisha in each year
    in our sample period, with the vertical line representing a reform that
    reduced prices and expanded the number of PDS-eligible households in
    2008.




                                                      45
Figure A3: Distribution of weights on district-sector-time effects




    2000
    1500
 Density
  1000
    500
    0




           0                 .002                .004                .006
                                       Weight

       This figure shows the histogram of weights on the district-sector-
       period-specific treatment effects in a difference-in-differences es-
       timate of the effect of the PDS eligibility expansions. 13 of 2,756
       treated district-sector-periods have negative weights. Calculated
       using de Chaisemartin and D'Haultfoeuille (2020).




                                      46
Table A1: Summary statistics for number of observations defining rice unit values

                                  Mean (SD)                  Percentile
                                                  1%    5%     10%     25%    50%

                    Panel A: Region-sector-quarter level
       Rice UV, unweighted    112.29       8   16     23                42     78
                             (103.55)
       PDS rice                      38.63         1     1      2         5    16
                                    (56.20)
                   Panel B: District-sector-quarter level
       Rice UV, unweighted    14.93        1    3      4                  6    10
                             (15.81)
       PDS rice                       7.82         1     1      1         2     4
                                     (9.86)
       This table shows summary statistics and the number of observations
       available to define unit values at various percentiles of the region-sector-
       quarter level (Panel A) and district-sector-quarter level (Panel B). Stan-
       dard deviations in parentheses.




                                           47
                 Table A2: Log RPS prices on log NSS unit values

                                All       By median SES             By landowning
                                          Below       Above     Landless     Landowner
                                (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)           (5)
Log NSS rice unit value      0.574       0.556       0.650       0.578        0.572
                              [0.063]     [0.065]     [0.065]     [0.076]      [0.062]
Observations                 175,065     116,070     58,995       36,655       138,410
This table shows regressions of log rice prices from the Rural Price Survey (RPS) on
log rice unit values from the National Sample Survey from 2003-12. All specifications
include district-sector-season and period (calendar quarter and NSS round) fixed effects.
Household-level SES is the predicted value from a regression of log expenditure per
capita on permanent household characteristics, with district-sector-season, year-quarter,
and NSS round fixed effects. All households owning 0.01 hectares of land or greater are
classified as landowning. Standard errors in parentheses and clustered at the region-
sector level.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.




                                           48
                  Table A3: PDS eligibility expansions

State             Policy Change             Type
Tamil Nadu        December 31, 2004         Expansion
Chhattisgarh      April 30, 2007            Expansion
Karnataka         June 1, 2008              Expansion
Odisha            August 1, 2008            Expansion/price reduction
Kerala            April 16, 2011            Expansion
This table shows the major expansions in PDS eligibility used in our analysis,
as noted in Section 5.1.




                                     49
                                 Table A4: First stage of PDS value (in 100 Rs.) on instruments


                                              All         By median SES          By Census region         Rural by landowning
                                                         Below       Above        Rural      Urban       Landless    Landowning
                                              (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)        (5)          (6)           (7)
     PDS price (Rs.)                       -0.097      -0.126       -0.063      -0.105      -0.063      -0.101         -0.107
                                            (0.035)     (0.043)      (0.025)     (0.039)     (0.026)     (0.033)        (0.042)
     Eligibility increase (=1)             0.512        0.540       0.449       0.525       0.500        0.481         0.539
                                           (0.102)      (0.114)     (0.093)     (0.114)     (0.106)      (0.122)       (0.127)
     Eligibility increase × PDS price      -0.116       -0.099      -0.120      -0.108      -0.148       -0.117        -0.102
                                            (0.038)     (0.049)      (0.026)     (0.045)     (0.030)      (0.045)       (0.048)
     Weak IV F-stat                         36.59        32.54        31.15       32.34       26.62       42.22          21.05
     Observations                          524,911      211,772      313,139     316,234     208,677      63,614        252,620
     This table presents coefficients and standard errors from a regression of PDS transfer value on PDS statutory rice prices,
50




     PDS expansion indicator, and their interaction. PDS value is calculated as the difference between market and PDS rice
     prices multiplied by household-level PDS quantities (expressed in units of 100). Market and PDS prices are average unit
     values of market and PDS rice at region-sector-period level. Statutory rice prices are state-mandated prices per kilogram
     of PDS rice for households below the poverty line. Expansion indicates if a household is surveyed in an expansion state
     after the date of expansion of the PDS reported in Table A3. All prices are deflated to 1999 Rs. All specifications include
     district-sector-season and period (calendar quarter and NSS round) fixed effects. Household controls include log market rice
     unit value, log household size, SC/ST, land ownership, religion, cooking fuel, and SES index. Household-level SES is the
     predicted value from a regression of log expenditure per capita on permanent household characteristics, with district-sector-
     season, year-quarter, and NSS round fixed effects. Standard errors in parentheses and clustered at the state level.  p < 0.10,
     
        p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.
                           Table A5: Effect of PDS generosity on meeting minimum calorie requirement
                                                 All        By median SES                 By sector            Rural by landowning
                                                            Below        Above        Rural       Urban       Landless     Landowning
                                                 (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)            (7)
                              Panel A: IV of meeting minimum calorie requirement on PDS value
     PDS value (100 Rs.)                      0.107         0.136        0.079       0.121         0.083      0.178           0.105
                                              (0.052)       (0.063)     (0.049)      (0.054)      (0.055)     (0.060)         (0.048)
     Weak IV F-stat                            36.59         32.53       31.18        32.34        26.62        42.22           21.05
                           Panel B: IV of meeting the minimum calorie requirement on PDS value
     Log market rice price                   -0.243        -0.453       -0.105      -0.344        -0.131      -0.477          -0.277
                                              (0.054)       (0.087)     (0.046)      (0.082)      (0.050)      (0.079)         (0.072)
     Market rice price × PDS value            0.178        0.210        0.274        0.162        0.412         0.110          0.113
                                              (0.066)      (0.075)      (0.104)      (0.073)      (0.165)      (0.086)        (0.093)
51




     Predicted rice elasticity,              -0.190        -0.368        -0.053     -0.293         -0.030     -0.435          -0.244
     at mean PDS value                        (0.051)       (0.095)     (0.038)      (0.076)      (0.053)      (0.085)         (0.061)
     Weak IV F-stat                            26.20        30.24        30.89        49.74        14.76        37.03          29.17
     Mean PDS value                            0.296        0.401        0.191        0.314        0.246        0.376          0.290
     SD PDS value                              0.604        0.668        0.512        0.592        0.632       0.632           0.574
     1st percentile PDS value                    0            0             0            0           0            0              0
     99th percentile PDS value                 2.56          2.69         2.32         2.41         2.73        2.56            2.36
     Observations                             524,911      211,772      313,139      316,234      208,677      63,614         252,620
     This table shows coefficients from regression of a dummy for meeting the minimum caloric requirement (MCR) on PDS value
     (in Panel A) and PDS value, market rice prices and their interaction (Panel B). In Panel A, PDS value is calculated as the
     difference between market and PDS rice prices multiplied by household-level PDS quantities (expressed in units of 100 Rs.), and
     instrumented for with state-level statutory PDS prices, a dummy for state-level PDS expansions, and their interaction. In Panel
     B, the same three instruments are included, as well as their interactions with market prices. For comparison, mean per-capita
     expenditure is 711 Rs. All specifications include district-sector-season and period (calendar quarter and NSS round) fixed effects.
     Household controls include log market rice unit value, log household size, SC/ST, land ownership, religion, cooking fuel, and
     SES index. Household-level SES is the predicted value from a regression of log expenditure per capita on permanent household
     characteristics, with district-sector-season, year-quarter, and NSS round fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at the state level
     in parentheses.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.
Table A6: Caloric intake on market prices and PDS generosity, with wild bootstrap p-values
                                                 Meets MCR               Log calories per capita
                                                          Below                         Below
                                             All        median SES          All       median SES
                                             (1)            (2)             (3)           (4)
                           Panel A: IV of outcomes on PDS value
  PDS value (100 Rs.)                      0.107          0.136            0.064          0.063
                                           (0.052)        (0.063)         (0.039)        (0.039)
  Wild bootstrap p-value                    0.127          0.054           0.205           0.132
                Panel B: IV of outcomes on PDS value and market prices
  Log market rice price                   -0.243         -0.453          -0.154          -0.251
                                           (0.054)        (0.087)         (0.033)         (0.057)
  Market rice price × PDS value            0.178          0.210          0.137           0.141
                                           (0.066)        (0.075)        (0.045)         (0.045)
  p-value, market price                     0.487          0.459          0.483           0.459
  p-value, market price × PDS               0.017          0.001          0.013           0.001
  Observations                             524,911        211,772        524,911         211,772
  This table shows coefficients from regression of outcome in header on PDS value (in Panel A)
  and PDS value, market rice prices and their interaction (Panel B). In Panel A, PDS value is cal-
  culated as the difference between market and PDS rice prices multiplied by household-level PDS
  quantities (expressed in units of 100 Rs.), and instrumented for with state-level statutory PDS
  prices, a dummy for state-level PDS expansions, and their interaction. In Panel B, the same three
  instruments are included, as well as their interactions with market prices. For comparison, mean
  per-capita expenditure is 711 Rs. All specifications include district-sector-season and period (cal-
  endar quarter and NSS round) fixed effects. Household controls include log market rice unit value,
  log household size, SC/ST, land ownership, religion, cooking fuel, and SES index. Household-level
  SES is the predicted value from a regression of log expenditure per capita on permanent household
  characteristics, with district-sector-season, year-quarter, and NSS round fixed effects. Standard
  errors clustered at the state level in parentheses.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.




                                                   52
                               Table A7: Effect of PDS generosity on logged rice prices
                                   All       By median SES          By Census region         Rural by landowning
                                             Below       Above       Rural      Urban       Landless     Landowning
                                   (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)        (5)          (6)            (7)
                                         Panel A: PDS rice price instrument
     PDS value (100 Rs.)         -0.026      -0.010      -0.057      -0.015      -0.065       -0.048         -0.005
                                (0.057)     (0.044)     (0.085)     (0.054)     (0.084)      (0.086)        (0.048)
     Weak IV F-stat               8.11       8.29     7.65     7.76     7.41                  9.84            7.05
                                         Panel B: PDS expansion instrument
     PDS value (100 Rs.)         -0.008      -0.006      -0.012      -0.001      -0.022       -0.038         0.008
                                (0.044)     (0.040)     (0.053)     (0.043)     (0.039)      (0.059)        (0.039)
     Weak IV F-stat       17.72    15.46      12.76    19.92     10.84      13.81                            19.54
53




                  Panel C: PDS rice price, expansion, and interaction instruments
     PDS value (100 Rs.)         -0.006      -0.000      -0.016      0.002       -0.030       -0.018         0.009
                                (0.030)     (0.029)     (0.033)     (0.032)     (0.019)      (0.036)        (0.033)
     Weak IV F-stat              37.69       30.19       31.45       34.21       25.05        66.50          21.78
     Observations               524,911     211,772     313,139     316,234     208,677      63,614         252,620

     Panel A displays results of instrumental variables regression of log rice unit values on PDS value, instrumented by
     PDS rice price. Panel B displays results of instrumental variables regression of log rice unit values on PDS value,
     instrumented by PDS expansion. Panel C displays results of instrumental variables regression of log rice unit
     values on PDS value, instrumented by PDS rice price, PDS expansion, and their interaction. All specifications
     include district-sector-season and period (calendar and NSS round) fixed effects. Household controls include
     log household size, SC/ST, land ownership, religion, cooking fuel, and SES index. Household-level SES is the
     predicted value from a regression of log expenditure per capita on permanent household characteristics, with
     district-sector-season, year-quarter, and NSS round fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at the state level in
     parentheses.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.
                     Table A8: NSS data


 NSS Rounds          Sample size       Time period
 59                  39,544            Jan 2003 ­ Dec 2003
 60                  28,626            Jan 2004 ­ Jun 2004
 61*                 121,158           Jul 2004 ­ Jun 2005
 62                  38,485            Jul 2005 ­ Jun 2006
 63                  61,149            Jul 2006 ­ Jun 2007
 64                  48,720            Jul 2007 ­ Jun 2008
 66*                 98,010            Jul 2009 ­ Jun 2010
 68*                 98,746            Jul 2011 ­ Jun 2012
This table presents details on the National Sample Survey rounds
used in our analysis. Asterisks indicate thick rounds which are
representative at the district level. Thin rounds are only repre-
sentative at the NSS region level.




                               54
                Table A9: Log real consumption and market prices by subsamples


                                   All        By median SES         By Census region        Rural by landowning

                                              Below      Above       Rural      Urban     Landless     Landowning
                                   (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)            (7)

Log market rice price           -0.112      -0.169       -0.068     -0.142      -0.032      -0.055       -0.170
                                 [0.042]     [0.057]     [0.043]     [0.055]    [0.050]     [0.073]       [0.056]

Equality of effect (p-value)                              0.08                  0.14                      0.08
Observations                     519,573     210,138     309,435    313,031    206,542      62,848       250,183
Table displays regressions of log real consumption on log market rice prices. See Section A2.3 for details on the
measurement of real consumption. All specifications include district-sector-season and period (calendar and NSS
round) fixed effects. Household controls are log household size, SC/ST, land ownership, religion, cooking fuel, and
SES index. All households owning 0.01 hectares of land or greater are classified as landowning. Household-level
SES is the predicted value from a regression of log expenditure per capita on permanent household characteristics,
with district-sector-season, year-quarter, and NSS round fixed effects. Standard errors in parentheses and clustered
at the region-sector level.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.




                                                   55
Table A10: Effect of PDS generosity on log real consumption
                                                       Below
                                            All      median SES
                                            (1)          (2)

    Panel A: IV of log real expenditure on PDS value
PDS value (100 Rs.)                      0.055           0.065
                                         (0.032)         (0.033)
Weak IV F-stat                            37.92           32.18
    Panel B: IV of log real expenditure on PDS value
Log market rice price                   -0.202          -0.294
                                         (0.050)         (0.064)
Market rice price × PDS value            0.156          0.127
                                         (0.057)        (0.037)
Predicted rice elasticity,              -0.155          -0.243
at mean PDS value                        (0.042)         (0.060)
Weak IV F-stat                            28.42          30.24
Mean PDS value                            0.300          0.405
SD PDS value                              0.608          0.671
1st percentile PDS value                    0               0
99th percentile PDS value                 2.56            2.69
Observations                             519,573        210,138
This table shows coefficients from regression of log real consump-
tion on PDS value (in Panel A) and PDS value, market rice prices
and their interaction (Panel B). See Section A2.3 for details on the
measurement of real consumption. In Panel A, PDS value is calcu-
lated as the difference between market and PDS rice prices multi-
plied by household-level PDS quantities (expressed in units of 100
Rs.), and instrumented for with state-level statutory PDS prices,
a dummy for state-level PDS expansions, and their interaction.
In Panel B, the same three instruments are included, as well as
their interactions with market prices. For comparison, mean per-
capita expenditure is 708 Rs. All specifications include district-
sector-season and period (calendar quarter and NSS round) fixed
effects. Household controls include log market rice unit value, log
household size, SC/ST, land ownership, religion, cooking fuel, and
SES index. Household-level SES is the predicted value from a re-
gression of log expenditure per capita on permanent household
characteristics, with district-sector-season, year-quarter, and NSS
round fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at the state level in
parentheses.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.


                                56
