                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   GLOBAL PRICING OF CARBON-TRANSITION RISK

                                       Patrick Bolton
                                      Marcin Kacperczyk

                                      Working Paper 28510
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28510


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   February 2021




We thank John Cochrane, Harrison Hong, Christian Leuz, Kunal Sachdeva, Zacharias Sautner,
and seminar participants at Bank of Italy, Danmarks Nationalbank Climate Conference, Florida
State University, HEC Montreal, Imperial College, INSEAD, McGill, NBER LTAM Meetings,
NBIM, Rice University, University of Alberta, University of Cyprus, University of Miami,
University of Geneva Climate Conference, UNPRI, Virtual Seminar on Climate Economics for
helpful suggestions. We are grateful to Trucost for giving us access to their corporate carbon
emissions data, and to Adrian Lam and Jingyu Zhang for their very helpful research assistance.
Some of the ideas in this paper have been reported in the working draft: "Carbon Premium
around the World". This project has received funding from the European Research Council
(ERC) under the ERC Advanced Grant program (grant agreement No. 885552 Investors and
Climate Change). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Patrick Bolton and Marcin Kacperczyk. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Global Pricing of Carbon-Transition Risk
Patrick Bolton and Marcin Kacperczyk
NBER Working Paper No. 28510
February 2021
JEL No. G12,Q51,Q54

                                           ABSTRACT

Companies are exposed to carbon-transition risk as the global economy transitions away from
fossil fuels to renewable energy. We estimate the market-based premium associated with this
transition risk at the firm level in a cross-section of over 14,400 firms in 77 countries. We find a
widespread carbon premium--higher stock returns for companies with higher levels of carbon
emissions (and higher annual changes)--in all sectors over three continents, Asia, Europe, and
North America. Short-term transition risk is greater for firms located in countries with lower
economic development, greater reliance on fossil energy, and less inclusive political systems.
Long-term transition risk is higher in countries with stricter domestic, but not international,
climate policies. However, transition risk cannot be explained by greater exposure to physical (or
headline) risk. Yet, raising investor awareness about climate change amplifies the level of
transition risk.


Patrick Bolton
Columbia Business School
804 Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
pb2208@columbia.edu

Marcin Kacperczyk
Imperial College Business School
Tanaka Building
South Kensington Campus
London SW7 2AZ
United Kingdom
m.kacperczyk@imperial.ac.uk
1 Introduction
Public opinion, governments, business leaders, and institutional investors all over the world are
awakening to the urgency of combatting climate change. 2 This growing concern about climate change
may crystalize into a faster and perhaps more disorderly transition away from fossil fuels to renewable
energy. By now over 100 countries have committed to carbon net neutrality targets, representing
nearly 50% of world GDP. In addition, a number of multilateral agreements and other commitments
to reduce carbon emissions have been made.3 This, in turn, means greater carbon-transition risk for
companies, especially those that rely more on fossil fuel production or consumption. Ultimately, of
course, this transition may also affect the speed with which the physical climate changes.
         In this paper we take a (forward-looking) global financial-market perspective to evaluate the
economic importance investors attach to this transition risk, by looking at stock prices of a large set
of companies with different degrees of exposure to this risk. From an individual firm's perspective,
transition risk reflects the uncertain rate of adjustment towards carbon neutrality. From investors'
perspective, the risk also embodies evolving beliefs about the transition to cleaner energy. Transition
risk is the amalgamation of a wide range of shocks, including changes in climate policy, reputational
impacts, shifts in market preferences and norms, and technological innovation.
         Much of the economics literature on climate risk relies on country-level measures. This
country-level focus unfortunately creates empirical identification challenges, as country-level variation
could be driven by sources other than carbon transition at the country level. In this study, we can to
some extent overcome this challenge by exploiting the rich cross-sectional firm-level variation in
carbon emissions, within each country.              This granularity of firm-specific confounders can be
combined with various fixed effects to capture unobservable variation driving transition risk. To our
knowledge, this is the first study in economics on transition risk with such a large panel data structure.
         The economics literature on climate change following Nordhaus (1991) has framed the issue
as a global public goods problem that requires a global Pigouvian carbon tax to internalize the
externality. The tax should be set equal to the social cost of carbon to achieve efficiency, where the
social cost is given by the discounted, expected, physical harm from a warming climate caused by the
accumulation of carbon particles in the atmosphere. This literature does not address the transition
risk that firms relying on fossil energy face as the economy adjusts to renewable energy. In contrast,
the finance literature on climate change is more directly concerned with the pricing of climate change


2 Some of the most notable actions include the national and pan-national initiatives, such as Conference of the Parties
(COP), Nationally Declared Contributions (NDCs) supported by the United Nations, or the G20 Taskforce for Climate-
related Financial Disclosure (TCFD).
3 Some of the prominent examples include China's commitment of carbon net neutrality by 2060, and Japan's and U.K.'s

commitments by 2050.
                                                          2
risk, in particular transition risk. But this literature is still in its infancy and we currently only have
patchy evidence on the pricing of carbon-transition risk. Accordingly, in this study we attempt a more
systematic, more wide-ranging, analysis than has been done to date on the pricing of transition risk,
focusing on how stock returns reflect investor concerns about carbon transition risk, both short-term
and long-term. Specifically, we explore how corporate carbon emissions together with country
characteristics that reflect the country's likely progress in the energy transition affect stock returns for
over 14,400 listed companies in 77 countries over a period ranging from 2005 to 2018. This is
essentially the universe of all listed companies globally for which it is possible to obtain carbon
emissions data. We exploit a rich country, industry, and firm-level variation to identify some of the
more nuanced elements of transition risk as it relates to technological shifts, social norms, and policies.
           A first contribution of our paper is to shed light on the distribution of corporate carbon
emissions across the 77 countries in our sample. In most studies on global carbon emissions the unit
of analysis is the country and little information is provided about the breakdown of emissions across
companies within each country. According to Fortune magazine, in 2017 the 500 largest companies
in the world generated $30 trillion in revenues4. This represents 37.5% of World GDP, which was
around $80 trillion in 2017 according to the CIA's World Factbook. It is thus natural to view climate
change mitigation not just through the lens of the largest emitting countries, but also through the lens
of the largest emitting companies. As a by-product of our analysis, we provide an overview of how
carbon emissions are distributed across the listed companies around the world.
           Our study is the first comprehensive exploration of carbon transition risk around the world at
the firm level, and we were uncertain as to what we might find. There are, however, a number of
general considerations that led us to expect particular results. First, a plausible null hypothesis is that
we would not find higher stock returns for companies with higher carbon emissions on the grounds
that investor awareness about climate change has not yet become salient in many countries during our
sample period, with the exception perhaps of Europe (and to some extent in the United States, Japan,
and a few other OECD countries).
           Another reasonable hypothesis is that the carbon premium is to be found in the parts of the
world responsible for the highest fraction of carbon emissions, that is, in the largest and most
developed economies. An important reason is that this is where emission reductions are most urgent
and therefore where transition risks are highest. All the more so that the more developed economies
also have greater capabilities to innovate in renewable energy technologies. A further plausible
conjecture is that in countries with large commodity export sectors (Australia, Brazil) there would be


4   https://fortune.com/global500/2018/
                                                     3
more political opposition to the introduction of policies limiting carbon emissions, and therefore that
investors would perceive a lower transition risk in these countries.
        Public opinion clearly matters more in more democratic countries and climate activists may
have greater success in the courts of countries with a stronger rule of law. Yet, greater political "voice"
or stronger rule of law can cut both ways. It can empower green public opinion, but it can also
entrench opposition to climate change mitigation. How the carbon premium should be expected to
vary with countries' political and legal traditions is thus largely an open question.
        A somewhat less plausible but nevertheless important hypothesis is that cross-country
differences may not matter so much in a world of globally integrated stock markets. To the extent that
the same representative investors hold all the public companies around the world, there should be a
uniform treatment by these investors of firm-level carbon risk around the world. By this hypothesis,
differences in carbon premia across countries would then mostly reflect different expected policy risk.
        We are able to explore all of these hypotheses and to partly confirm some or reject others. A
few general striking results emerge from our analysis, but the overall picture is relatively nuanced. A
first striking general finding is that there is actually a positive and significant carbon premium in most
areas of the world. It is present in North America, Europe, and Asia. The only exception is Africa,
Australia, and South America, where we do not find a significant premium. Moreover, this premium
is related to both direct emissions from production, and indirect emissions from firms in the supply
chain. Importantly, firms associated with higher emissions offer higher stock returns after controlling
for characteristics that predict returns, such as size, book-to-market, momentum, the value of
property, plant & equipment (PPE), profitability, and investment over assets.
        Surprisingly, we find a similar carbon premium in China and in the U.S. These two economies
are the largest carbon emitters in the world, but they are very different in many respects: their level of
economic development, the relative size of their manufacturing and energy sectors, the size of their
financial markets and asset management sectors, their political systems, their demographics, and their
public opinions on the environment and climate change. Despite all these differences, we find that the
carbon premium is similar in both economies. A related surprise is that differences in level of
development more generally do not explain the variation in carbon premium across countries.
        A second general finding is that the carbon premium is related to both the level of emissions
and percentage changes in the level of emissions. Our findings bring out the fact that a firm's exposure
to transition risk is proportional to the level of its emissions. This is a very robust finding that
underscores the importance of the level of emissions to apprehend transition risk; it goes against the
near exclusive focus of attention on emission intensity by practitioners and other climate finance
studies. Carbon emissions must be significantly curbed in the next two decades, whether or not
                                                    4
companies are wasteful in their fossil energy consumption. Interestingly, both levels and changes in
emissions affect the carbon premium, which we interpret as reflecting that transition risk involves
both a long-run and short-run component. Given that emissions are highly persistent over time, the
level of emissions picks up the long-run exposure to transition risk, whereas changes reflect a
company's short-run drift away from (or into) greater future emissions. Changes in emissions could
also reflect changes in earnings, but we control for this effect by adding the company's return on
equity and sales growth among our independent variables.
       Subsequently, we delve into cross-country variation to shed light on the sources of the carbon
premium. The main premise of our tests is that in partially segmented markets, the local country
environment can amplify or mitigate the average premium. Since country-level evidence is possibly
subject to omitted variables bias (or correlated confounding economic variables), we exploit firm-level
variation in carbon emissions in conjunction with a variety of firm-level controls and fixed effects to
better identify each economic channel. Our identification approach is similar to the one effectively
used by Rajan and Zingales (1998) in their study of the link between financial development and
economic growth.
       As a starting point, we consider differences in the level of economic development. We find
that the short-term carbon premium is generally higher among firms that are headquartered in
countries with more modest economic development. In particular, it is higher in countries with lower
GDP per capita, countries whose economic output relies more on manufacturing sector, and in
countries with less developed healthcare system. Yet, the same characteristics cannot explain the cross-
country variation in the long-term carbon premium. These results stand in contrast to the common
view that the carbon risk is a problem of developed countries.
       We further identify several other country characteristics that matter significantly. We group
these characteristics into two broad categories, respectively political or social factors, and energy
factors. Regarding political factors, we find that both "voice" and "rule of law" significantly affect
the short-run carbon premium associated with changes in emissions. More democratic countries (with
stronger rule of law) tend to have lower carbon premia, other things equal. Further, we find that long-
term carbon premium is larger in countries with tighter climate policy. The significance of long-term
effects suggests that investors may perceive any policy change as more permanent. Notably, among
two types of policies, domestic and international, we find that only the former is economically
significant whereas the effect of the latter is very small. This result underscores the importance of
political coordination costs associated with climate policies, a problem that the global communities
have witnessed in recent years.


                                                   5
        When we consider the country-level variation in energy mix, we find that the carbon premium
is lower in countries with a higher share of renewable energy, and higher in countries with greater
dependence on the energy sector. The energy mix effect is reflected in the short-term premium, which
suggests that any technological progress is perceived as transitory or otherwise as a factor that is hard
to estimate in the long run. Somewhat surprisingly, we find that a country's energy consumption is
not a significant predictor of the carbon premium.
        Finally, we also find that in the countries that have been exposed to greater damages from
climate disasters (floods, wild-fires, droughts, etc.) there is no significantly different carbon premium.
This result suggests that the carbon premium does not reflect physical climate risks, nor that physical
risk is positively correlated with transition risk, or that (consistent with the findings of Hong, Li, and
Xu, 2019) transition risk may be more salient to investors than rising physical risk.
        Given that climate change has become a major issue for investors only recently we also explore
how the carbon premium has changed in recent years. We do this by comparing the estimated premia
for the two years leading up to the Paris agreement in 2015 and following the agreement. A number
of striking results emerge from this analysis. First, when we pool all countries together, we find that
there was no significant premium before the Paris agreement, but a highly significant and large
premium in the years after the agreement. This general result is consistent with the view that investors
have only recently become aware of the urgency of climate change. Second, the change in carbon
premium is mostly related to long-term risks, which given our previous results suggests that Paris
agreement led investors to update their beliefs about long-term impact of climate policy tightness
rather than the short-term impact of technology or political environment. Finally, when we break
down the change in the carbon premium around the Paris agreement by continent, we find that the
premium has sharply risen in Asia, and less so in North America and Europe. In effect, Asia is entirely
responsible for the rise in the global carbon premium around the Paris agreement.
         A difficult question to answer is how transition risk gets impounded into asset prices. From
an equilibrium perspective, our results imply the existence of a transition stage during which prices of
assets with low emissions are bid up while prices of assets with high emissions are bid down in
response to changing investor beliefs. The different repricing phases are difficult to pin down
empirically since individual asset prices may transition at different times and at different speeds. Still,
we provide some suggestive evidence that such repricing has indeed taken place. In particular, we
show that the rise in the use of renewable technology coincides with the decrease in stock prices of
oil majors. These repricing effects are economically large and underscore the importance of the energy
transition to a new equilibrium.


                                                    6
        Overall, our analysis paints a nuanced picture of the pricing of carbon transition risk around
the world. The pricing is uneven across countries but widespread in North America, Asia, and Europe.
From a short-term perspective, it is related to the energy mix of the country and to politico-socio-
economic characteristics of the country. In turn, climate policy tightness is reflected in long-term
carbon-transition pricing. The carbon premium is also rising, with a significant increase post Paris
agreement, a fact consistent with the rise in investor awareness.


Related Literature: We are obviously not the first to undertake a cross-country analysis. As informative
as such analyses can be, and as suggestive as the results are, it is important to underline the important
limitation that we cannot draw any causal inferences from this analysis. The closest analysis to ours is
by Görgen, Jacob, Nerlinger, Riordan, Rohleder, and Wilkens (2020), who estimate stock return
differences between a group of "brown" and "green" firms around the world. Also, related in terms
of general subject matter are the studies by Dyck, Lins, Roth, and Wagner (2019) and by Gibson,
Glossner, Krueger, Matos, and Steffen (2019), who both explore how environmental, social, and
governance (ESG) motivated investing varies around the world.
        Next to this cross-country literature there is, of course, a growing country-level climate finance
literature, mostly focused on the U.S. In an early theoretical contribution, Heinkel, Kraus, and
Zechner (2001) have shown how divestment from companies with high emissions can give rise to
higher stock returns. Another relevant analysis for transition risk by Shapiro and Walker (2018) finds
that air pollution by U.S. manufacturers has declined significantly as a result of tightening pollution
regulations between 1990 and 2008. An early study by Matsumura, Prakash, and VeraMunoz (2014)
finds that higher emissions are associated with lower firm values. Relatedly, Chava (2014) finds that
firms with higher carbon emissions have a higher cost of capital. More recently, Ilhan, Sautner, and
Vilkov (2020) have found that carbon emission risk is reflected in outof-themoney put option prices.
Hsu, Li, and Tsou (2019) find that highly polluting firms are more exposed to environmental
regulation risk and command higher average returns. Engle, Giglio, Lee, Kelly, and Stroebel (2020)
have constructed an index of climate news through textual analysis of the Wall Street Journal and
other media and show how a dynamic portfolio strategy can be implemented that hedges risk with
respect to climate change news. Monasterolo and De Angelis (2019) explore whether investors
demand higher risk premia for carbon-intensive assets following the COP 21 agreement. Garvey, Iyer,
and Nash (2018) study the effect of changes in direct emissions on stock returns, and Bolton and
Kacperczyk (2020) find that there is a significantly positive effect of carbon emissions on U.S. firms'
stock returns for both direct and indirect carbon emissions.


                                                    7
        Other related studies have explored the asset pricing consequences of greater material risks
linked to climate events and global warming. Bansal, Kiku, and Ochoa (2016) reveal the asset pricing
implications of rising temperatures using an equilibrium framework with an endogenous temperature
process embodied in a standard long-run risk model. Hong, Li, and Xu (2019) have found that the
rising drought risk caused by climate change is not efficiently priced by stock markets. Several studies
have looked at climate change and real estate prices. Baldauf, Garlappi, and Yannelis (2020) find little
evidence of declining prices as a result of greater flood risk due to sea level rise. Bakkensen and Barrage
(2017) find that climate risk beliefs in coastal areas are highly heterogeneous and that rising flood risk
due to climate change is not fully reflected in coastal house prices. Bernstein, Gustafson, and Lewis
(2019) find that coastal homes vulnerable to sea-level rise are priced at a 6.6% discount relative to
similar homes at higher elevations. However, in a related study Murfin and Spiegel (2020) find no
evidence that sea-level-rise risk is reflected in residential real estate prices. Finally, Giglio, Maggiori,
Rao, Stroebel, and Weber (2018) use real estate pricing data to infer long-run discount rates for valuing
investments in climate change abatement.
        The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data and provides
summary statistics. Section 3 discusses the results. Section 4 concludes.


2 Data and Sample
Our primary database matches two data sets by respectively Trucost, which provides annual
information on firm-level carbon and other greenhouse gas emissions, and FactSet, which assembles
data on stock returns and corporate balance sheets. We performed the matching using ISIN as a main
identifier. In some instances, in which ISIN was not available to create a perfect match, we relied on
matching based on company names.5 Finally, when there are multiple subsidiaries of a given company,
we used the primary location as a matching entity. The ultimate matching produced 14,468 unique
companies out of 16,222 companies available in Trucost. They represent 77 countries. Among the
companies we were not able to match, more than two thirds are not exchange listed and the remaining
ones are small and are not available through Factset. The top three countries in terms of missing data
are China, Japan, and the United States. In sum, our sample essentially covers more than 98% of
publicly listed companies in terms of their market capitalization, for which we have emissions data.
We augment this data with country-level variables from the World Bank, Germanwatch, the provider
of the global climate policy index and the climate risk index (CRI), and Morgan Stanley for the MSCI
world index data.

5 After standardizing the company names in FactSet and Trucost, respectively, we choose companies whose names have

a similarity score of one based on the standardized company names.
                                                        8
2.1 Data on Corporate Carbon Emissions
Trucost firm-level carbon emissions data follows the Greenhouse Gas Protocol that sets the standards
for measuring corporate emissions.6 The Greenhouse Gas Protocol distinguishes between three
different sources of emissions: scope 1 emissions, which cover direct emissions over one year from
establishments that are owned or controlled by the company; these include all emissions from fossil
fuel used in production. Scope 2 emissions come from the generation of purchased heat, steam, and
electricity consumed by the company. Scope 3 emissions are caused by the operations and products
of the company but occur from sources not owned or controlled by the company. These include
emissions from the production of purchased materials, product use, waste disposal, and outsourced
activities. The Greenhouse Gas Protocol provides detailed guidance on how to identify a company's
most important sources of scope 3 emissions and how to calculate them. For purchased goods and
services, this basically involves measuring inputs, or "activity data", and applying emission factors to
these purchased inputs that convert activity data into emissions data. Trucost upstream scope 3 data
is constructed using an input-output model that provides the fraction of expenditures from one sector
across all other sectors of the economy. This model is extended to include sector-level emission
factors, so that an upstream scope 3 emission estimates can be determined from each firm's
expenditures across all sectors from which it obtains its inputs (see Trucost, 2019).7
         The Trucost EDX database reports all three scopes of carbon emissions in units of tons of
CO2 emitted in a year. We first provide basic summary statistics on carbon emissions across our 77
countries aggregated up from the firm-level emissions reported by Trucost. Table 1 reports the
country-level distribution of firms in our sample and various measures of emissions broken down into
scope 1, scope 2, and scope 3. We consider the average total yearly emissions in tons of CO2
equivalent per firm in each country (S1TOT, S2TOT, and S3TOT), the (winsorized) yearly percentage
rate of change in emissions (S1CHG, S2CHG, and S3CHG), and the total yearly emissions by country
(TOTS1, TOTS2, and TOTS3).
         The largest country by number of observations is obviously the United States, but remarkably
it only represents around 19.8% of total observations, with Japan a close second with 14% of
observations, and China third with around 8.2% of observations. Importantly for our analysis, Table
1 highlights that the majority of listed firms in our sample is not concentrated in these three large
economies. In aggregate, the entire population of countries in our sample produces a staggering 11.81

6 See https://ghgprotocol.org.
7 Downstream scope 3 emissions, caused by the use of sold products, can also be estimated and are increasingly reported
by companies. Trucost has recently started assembling this data (see Trucost, 2019); however, we do not include this data
in our study.
                                                           9
billion tons of scope 1, 1.62 billion tons of scope 2, and 7.99 billion tons of scope 3 emissions per
year. The three biggest contributors in terms of total carbon emissions produced are China producing
2.91 billion tons of scope 1 emissions per year, followed by the U.S. with 2.33 billion, and Japan
contributing 980 million. The same three countries also dominate scope 2 and scope 3-emissions,
except that the ranking changes with U.S producing 2.1 billion of scope 3 emissions, followed up by
Japan with 1.25 billion, and China with 841 million tons of CO2.
        The global production of emissions does not necessarily reflect the contribution of each firm
to the total, as the relative sizes of countries vary. In fact, the top three countries in terms of scope 1
emissions per firm are Russia, the Netherlands, and Greece, with their respective emission levels of
10.1 million, 5.6 million, and 4.2 million tons of CO2 per year. An average Russian firm also leads the
rankings in terms of scope 3 emissions with 6.1 million tons of CO2, followed by Germany and
France, with respective numbers of 3.4 and 2.9 million tons of CO2. A slightly different picture can
be painted when we compare firm-level emission intensities. The most intense countries in terms of
scope 1 emissions include Estonia, Morocco, and Peru. Among the largest countries, Russia, India,
and China score relatively high, while France, Japan, and the United Kingdom score relatively low.
        Another striking observation is that carbon emissions are growing in most countries
throughout our sample period. The country with the highest growth rate in scope 1 emissions is
Mauritius, with an average yearly growth rate of 45%. The second largest is Bulgaria with a 35% growth
rate, and the third, fourth, and fifth largest are, respectively, Iceland, Kenya, and Lithuania. All these
five countries have witnessed rapid GDP growth over our ample period. Among the largest
economies, the ones with the highest growth rate in emissions are China with nearly 18%, the Russian
Federation with 16%, the United States with 7.9%, and Germany with 7.1% growth rates. Among the
countries with the lowest growth rates in scope 1 emissions are, remarkably, Saudi Arabia, with a
negative 10.5% growth rate (this may reflect the fact that a lot of companies have gone public over
our sample period, lowering the average per-company scope 1 emissions), Luxembourg with a
negative 33% growth rate, and Jordan with a minus 7.5% growth rate. When it comes to the growth
rate in scope 3 emissions, some of these rankings are reversed, reflecting the fact that some countries
increasingly rely on imports whose production generates high emissions. Thus, Saudi Arabia has a
4.3% growth rate in scope 3 emissions.
        In Figures 1 and 2, we further represent the detailed cross-country variation in total emissions
over two equal-length time periods, which classify countries into four categories by their performance
in these metrics. The left panel of each figure represents scope 1 emissions, the middle panel scope 2
emissions, and the right panel scope 3 emissions. As can be seen in Figure 1, the countries with the
highest total average yearly emissions are first, the countries with the highest GDP, second the
                                                    10
countries with the largest populations, and third the largest commodity exporting countries. Important
exceptions are Sweden, which has the lowest emissions among developed countries, Iceland, and the
Czech Republic. Importantly for our analysis, there is considerable cross-country variation in total
emissions. To the extent that the carbon premium reflects concerns about the level of emissions, we
expect to see considerable variation in the premium across countries.
        We further show how the performance of countries has changed from the first half period of
our sample, from 2005 to 2011, to the second half period, from 2012 to 2018. The most noteworthy
changes are the deterioration in total emission performance of Latin America, the Russian Federation,
Turkey, and Australia.
        Interestingly, however, there is little correlation between a country's levels of total emissions
and average per-firm emissions, as can be seen in Figure 2, which represents the cross-country
variation in average per-firm emissions. Among the worst performers in the world in per-firm
emissions are the United States, Saudi Arabia, Argentina, Colombia, China, the Russian Federation,
India, Japan and the European Union (excluding the U.K.).
        In Table 2, Panel A we report summary statistics on per-firm carbon emissions in units of tons
of CO2 emitted in a year, normalized using the natural log scale. Thus, the log of total scope 1
emissions of the average firm in our sample (LOGS1TOT) is 10.32, with a standard deviation of 2.95.
Note that the median number is the largest for scope 3 emissions (LOGS3TOT), indicating that most
companies in our sample are significantly exposed to indirect emissions. To mitigate the impact of
outliers we have winsorized all growth and intensity measures at the 2.5% level. In Panel B, we report
the correlations between the total emissions variable and the emission percentage change variable for
the three different categories of emissions. Interestingly, the correlation coefficients are quite low,
indicating that the emission change variable reflects a different type of variation in the data.
        Finally, Panel C provides summary statistics on stock returns and several control variables we
use in our subsequent tests. The dependent variable, RETi,t , in our cross-sectional return regressions
is the monthly return of an individual stock i in month t. The average return in our sample is 1.08%
with a standard deviation of 10.23%. We use the following control variables in our cross-sectional
regressions: LOGSIZEi,t , which is given by the natural logarithm of firm i's market capitalization (price
times shares outstanding) at the end of year t; B/Mi,t , which is firm i's book value divided by its market
cap at the end of year t; LEVERAGE, which is the ratio of debt to book value of assets; momentum,
MOMi,t , which is given by the average of the most recent 12 months' returns on stock i, leading up to
and including month t-1; capital expenditures INVEST/A , which we measure as the firm's capital
expenditures divided by the book value of its assets; a measure of the firm's specialization, HHI ,
which is the Herfindahl concentration index of the firm with respect to its different business segments,
                                                    11
based on each segment's revenues; the firm's stock of physical capital, LOGPPE, which is given by
the natural logarithm, of the firm's property, plant, and equipment; the firm's earnings performance
ROEi,t , which is given by the ratio of firm i's net yearly income divided by the value of its equity; the
firm's idiosyncratic risk, VOLATi,t, which is the standard deviation of returns based on the past 12
monthly returns; and, MSCIi,t, which is an indicator variable equal to one if a stock i is part of the
MSCI World index in year t, and zero otherwise. To mitigate the impact of outliers we winsorize B/M,
LEVERAGE, INVEST/A, and ROE at the 2.5% level, and MOM and VOLAT at the 0.5% level.
        The average firm's monthly stock return equals 1.08%, with a standard deviation of 10.23%.
The average firm has a market capitalization of $66 billion, significantly larger than the size of the
median firm in our sample, which is $15 billion. The average book-to-market ratio is 0.57, and average
book leverage is 23%. The average return on equity equals 11.1%, slightly more than the median of
10.87%.
        Table 3 provides summary statistics by year for the total number of firms in our sample in any
given year and for total emissions, the level and percentage change in emission intensity, for all three
SCOPE categories. Note in particular the large increase in coverage after 2015, when the number of
firms jumps from 5427 in 2015 to 11961 in 2016. This is due to the fact that Trucost has been able to
expand the set of firms worldwide for which it was able to collect data on carbon emissions.
        We also report the distribution of firms by industry in Table A.1, using the six-digit Global
Industry Classification (GIC 6). Our global database should reflect a greater proportion of firms in
manufacturing and agriculture than is the case in developed economies. This is indeed what is reflected
in Table 4, with 580 companies in the machinery industry, 530 in the chemicals industry, 520 in the
electronic equipment, instruments and components industry, 506 in metals and mining, and 440 food
products companies. In the services sector the largest represented industries are banking with 679
banks and real estate, with 619 companies (some of which are also engaged in construction and
development).
        Finally, we report summary statistics on the main determinants of carbon emissions in Table
4. We regress in turn the log of total firm-level emissions, the percentage change in total emissions,
and the levels of emission intensity on the following firm-level characteristics: LOGSIZE, B/M, ROE,
LEVERAGE, INVEST/A, HHI, LOGPPE, and MSCI. To allow for systematic differences in
correlations across countries and over time, we include year/month fixed effects and country fixed
effects. In this regard, our identification comes from within-country variation in a given year. In
columns (4)-(6), we further include industry fixed effects to account for possible differences across
industries. Finally, in columns (7)-(9), we include firm fixed effects. In Panel A, we show considerable
variation across industries in the effect of these variables on emissions (for example, the R-square
                                                   12
increases from 0.696 to 0.779 when we add industry fixed effects to the regression for LOGS1TOT).
Accordingly, we focus on the regressions with industry fixed effects and note that total emissions
significantly increase with the size of the firm (in particular if it is a constituent of the MSCI World
index), its book to market ratio, its leverage, and its tangible capital stock (PPE). This is altogether not
surprising, to the extent that emissions are generated by economic activity, which is proportional to
the size of the firm. Somewhat surprising is the strong effect of leverage. One possible explanation is
that firms with higher emissions may anticipate future drop in profitability due to transition risk and
as a result take more leverage. Interestingly, investment has a strong negative effect on emissions,
suggesting that new capital vintages are more carbon efficient. Industry specialization (a high HHI)
also has a negative effect on emissions, perhaps because non-specialized conglomerates tend to be
larger. Alternatively, conglomeration can reflect a firm's response to potential costs of high emissions
in a particular sector.
         Finally, we also note a strong explanatory power of firm attributes as the coefficient increases
to 0.960 when we add firm fixed effects. Nonetheless, the coefficients of the firm-level characteristics
do not change markedly in this specification relative to the one with industry fixed effects.


3 Results
We organize our discussion into two subsections. The first one reports results on the overall pricing
of transition risk and the second reports results related to specific components of the risk.


3.1 Pricing Carbon-Transition Risk throughout the World
The transition to a carbon net neutral world generates risk for shareholders through both cash-flow
and discount rate risk. Firms with high emissions may incur greater costs from emission abatement,
renewable energy production, policy compliance, and possible litigation. When these costs materialize
firms may respond by increasing leverage, which increases default risk, or in extreme cases may have
to cease operating. But, transition risk also involves uncertainty with respect to the dynamics of
changes in investors' beliefs about climate change risk. Both types of shocks increase equity risk.8
Firms with high emissions are also exposed to reputational risk, social backlash, and stakeholder
activism, shareholder pressure to divest, and generally headline risk. Using the logic of Merton (1987),
these factors could increase the discount rates of high carbon emission firms. In this section we
present results in support of such transition risk effects. In our unconditional tests we do not aim to
separate the cash flow from the discount rate effects. In the following section, where we provide

8 But the energy transition may also open up new opportunities, giving firms access to higher profit streams. In this case

one could observe a reduction in risk premia (e.g., Kogan and Papanikolaou, 2014).
                                                           13
additional evidence regarding the specific transmission mechanism driving stock returns, we attempt
to separate out individual sources of transition risk.


3.1.1 Empirical Specification
Our analysis of carbon-transition risk centers on two different cross-sectional regression models
relating individual companies' stock returns to carbon emissions. Rather than a factor-based model
we take a firm characteristic-based approach along the lines of Daniel and Titman (1997). This
approach is particularly well suited given the rich cross-sectional variation in firm characteristics in
our sample.9 As shown in Bolton and Kacperczyk (2020), these characteristics are particularly relevant
when using carbon emissions as the main sorting variable. This approach also allows us to take full
advantage of fixed effects along time, country, industry, and firm dimensions. Further, we can better
account for potential dependence of residuals by using a clustering methodology. Finally, the
advantage of taking a characteristics-based approach is that we do not need to take a stance on the
underlying asset pricing model. One basic conceptual difficulty with the choice of asset pricing model
in the context of a complex pricing problem such as climate change risk, is that such a model has not
yet been formulated. However, since we do not take a risk-factor approach, we cannot explore the
presence of a "carbon alpha" or of any mispricing of carbon-transition risk. Our aim is more limited:
to provide a comprehensive picture of the cross-sectional variation in stock-level returns throughout
the world.
         We begin by linking companies' total emissions in a given year to their corresponding monthly
stock returns in the cross-section. This regression reflects the long-run, structural, firm-level impact
of emissions on stock returns. Taking absolute carbon neutrality as a benchmark, one can think of
this measure as a rough proxy for the quantity of risk a firm is exposed to at a given point in time.
Specifically, we estimate the following model:

"#$!,# = &$ + &% ($)$#*+,,+-.,)!,# + && 0-.12-3,!,#'% + µ# + e!,#                                                     (1)

where !"#!,# measures the stock return of company i in month t and TOT Emissions is a generic term
standing for respectively LOGS1TOT, LOGS2TOT, and LOGS3TOT. The vector of firm-level
controls     includes     the    firm-specific     variables     LOGSIZE,         B/M,      LEVERAGE,             MOM,
INVEST/ASSETS, HHI, LOGPPE, ROE, and VOLAT.



9 The risk factor-based approach has been a popular method to measure risk premia in a single-country, but in a fully

global study, such as this one, this approach is problematic because of the difficulties in specifying appropriate factor-
mimicking portfolios for a large number of countries with limited data, and because of cross-country comparability issues.
                                                           14
         Second, we relate companies' percentage changes in annual total emissions to their monthly stock
returns by estimating the following cross-sectional regression model:

"#$!,# = &$ + &% D($-1&3#*+,,+-.,)!,# + && 0-.12-3,!,#'% + µ# + e!,#                                    (2)


         The percentage change in total emissions (S1CHG, S2CHG, and S3CHG) captures the short
run impact of emissions on stock returns. In particular, changes in total emissions reflect the extent
to which companies load up on, or decrease, their material risk with respect to carbon emissions. From
a transition perspective, this measure captures the position of a firm on a long-term path towards
carbon neutrality. In this respect, it is complementary to the long-term objective captured by the level
of emissions.
         We estimate these two cross-sectional regressions using pooled OLS. In both models we also
include country fixed effects, as well as year/month fixed effects. Hence, our identification is cross-
sectional in nature. In some tests, we additionally include industry fixed effects to capture within-
industry variation across firms. Finally, we include firm fixed effects which allows us to exploit within-
firm variations and thus absorb any time-invariant, firm-level, characteristics correlated with emissions
and stock returns. In all the model specifications, we cluster standard errors at the firm and year levels,
which allows us to account for any serial correlation in the residuals as well as capture the fact that
some control variables, including emissions, are measured at an annual frequency. Our coefficient of
interest is &% .


3.1.2 Evidence from the United States and China
We begin our analysis by comparing the results for our regression models in the two economies with
the largest emissions, China and the U.S. We report the results in Table 5. These two economies
differ in fundamental ways and one would expect the carbon premium to reflect fundamental
differences in the level of economic and financial development, and in the legal and political regimes.
Yet, we find that the results for scope 1 emissions are surprisingly similar, which suggests that firm-
level variation in emissions may be more relevant for transition risk than are the differences between
the two countries. Specifically, once one controls for industry and time period, as well as a battery of
firm characteristics, firm-level differences in LOGS1TOT generate a highly significant carbon
premium of similar size both in China (.067) and in the U.S. (.083), or equivalently 2.39% and 2.85%
per one-standard-deviation change in total emission levels in each country. Using a slightly shorter
time period (2005-2017), Bolton and Kacperczyk (2020) find that the premium for U.S. companies is
slightly lower (.060). Here we find a higher premium estimated over the time interval 2005-2018. This

                                                    15
higher premium is in line with the findings Bolton and Kacperczyk (2020) that the carbon premium
is rising over time, especially after the Paris agreement of 2015.
        The finding of a firm-level carbon premium for listed Chinese companies is novel and
surprising. Although China in many ways has been a pioneer in the promotion of renewable energy,
it does not stand out for its ESG institutional investor constituency, nor for its institutional investors'
focus on carbon emissions. Yet, financial markets in China do price in a carbon premium at the firm
level, at least when it comes to direct emissions (as reported in Panel A, the carbon premium associated
with scope 2 and 3 emissions is only significant at the 10% level in China, while it is significant at the
1% level in the U.S). The similarities in the results across the two economies are even more striking
for the carbon premium associated with percentage changes in emissions, as can be seen in Panel B.
For both countries, the premium is highly significant and of similar size, except for changes in scope
2 emissions, for which the premium is nearly double in China.


3.1.3 Unconditional Results
We next turn to the estimation of the model for the full sample of 77 countries. Relative to our
previous specification, we also include country-fixed effects to account for country-specific variation
in the data. We report the results in Table 6. In columns (1)-(3), we use our baseline regression; in
column (4)-(6), we include industry fixed effects, and in columns (7)-(9) we include firm fixed effects.
In Panel A, we report the results for the level of carbon emissions. Throughout all specifications, we
find a positive and statistically significant effect of total emissions on individual stock returns,
consistent with the hypothesis that higher-emission firms are riskier. Interestingly, when we do not
control for industry there is no significant carbon premium at the firm level for total scope 1 emissions.
One possibility is that some firms (or industries) with high emissions experience unexpectedly low
returns. The example of that could be a recent devaluation in the energy sector. For that reason, it
seems natural to exploit within-industry variation in the data. Indeed, when we add an industry fixed
effect, the premium is large and highly significant. A one-standard-deviation increase in LOGS1TOT
is associated with a return premium of 2.34% per year. These results indicate that variations in stock
returns across industries swamp variations in firm-level emissions within a given industry. Put
differently, while we find a global carbon premium at the firm level once we control for country and
industry, this premium explains only a small fraction of stock returns as reflected in the small
differences in R-squares between the regressions without and with industry fixed effects.
        Note that the coefficient of LOGS3TOT is highly significant in the regressions without and
with industry fixed effects. It is also economically significant, as a one-standard-deviation increase in
LOGS3TOT is associated with a return premium of 3.08% for the specification without industry fixed
                                                    16
effects, and 4.54% with the fixed effects. This is to be expected given that total scope 3 emissions are
determined using an input-output matrix.
         The results become even more significant and robustly estimated when we include firm fixed
effects. The coefficients of both scope1 and scope3 emissions more than double compared to the
specification that includes industry fixed effects.10 These results suggest that most of the variation in
the data comes from within-firm rather than between-firm variation in emissions.
         The results with respect to percentage changes in carbon emissions are all highly significant
and are not affected at all by the inclusion of industry fixed effects or firm fixed effects, as can be seen
in Panel B. Per one-standard-deviation change in scope 1 and scope 3, the corresponding return
premia amount to 2.5% and 4.1% per year, similar in magnitude to the effects we observed for the
levels of emissions. Of course, statistically speaking, taking differences in emissions is very close to
including firm fixed effects in the model with levels of emissions.
         The overarching conclusion from this part of our analysis is that firm-level global stock returns
reflect firm-level variation in both total emissions and percentage changes in total emissions, which indicates
that investors price carbon-transition risk both from a short-term and long-term perspective.


3.1.4 Geographic Distribution
Another informative representation of the transition risk is its distribution across different geographic
regions. The economics literature on climate change has emphasized the importance of the spatial
distribution of climate policies (e.g., Nordhaus and Yang, 1996) and physical impacts (Cruz and Rossi-
Hansberg, 2020). Different regions have different exposures to climate change as well as different
capacities to adapt. With respect to transition risk, one might expect that a country's economic
development, social norms, or headline risk may be equally important. At the same time, in the context
of financial markets, greater global market integration may offset some of the country-level
heterogeneities. We evaluate the geographic distribution of transition risk pricing by separately
looking at four different regions: North America, Europe, Asia, and Southern Hemisphere countries
(defined as "Others").
         We report the results in Table 7, Panel A for total emissions, and Panel B for percentage
changes. For brevity, we focus on scope 1 and scope 3 emissions. The effects of total emissions on
stock returns for North America are very similar to those obtained when we pool all countries
together. In contrast, in the EU the level of scope 1 emissions has a somewhat weaker effect on stock
returns, even when we add industry fixed effects. This is surprising given that the EU has arguably

10 A model with emission levels and firm fixed effects implicitly captures both long-term as well short-term effects of

transition risk. Hence, the economic magnitude can be roughly understood as a total of the two effects in the data.
                                                          17
put in place some of the strictest regulations limiting carbon emissions. One possible explanation
might be that as a result of the EU's "single-market" regulations there is a much smaller variation in
emissions across firms, once we control for other firm characteristics. As it turns out, this single-
market effect for the EU is consistent with the other results obtained for Europe as a whole, where
the carbon premium is much more in line with the premium obtained when we pool all countries
together. The results for Asia are quite similar to those in North America for scope 1 emissions, but
they are visibly larger for scope 3 emissions, especially when we factor in industry fixed effects. When
it comes to percentage changes in emissions, the magnitudes of the effects for Europe are visibly
smaller than those in North America and Asia. The regions of the world that stand out are Africa,
Australia, and South America, where the coefficient of S1CHG is insignificant when we add industry
fixed effects. This result is quite interesting as these countries are least aligned with the principle of
carbon neutrality.
        An important robustness question is which matters more, where the company is
headquartered (which is the determinant of classification in our data) or where emissions are
generated? This distinction may be particularly relevant for firms with global operations, which are
subject to different social pressures, policies, or headline risk. While the granularity of our data does
not allow us to attribute total firm emissions to individual plants, we can evaluate whether the impact
of firm emissions differs in a sample of multinational companies vs. those operated in a single country.
Empirically, we define an indicator variable, FORDUM, equal to one for firms that have at least some
sales generated abroad and zero for firms whose sales are entirely from a single country. Next, we
estimate the models in equations (1) and (2) with an additional interaction term between measures of
emissions and FORDUM.
        We present the results in Table A.2. Across all empirical specifications, we find only weak
evidence that firms with multinational operations exhibit different sensitivities of their stock returns
with respect to total firm emissions. For the specifications with the level of emissions, the interaction
terms are small and statistically insignificant and for the specifications with the percentage changes,
the interaction term is significant at the 10% level for scope 3 emissions. Overall, it does not seem
that the geographic source of firm-level emissions is a primary driver of the carbon premium in our
data.
        In sum, the similarities in firm-level carbon premia between the U.S. and China
notwithstanding, our continent-level results reveal that there is substantial variation in the carbon
premium throughout the world. Consequently, we turn next to an investigation of which country and
industry characteristics are likely to affect transition risk.


                                                      18
3.1.5 Economic Development
The level of a country's economic development is an important consideration when it comes to climate
policy. Typically, richer countries are expected to, and have for the most part, made stronger
commitments to combat climate change. Rich countries have a greater responsibility to combat
climate change as they are the source of the largest cumulative emissions over the past two centuries
by far. Another reason to expect a lower carbon premium in developing countries is simply that
currently these countries have low levels of emissions. In addition, these countries' economies are
not as deeply founded on fossil fuel energy consumption and may therefore be able to transition more
easily to a renewable energy development path. On the other hand, if these countries depend a lot on
fossil fuels their willingness to adjust in the short run may be smaller.
        In this section, we explore the empirical relevance of these arguments. A remarkable general
finding, as we show in Table A.3, is that the carbon premium does not seem to be related to countries'
overall level of development. We first broadly categorize developed countries to be the G20 countries
and the remaining group of countries to be developing countries.11 When we add industry fixed
effects, we observe from Table A.3 (Panel A) that the G20 group of countries have highly significant
carbon premia related to the level of emissions for all three scope categories. But this is also the case
for the most part for the group of developing countries (scope 2 emissions are only significant at the
10% level for this group of countries). Moreover, the size of the coefficients is similar. As for the
short-run effects of carbon emissions on stock returns, we observe that they are again highly
significant for both the G20 countries (controlling for industry) and the group of developing countries.
Also, the size of the coefficients is again broadly similar.
        Admittedly, the above classification of countries into two groups, developing and developed
is rather coarse, and there is substantial heterogeneity in country characteristics within each group.
Accordingly, we also investigate the effect of interacting GDP per capita, and other development
variables such as the share of the manufacturing sector in GDP and health expenditure per capita,
with the level and changes in emissions. As we show in Panel A of Table 8, the interaction of per
capita GDP and the level of emissions is insignificant. The same is true for the interaction of the
share of manufacturing and the level of emissions, and for the interaction of per capita health
expenditures and the level of emissions. Overall, these results indicate that differences in development
do not appear to explain much of the variation in long-run carbon premia across countries. On the
other hand, when we interact the same variables with the percentage change in emission, as a measure
of short-term risk, a slightly different picture emerges. Now, firms located in countries with higher

11 The results are qualitatively very similar, reported in Panel B, if we define developed countries based on OECD

membership.
                                                       19
GDP per capita and a more developed health system have statistically smaller stock returns. Further,
firms located in countries with a higher dependence on the manufacturing sector in their output
creation have higher stock returns.


3.2 Carbon-Transition Risk Drivers
We explore a number of channels through which carbon-transition risk could manifest itself.
Specifically, we study the role of heterogeneity across technological, socio-economic, regulatory policy,
and reputation dimensions. The main empirical challenge of identifying each of the channels
empirically is that to a large extent we can only measure the transition risk drivers at the country level.
Hence, in a regression that relates stock returns to country-level characteristics, our estimates could
potentially be biased due to omitted country-level variables. To mitigate this concern we add the firm-
level variation in carbon emissions, and estimate the role of the different mechanisms by interacting
the country variables with firm-level emissions. This estimation approach follows closely the
identification strategy of Rajan and Zignales (1998), which also interacts country-level financial
development variables with industry-level financial constraints.                 In our tests, we are also able to
sharpen our empirical identification by absorbing additional firm-level, industry-level, and country-
level variation through a mix of observable characteristics and fixed effects.


3.2.1 Technological Mix
An important source of carbon-transition risk is technological change in energy production and
carbon capture. As they transition to carbon neutrality, firms may find themselves at different points
in their energy mix, carbon intensity, and outside demand for energy. The more distant the firms are
from their target technology profile in a new green equilibrium, the more they are exposed to potential
aggregate technology shocks. The resulting risk may come from unexpectedly high costs of green
energy production as well as uncertainty about such costs.12
         In this section, we explore the importance of these factors for stock prices. First, we
investigate whether firms located in countries with a higher share of renewable energy have lower
carbon premia. Second, we explore whether the size of the fossil fuel production sector affects the
carbon premium. We hypothesize that firms located in countries in which the share of the energy
sector is large would have a larger carbon premium. Finally, consumption of energy per capita may
indicate how far the transition to a low-emission economy has progressed. It may also indicate the


12 A separate issue that we do not explore formally in the paper is the uncertainty about the depreciation of any stranded

assets and their impact on firm value. Atanasova and Schwartz (2020) analyze the empirical importance of this issue in the
oil& gas industry.
                                                           20
expected demand for fossil-dependent energy going forward. We expect that firms in countries with
high energy consumption are exposed to higher transition risk.
        The results of this analysis are reported in Table 9. Our results present a few interesting
patterns. First, we find that the green and brown energy variables do not matter much for how stock
returns react to emission levels. Across all specifications, the coefficients of the interaction terms are
small and statistically insignificant. The exception is the interaction term between scope 3 emissions
and the reliance on renewable energy. This effect, however, is only marginally significant. Second, the
hypothesis that a more renewable-energy based economy is associated with lower carbon premia is
broadly borne out in the data when it comes to the short-run impact of changes in emissions. Firms
located in countries with a larger fraction of renewable energy production have lower carbon premia
with respect to changes in emissions, as indicated by the negative highly significant coefficients for
the interaction terms. Similarly, we find that the coefficients of the interaction terms between the
share of the energy sector and changes in emissions are highly significant and positive, indicating that
investors perceive the risk with respect to carbon emissions to be greater in countries with large fossil
fuel energy sectors. Finally, we find that energy use is not significantly related to stock returns
irrespective of the risk measure we focus on. One reason may be that the energy source being
consumed may be green. Also, the place of consumed energy need not be the same as the country in
which it is sourced. In sum, the distinction between short-term and long-term reactions to
technological mix suggests that such environment is transitory in nature, at least when assessed from
the capital markets perspective.
        Overall, we find strong evidence that a country's energy production mix is an important
predictor of how investors price short-term changes in emissions. The direction of the results is
broadly consistent with our hypothesis that uncertainty about technological change increases
transition risk.


3.2.2 Socio-political Environment
Changing social norms and investor preferences have played a major role in the rise of the responsible
investment movement. We may find a higher return premium in countries with stronger social norms,
other things equal. We explore this channel by looking at whether a country's "rule of law" and
"voice" affects its carbon premium. Another indirect measure of social and political stability we look
at is the country's income inequality as measured by the Gini coefficient. As before, we interact each
of the variables with the level and percentage changes of emissions. We report the results in Table 10.
        We do not find a significant effect of these variables on the premium associated with the level
of emissions and conclude from these results that social factors do not appear to affect the long run
                                                   21
risk associated with carbon emissions. All coefficients of the interaction terms in Panel A are small
and statistically insignificant. In contrast, we find that social factors do matter for investors' carbon
risk perceptions in the short run. As reported in Panel B, the coefficients of the interaction terms
between respectively "rule of law" and changes in emissions, and between "voice" and changes in
emissions, are both highly significant and negative, indicating that the carbon premium is lower in
countries with better rule of law and more democratic political institutions. Similarly, the coefficient
of the interaction term between the Gini coefficient and changes in emissions is significant and
positive, meaning that in countries with higher inequality the carbon premium is likely to be larger.
Overall, the results on social inclusion point to a transitory role such factor plays in pricing of carbon-
transition risk.


3.2.3 Climate Policy Tightness
Transition risk is often associated with expected regulatory changes dictating the adjustment to a green
economy.      Investor expectations of future climate-related policies can be an important risk
component. Firms located in countries in which the government has made the most ambitious pledges
to reduce carbon emissions may therefore be associated with a higher carbon premium. This is
particularly true when local regulations are reinforced by pan-governmental policy actions, such as the
UN-led COP initiative.
        Climate change mitigation policies may originate from two sources: domestic regulators or
international pan-governmental agreements. In this section, we evaluate the importance of each of
the channels separately using unique data on country-specific regulatory tightness. Our policy data
come from Germanwatch. To our knowledge, ours is the first large-sample study that evaluates the
direct importance of both types of policies for global stock returns. Each year, Germanwatch collects
information on all climate-related policies and converts this information into a numerical score, where
a higher number means a stricter regulatory regime. We define two variables that we interact with
firm-level carbon emissions. INTPOLICY is a normalized measure of international policy tightness;
DOMPOLICY is a normalized measure of domestic policy tightness. We interact each of the two
variables with the level and percentage changes in firm emissions.
        We report the results in Table 11. We find two interesting results. First, in Panel A, we show
that climate policy is generally more important for the sensitivity of carbon emission levels on stock
returns. The effect is positive and economically significant for both scope 1 and scope 3 emissions,
and statistically significant for scope 3 emissions. On the other hand, both types of climate policy
tightness are broadly unrelated to the short-term effect of emissions on stock returns, as shown in
Panel B. These results support the view that carbon policies are seen by investors as permanent shocks
                                                    22
to carbon risk. To the extent that such policies may be costly to firms and investors, the investor
perspective is that they are largely irreversible. Second, and perhaps more unexpectedly, we find that
between the two types of climate policies, domestic ones have a bigger effect on the carbon premium.
This result sheds light on analysts concerns about the commitments made by countries in Paris could
be empty promises, perhaps because the coordination costs are either too high or the objective
functions across countries are too diverse. It is only when these commitments are likely to lead to
domestic policy implementation that investors start paying attention.


3.2.4 Reputation Risk
An important component of transition risk is reputation risk. A few fossil-fuel intensive industries
that we define as `salient' are known to attract negative media coverage, which can further amplify
transition risk. Is it the case that the carbon premium is mostly concentrated in the oil & gas, utilities,
and motor sectors that are the focus of much headline risk? The underlying economic reason behind
such cross-sector variation could be differences in possible negative reputation effects in "brown"
versus "green" sectors. Given that the media focus is largely on the salient brown industries, one
would expect that investors in companies in these sectors price-in an additional risk compensation for
their exposure to the negative stigma of holding these stocks.
        To explore this hypothesis, we estimate the same regression specification for our 77 countries
as in Table 6, excluding the salient industries mentioned above. We report the results in Table 12.
Remarkably, when we exclude these industries, we find that the premium, if anything, is larger and
statistically more significant for the level of emissions. It also remains highly significant for the
premium associated with the changes in emissions. This could mean that transition risk has mostly
been "baked in" in these salient sectors, but not yet in the other sectors that face less analyst scrutiny.
These findings are also consistent with the results in Table 6 that variations in stock returns across
industries swamp within-industry effects of carbon emissions on stock returns.


3.2.5 Physical Risk
Much of the economics literature on climate risk has sought to estimate the expected damages due to
climate change. The materialization of such damages through climate disaster events introduces what
is called a physical risk. A natural hypothesis is that transition risk is positively correlated with physical
risk. As countries are exposed to more severe weather events caused by climate change one would
expect that there will be greater support for policies combatting climate change in these countries. In
other words, the extent to which a country has been exposed to climate disasters may shape investors'
beliefs about the cost of long-term damage due to climate change. To test this hypothesis, we use a
                                                     23
country-level, year-by-year index measuring physical risk (CRI) from Germanwatch. This index is based
on the frequency of climate-related damages. Countries with higher values of the CRI index are
considered as having higher physical risk. We estimate the coefficients of the interaction terms
between CRI and firm-level emission measures, both their levels and percentage changes. The results
are reported in Table 13. Columns (1)-(4) show the results based on total emissions, and columns (5)-
(8) the results based on percentage changes. Consistent with the hypothesis that physical risk amplifies
the risk premium associated with transition risk we find positive values for the interaction terms with
emission changes. However, all of these coefficients are statistically insignificant. Also, contrary to
our prediction, the coefficients of the interactions with emission levels are negative (again, however,
these coefficients are statistically and economically small). Overall, we conclude that transition risk
does not appear to be linked to different exposures to physical risk.


3.2.6 Changes in Investor Awareness
Our analysis so far has explored the carbon premium, pooling all observations from 2005 to 2018
together. Arguably, however, awareness about risks tied to carbon emissions has been increasing in
recent years. By pooling the effect on stock returns for later years with the earlier years, our cross-
sectional results may not adequately capture the true impact of carbon emissions on stock returns now
that the world is mobilizing to combat climate change. We therefore also explore how the carbon
premium reacts to salient events that reshape public reaction to climate changes. In particular, one
such defining event is the landmark Paris climate agreement at the COP 21 in December 2015. This
event has enhanced the salience of the climate debate worldwide and underscored the importance of
possible transition risk going forward. It is therefore to be expected that the event has likely changed
investors' perception of risk along multiple dimensions, including future energy costs, social
preferences, or policy changes. Our empirical analysis around this event captures the aggregate effect,
encompassing all of the above possibilities, of investors' response to this event.
        Specifically, we regress stock returns on carbon emissions by pooling the observations
together for respectively the two years (2014-2015) preceding and the two years (2016-2017) following
the Paris agreement. We report the results in a series of tables, starting with Table 14, which provides
the estimates for the levels and changes in emissions for our aggregate sample of 77 countries. Panel
A presents the results for the pre-Paris period, both for the levels and changes in emissions, while
Panel B presents corresponding results for the post-Paris period. Notably, there is no significant
premium associated with the level of emissions right before Paris (even with industry fixed effects),
whereas there is a highly significant and large positive premium after Paris. In turn, the results for
changes in emissions are significant in both periods and show no visible difference. One way to
                                                  24
interpret these contrasting results is that as a result of COP 21, investors significantly updated their
beliefs about long-term transition risk. Consistent with our previous findings, the result may also
suggest that Paris agreement has been particularly relevant for the market update about forthcoming
climate-related policies. In fact, this narrative has been pretty popular among practitioners and policy
makers.
          In which parts of the world did the Paris agreement have the biggest effect? To explore this
question, we estimate the same model as in Table 14 for each continent. We report the results for
measures related to the level of carbon emissions in Table 15 (Panel A contains the results for the pre-
Paris period and Panel B for the post-Paris period). Remarkably, there is no apparent change for
North America. Both before and after the Paris agreement there is no significant carbon premium
associated with the level of emissions. In Europe, both before and after Paris there is a significant
carbon premium (except that the premium for scope 1 emissions becomes insignificant after Paris).
Hence, there does not seem to be a significant change in the value of the premium around the Paris
event for Europe. The biggest change is in Asia, where the carbon premium was insignificant before
Paris, but became highly significant after Paris. This is true, whether we exclude China or not. Finally,
in the other continents (Africa, Australia, and South America) there is also no apparent change before
and after Paris.
          Another relevant breakdown is between the group of G20 countries and the group of other
countries. The results are reported in Table A.4. Again, the difference in the carbon premium before
and after Paris is dramatic for the group of G20 countries. Before the agreement there was no
significant carbon premium, but after the agreement there is a highly significant positive premium,
whether we include industry fixed effects or not. In contrast, the changes in the other group of
countries are much smaller. While there is a shift towards a significant premium, it is mostly for scope
3 emissions.
          We also undertake this analysis after excluding the salient industries associated with fossil fuels.
Recall that our cross-sectional analysis when we pool all years together established that the carbon
premium is present even beyond these industries. The results reported in Table A.5 reveal similar
robustness in carbon premium around the Paris shock. Indeed, there is a highly significant and
positive premium associated with the level of emissions in other industries as well post Paris.
          All in all, these results paint a rather striking picture of the pricing of transition risk across
countries. On average across all 77 countries there is a significant carbon premium with respect to
the level of emissions, reflecting firms' long-run exposure to transition risk. There is also a perceived
transition risk with respect to changes in emissions, which capture the risk associated with the short-
run drift away or into higher future emissions. The carbon premium, however, is far from uniformly
                                                      25
distributed across these countries, across sectors, and over time. Interestingly, the long-term carbon
premium does not appear to be tied to a country's level of development, a country's reliance on
renewable energy, or its socio-political openness. These factors matter more when investors evaluate
the short-term adjustment towards a long-term green economy.
        In turn, the expectation of significant policy risk seems to matter more for the long-term
assessment of transition risk and not so much its short-term path. The expectation of a significant
long-term change seems to be reflected in salient events, such as the Paris agreement. The striking and
surprising finding here is that awareness about carbon risk, as reflected in the carbon premium, has
changed the most in Asia, where investor awareness has jumped after the Paris agreements, whereas
it has remained basically unchanged in Europe and North America, either because these regions
already had greater awareness of climate change (Europe) or had less awareness and did not revise
their beliefs (North America).

3.3 Transitioning to a Green Equilibrium
Our results are broadly consistent with the existence of a return premium compensating investors for
the carbon-transition risk they face. But at what point did investors begin to demand compensation
for this risk? Basic logic suggests that the period when carbon transition risk is compensated should
be preceded by a period during which assets are repriced to reflect the new risk. This repricing can in
principle be a protracted process that parallels the economic shift from a brown to a green equilibrium.
Moreover, the repricing is driven by changes in investor awareness about climate change risk. During
this transition phase, one would expect to see increased demand (and therefore higher prices) for
assets with low levels of emissions, and decreased demand (and lower prices) for assets with high
levels of emissions. Although this adjustment mechanism is straightforward, testing for such asset
price adjustments is challenging, especially in the context of heterogenous global financial markets, in
which individual assets may transition at different times and at different speeds.
        In the absence of a clear large-scale empirical setting, we fall back on suggestive evidence from
one individual sector, the tobacco industry, where such a repricing process accompanied the
rebranding of tobacco companies as "sin stocks". As Hong and Kacperczyk (2009) show, the
reclassification of the tobacco industry as a sin asset class meant that tobacco companies were added
to the divestment lists of many investors. This divestment movement resulted in higher expected
returns (Merton, 1987). Prior to 1950s the negative health effects of tobacco consumption were not
known; in fact, many considered tobacco a cure. This perception changed following the reports of the
General Surgeon, which resulted in a massive change in beliefs about the industry. Consequently, the
1950-1970 period saw a massive revaluation of the industry, with tobacco companies being valued at

                                                   26
much lower multiples. Following this repricing, however, tobacco companies over the subsequent
four decades delivered very large returns.
        We believe that a similar process is underway in the energy industry, with green energy
companies being valued at much higher multiples and some "brown" companies already being valued
with lower multiples. We can infer some of these repricing effects from some of our tests. As
highlighted in Table 12, when we exclude salient industries from our sample the effect of scope 1
emission levels on stock returns increases relative to the unconditional value in Table 6, which means
that the salient industries, on average, underperformed other sectors (with lower emissions) over our
sample period. Interestingly however, this difference only appears in regressions without industry
fixed effects, which suggests that the repricing has been a broad categorical repricing of the whole
industry rather than individual firms in these industries. Of course, this repricing need not be a once-
and-for-all revaluation as it appears to have been for the tobacco industry. In fact, it seems to us that
investors' attitudes to carbon emissions are much more dynamic, and thus it is quite possible that one
could witness multiple waves of repricing followed by periods with high returns. This is in fact what
we think our data captures. Because the carbon transition process is ongoing this can only be a
speculative inference, which we expect a future out-of-sample test of the carbon transition will
confirm.

4 Conclusion
If global warming is to be checked, the global economy will have to wean itself off fossil fuels and
reduce carbon emissions to zero by 2050 or 2060. This translates into a year-to-year rate in emissions
reductions equal to the drop we have witnessed in 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Whether the global economy will be able to stick to such a rate of transition away from fossil fuels,
whether the reduction in emissions will be smooth or highly non-linear and abrupt is impossible to
say. But was is certain is that in the coming years and decades investors will be exposed to substantial
transition risk. Given that stock markets are fundamentally forward-looking it is natural to ask whether
and to what extent this transition risk is by now reflected in stock returns.
        We have taken the broadest possible look at this question by analyzing the pricing of carbon-
transition risk at the firm level in a cross-section of over 14,400 listed companies in 77 countries. To
date very little is known about how carbon emissions affect stock returns around the world. Our
wide-ranging exploratory study provides a first insight into this question. We have found evidence of
a widespread, significant, rising, carbon premium--higher stock returns for companies with higher
carbon emissions. This premium is not just present in a few countries (U.S., EU) or in a few sectors
tied to fossil fuels. It is ubiquitous, affecting firms in all sectors over three continents, Asia, Europe,

                                                    27
and North America. Moreover, stock returns are related not just to firms' direct emissions but also
to their indirect emissions through the supply chain. Finally, we have found that this carbon premium
has been rising after the landmark Paris accord of 2015, in line with the growing awareness about the
urgency of combatting climate change and the rise of the sustainable investment movement.
        At a broad level, our study is relevant for the discussions centered on carbon tax as a means
to achieve reduction in emissions. While the idea of carbon tax is ex ante appealing clearly it does not
come without costs. A clear impediment to successful global carbon taxation are coordination costs
resulting from the bargaining process involving political parties with diverse interests and economic
capacities. Our study offers an alternative to pass on the problem to financial markets. In fact, the
increasing cost of equity for companies with higher emissions can be regarded as an alternative system
of decentralized taxation. While this solution is not free of all problems it is clearly mitigating to a
great extent the political risk of global taxation.




                                                      28
                                                          References

Andersson, Mats, Bolton, Patrick, and Samama, Frederic (2016) "Hedging climate risk", Financial Analysts Journal 72(3), 13-
32.

Atanasova, Christina V., and Schwartz, Eduardo (2020) "Stranded fossil fuel reserves and firm value", NBER Working
Paper 26497.

Bakkensen, L., Barrage, L. (2018) "Flood risk belief heterogeneity and coastal home price dynamics: Going under water?",
NBER Working Paper No. 23854.

Baldauf, Markus, Garlappi, Lorenzo, Yannelis, Constantine (2020) "Does climate change affect real estate prices? Only if
you believe in it", Review of Financial Studies 33, 1256-1295.

Bansal, Ravi, Kiku, Dana, and Ochoa, Marcelo (2016) "Climate change and growth risks", NBER Working Paper 23009.

Bernstein, Asaf, Gustafson, M., Lewis, Ryan, (2019) "Disaster on the horizon: The price effect of sea level rise", Journal of
Financial Economics 134(2), 253-272.

Bolton, Patrick and Kacperczyk, Marcin T. (2020) "Do investors care about carbon risk?", Journal of Financial Economics,
forthcoming.

Chava, Sudheer (2014) "Environmental externalities and cost of capital", Management Science 60(9), 2223-2247.

Cruz, Jose-Louis and Rossi-Hansberg, Esteban (2020) "The economic geography of global warming", Working paper,
Princeton University.

Daniel, Kent and Titman, Sheridan (1997) "Evidence on the characteristics of cross-sectional variation in returns", Journal
of Finance 52, 1-33.

Dyck, Alexander, Lins, Karl, Roth, Lukas, and Wagner, Hannes (2019) "Do institutional investors drive corporate social
responsibility? International evidence", Journal of Financial Economics 131, 693­714.

Engle, Robert, Giglio, Stefano, Lee, Heebum, Kelly, Bryan, and Stroebel, Johannes (2020) "Hedging climate change news",
Review of Financial Studies 33, 1184-1216.

Garvey, Gerald T., Iyer, Mohanaraman, and Nash, Joanna (2018) "Carbon footprint and productivity: does the "E" in
ESG capture efficiency as well as environment?", Journal of Investment Management 16(1), 59-69.

Gibson, Rajna, Glossner, Simon, Krueger, Philipp, Matos, Pedro, and Steffen, Tom (2019) "Responsible institutional
investing around the world", SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3525530

Giglio, Stefano, Maggiori, Matteo, Rao, Krishna, Stroebel, Johannes, and Weber, Andreas (2018) "Climate change and
long-run discount rates: Evidence from real estate", Chicago Booth Research Paper No. 17-22.

Görgen, Maximilian, Jacob, Andrea, Nerlinger, Martin, Riordan, Ryan, Rohleder, Martin, and Wilkens, Marco (2020)
"Carbon risk", Working Paper University of Augsburg.

Heinkel, Robert, Kraus, Alan, and Zechner, Josef (2001) "The effect of green investment on corporate behavior", Journal
of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 36, 431-450.



                                                                 29
Hong, Harrison, and Kacperczyk, Marcin T. (2009) "The price of sin: The effects of social norms on markets", Journal of
Financial Economics 93(1), 15-36.

Hong, Harrison, Li, Frank W., Xu, Jiaming (2019) "Climate risks and market efficiency", Journal of Econometrics 208(1), 265-
281.

Hsu, Po-Hsuan, Li, Kai, and Tsou, Chi-Yang (2019) "The pollution premium", Unpublished working paper. HKUST.

Ilhan, Emirhan, Sautner, Zacharias, and Vilkov, Grigory (2020) "Carbon tail risk", Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.

Khan, Mozaffar, Serafeim, George, and Yoon, Aaron (2016) "Corporate sustainability: First evidence on materiality", The
Accounting Review 91(6), 1697-1724.

Kogan, Leonid, and Papanikolaou, Dimitris (2014) "Growth opportunities, technology shocks, and asset prices", The
Journal of Finance 69, 675­718.

Krueger, Philip, Sautner, Zacharias, and Starks, Laura (2020) "The importance of climate risks for institutional investors",
Review of Financial Studies 33, 1067-1111.

Matsumura, Ella Mae, Rachna, Prakash, and Vera-Muñoz, Sandra C. (2014) "Firm-value effects of carbon emissions and
carbon disclosures", The Accounting Review 89(2), 695-724.

Monasterolo, Irene, and De Angelis, Luca (2019) "Blind to carbon risk? An analysis of stock market's reaction to the Paris
Agreement", Working Paper University of Bologna.

Nordhaus, William D. (1991) "To slow or not to slow: the economics of the greenhouse effect", The Economic Journal 101, 920-
937.

Nordhaus, William D. and Yang Zili (1996) "A regional dynamic general-equilibrium model of alternative climate-change
strategies" American Economic Review 86, 741-765.

Pastor, Lubos, and Veronesi, Pietro (2013) "Political uncertainty and risk premia", Journal of Financial Economics 110, 520­545.

Rajan, Raghuram G., and Zingales, Luigi (1998) "Financial dependence and growth", American Economic Review 88, 559-
586.
Ramadorai, Tarun, and Zeni, Federica (2019) "Climate regulation and emissions abatement: Theory and evidence from
firms' disclosures", Working Paper Imperial College.

Shapiro, Joseph S. and Walker, Reed (2018) "Why is pollution from U.S. manufacturing declining? The roles of
environmental regulation, productivity, and trade", American Economic Review 108(12), 3814-3854.




                                                                 30
                                               2005-2011




                                               2012-2018




Figure 1: Total Annual Carbon Emissions by Country

                                               2005-2011




                                               2012-2018




Figure 2: Average Annual Total Carbon Emissions per Firm




                                                     31
                                                                        Table 1: Carbon Emissions by Country: 2005-2018
S1TOT (S2TOT ; S3TOT) measures the firm-level average (by country) of scope 1(scope 2; scope 3) carbon emissions measured in tons of CO2e. S1CHG (S2CHG; S3CHG) measures the percentage growth rate in carbon
emissions of scope 1 (scope 2; scope 3) (winsorized at 2.5%). TOTS1 (TOTS2; TOTS3) is a sum of S1TOT (S2TOT; S3TOT) within a country in a given year (averaged across all years).

              CODE      COUNTRY                Freq.     Perc.      # co.     S1TOT       S2TOT       S3TOT        S1CHG       S2CHG       S3CHG          TOTS1         TOTS2          TOTS3
              AE        UAE                   1,748       0.2        34        382822      45424      133220       10.93%       16.32%     11.05%        13000000       1106904        3338979
              AR        ARGENTINA              550       0.06         6       1977235     259067      1032782      11.18%       38.18%     10.24%         9816885       1137898        4831946
              AT        AUSTRIA               3,741      0.42        42       1543117     175280      1478427      10.00%       16.37%       7.56%       34500000       4073719       33900000
              AU        AUSTRALIA            37,405      4.21        471       580313     225151      390624       14.38%       20.19%     11.88%        141000000     51700000       91500000
              BD        BANGLADESH             254       0.03         5        112458      23661      145789       16.66%       25.97%     14.83%         490572        106452         624504
              BE        BELGIUM               3,883      0.44        52       1611505     398625      1586838        5.88%      11.12%       6.28%       35200000       9368517       39000000
              BG        BULGARIA               123       0.01         3        49815       11011       44659       34.85%        6.04%     14.60%         1010125        85163         303958
              BH        BAHRAIN                198       0.02         3         1986        5858       28640         7.04%       8.84%       9.21%         5696          16924          83299
              BR        BRAZIL               10,249      1.15        126      1846871     200604      2147921      11.05%       16.74%       9.09%       119000000     12700000       145000000
              BW        BOTSWANA                68       0.01         2         3986       16534       38093       12.15%       21.45%     21.82%          6650          28041          64964
              CA        CANADA               25,479      2.87        399      1179827     194523      794471       13.80%       18.99%     11.30%        226000000     35700000       147000000
              CH        SWITZERLAND          12,638      1.42        172      1751558     219020      1848782        5.40%       9.95%       5.63%       142000000     18500000       144000000
              CI        CÔTE D'IVOIRE          154       0.02         2        10867       13642      102418         5.46%       6.50%       6.45%         18779         25697         181503
              CL        CHILE                 3,991      0.45        37       2520658     150335      526513         9.99%      17.85%       9.09%       61800000       3816032       13500000
              CN        CHINA                73,490      8.28       1660      4009318     258028      1121424      17.16%       24.86%     16.47%       2910000000     232000000      841000000
              CO        COLOMBIA              1,141      0.13        13       2638497     153165      1602004      16.65%       23.03%     13.89%        24900000       1460375       14600000
              CZ        CZECH REP.             446       0.05         5        80966       84133      106096         3.29%       8.69%      -2.05%        298304        276486         311847
              DE        GERMANY              19,023      2.14        253      4126920     584281      3403940        7.12%      13.69%       7.24%       458000000     70800000       397000000
              DK        DENMARK               4,310      0.49        48       1830641      81427      715844         6.29%       8.37%       5.98%       48000000       2101215       19200000
              EE        ESTONIA                116       0.01         2       1324801      23427       72707       10.45%       18.91%       5.49%        2649601        46855         145415
              EG        EGYPT                 2,855      0.32        30       1300763      71534      347754         4.98%      10.42%       5.58%       22200000       1285661        6255982
              ES        SPAIN                 7,140       0.8        84       3733641     254727      2095625        9.14%      15.39%       6.55%       153000000     11100000       89400000
              FI        FINLAND               4,049      0.46        42       1401658     320239      1548562        2.96%      10.18%       3.74%       34300000       7964368       37800000
              FR        FRANCE               20,256      2.28        248      3537015     457697      2902571        7.12%      11.09%       6.26%       411000000     57400000       355000000
              GB        UK                   68,153      7.68        660      1037499     263688      1350755        7.47%       8.86%       6.25%       436000000     110000000      560000000
              GH        GHANA                  235       0.03         2         3583        3103       68338         0.63%       3.23%       2.96%         6882          5945          133928
              GR        GREECE                1,929      0.22        23       4208318     155010      938891       13.98%       18.93%       7.11%       47800000       2284545       11200000
              HK        HONG KONG            28,827      3.25        830      1963473     177584      524083       14.95%       28.14%     14.69%        383000000     45200000       119000000
              HR        CROATIA                128       0.01         2        839807     101136      745120        -6.99%      -1.29%     12.21%         1503091       194606         1321002
              HU        HUNGARY                474       0.05         3       2033690     348850      2292191        8.91%      22.72%       0.16%        6100691       1046018        6871986
              ID        INDONESIA             8,865        1         130       982778      88318      416476       12.58%       14.81%     10.12%        62100000       5377655       28000000
              IE        IRELAND               1,749       0.2        20       1013523      88576      854927         5.99%       9.48%       5.64%       12700000       1108046       10300000
              IL        ISRAEL                5,688      0.64        92        207414      49185      289135       12.32%       15.74%       9.46%        9144490       1943727       10900000
              IN        INDIA                33,514      3.78        518      3452714     141930      1006817      13.04%       19.06%     12.24%        831000000     34700000       248000000
              IS        ICELAND                 81       0.01         3         1257        1412       26849       32.91%       28.11%     28.32%          3156          3806           67937
              IT        ITALY                 6,656      0.75        107      4129000     307340      2549945        6.26%      11.40%       5.64%       169000000     14300000       118000000
              JM        JAMAICA                 68       0.01         2         335         1422       11711         1.05%      16.31%     12.74%           671          2843           23423
              JO        JORDAN                 196       0.02         4         1325        6190       30871        -7.52%       0.47%       6.09%         4338          17295         102857
              JP        JAPAN                124,903     14.07      2258      1312299     231427      1511355        4.90%      10.72%       5.22%       980000000     204000000     1250000000
              KE        KENYA                  524       0.06         8        103831       8819       75464       24.97%       27.08%     14.38%         799872         58883         458581
              KW        KOREA                51,738      5.83        843      1243235     166251      1001098      10.34%       14.19%       9.15%       397000000     60700000       344000000
              KZ        KAZAKHSTAN              45       0.01         1         1153        1005       21863       19.74%       18.64%     13.32%          1153          1005           21863
              LB        LEBANON                 85       0.01         2         3788       11484       34112       10.68%       13.73%     19.42%          5696          17485          54787
              LK        SRI LANKA              452       0.05         4        11715       29408       42644       10.17%       23.04%       6.94%         28522         89216         136662
              LT        LITHUANIA               58       0.01         1         1590        4595       18366       23.73%       20.36%     21.61%          1590          4595           18366
              LU        LUXEMBOURG              54       0.01         3         1035        1368       8149        -33.03%     -36.01%     -24.82%         2263          2823           17197


                                                                                                     32
MA      MOROCCO         1,352    0.15     13     1690454     67664    307399      6.16%   8.18%     5.86%    15400000       582425       2563349
MU      MAURITIUS        114     0.01      3       925        1368     9340     45.24%    67.68%   27.90%      2115          3259         22106
MX      MEXICO          4,157    0.47     65      630508     322220   1146013   10.20%    15.58%    9.50%    23000000      10100000     36900000
MY      MALAYSIA       12,596    1.42     188    1289048     58716    364614    12.85%    18.36%    9.32%    108000000      6093201     32100000
NG      NIGERIA         1,182    0.13     16     1556752     68555    299827      1.31%   5.69%     0.65%    23600000       1024925      4236235
NL      NETHERLANDS     5,579    0.63     63     5563867     702550   2898875     5.06%   7.38%     4.50%    188000000     23700000     97700000
NO      NORWAY          5,680    0.64     97     1269294     294583   1627966   10.02%    13.26%    9.33%    49000000       9238739     56700000
NZ      NEW ZEALAND     3,011    0.34     50      393267     32502    239998      5.67%   9.68%     8.79%     8036961       707115       5067580
OM      OMAN             488     0.05      8      369577     60682    106543      6.60%   16.64%    8.10%     2686115       433197       755255
PE      PERU             544     0.06      5     1023906     213257   201341    15.87%    18.77%   10.71%     3617539       755370       721199
PH      PHILIPPINES     5,583    0.63     72     1077980     87818    518201    17.10%    26.63%   12.56%    49100000       4010504     23100000
PK      PAKISTAN        3,169    0.36     51      750597     40021    217645    12.02%    14.41%    9.61%    25900000       1223456      6959005
PL      POLAND          5,672    0.64     60     2368805     158750   619717    12.22%    18.37%   10.16%    94300000       6032271     22200000
PT      PORTUGAL        1,351    0.15     17     3179836     233808   1365071     2.71%   12.34%    3.92%    26400000       1974726     11800000
QA      QATAR           1,222    0.14     23      611145     45424    210790      7.31%   12.18%    6.43%    10900000       812774       3752829
RO      ROMANIA          250     0.03      4      886381     56688    680844    14.92%    9.79%     8.08%     3381664       202319       2430224
RS      SERBIA           168     0.02      3      272240     23975    196896    23.17%    18.38%   19.48%     601691         55795       452004
RU      RUSSIA          1,925    0.22     26     10100000    816962   6098643   16.11%    19.48%    9.72%    147000000     10800000     72600000
SA      SAUDI ARABIA    1,088    0.12     98     2345866    1002530   1190067   -10.47%   8.66%     4.26%    66100000      22600000     43600000
SE      SWEDEN         11,560     1.3     174     228060     74868    703569      7.48%   11.15%    7.68%    17000000       6014555     53200000
SG      SINGAPORE       9,881    1.11     145     864602     122194   1143235   12.55%    18.94%   10.64%    55800000       8285673     74100000
SI      SLOVENIA         220     0.02      3      13270      26995     71210      1.05%   21.79%    5.40%      37469         78045       203048
TH      THAILAND        5,767    0.65     106    2089681     167475   674012    14.69%    23.17%   13.21%    88800000       6770391     31000000
TN      TUNISIA          140     0.02      2       239        235      5106      -6.55%   0.70%    -1.53%       477           469         10212
TR      TURKEY          4,706    0.53     58     1697617     130762   768350    15.98%    18.69%    8.58%    55000000       4237040     23400000
TW      TAIWAN         41,061    4.63     684     530858     134310   531483    10.24%    17.23%    7.74%    135000000     41300000     147000000
UG      UGANDA            88     0.01      1       842        1470     4194     34.73%    71.91%    4.62%       842          1470         4194
US      USA            175,377   19.76   3013    2012926     323727   1733058     7.87%   13.84%    8.24%   2330000000     403000000   2100000000
VN      VIET NAM         820     0.09     15      479322     43086    343905    12.19%    18.35%   14.68%     6087639       552733       4260247
ZA      SOUTH AFRICA   14,883    1.68     148    1074195     444228   423650    10.53%    17.41%    6.08%    95900000      41400000     40100000
ZW      ZIMBABWE          56     0.01      2      15480      14546    138070     -6.75%   1.28%     8.77%      48346         45915       457559
Total                  887429     100    14468   1874065     246606   1301047     9.73%   15.35%    8.86%   11813099883   1615895170   7990066031




                                                                      33
                                                                         Table 2: Summary Statistics
             This tables reports summary statistics (averages, medians, and standard deviations) for the variables used in regressions. The sample period is 2005-2018.
             Panels A and B report the emission variables and their pairwise correlations. Panel C reports the control variables. RET is the monthly stock return;
             LOGSIZE is the natural logarithm of market capitalization (in $ million); B/M is the book value of equity divided by market value of equity; ROE is the
             return on equity; LEVERAGE is the book value of leverage defined as the book value of debt divided by the book value of assets; MOM is the
             cumulative stock return over the one-year period; INVEST/A is the CAPEX divided by book value of assets; HHI is the Herfindahl index of the
             business segments of a company with weights proportional to revenues; LOGPPE is the natural logarithm of plant, property & equipment (in $ million);
             VOLAT is the monthly stock return volatility calculated over the one year period; MSCIi,t is an indicator variable equal to one if a stock i is part of MSCI
             World Index in year t, and zero otherwise.
                                                                              Panel A: Carbon Emissions
           Variable                                                                                          Mean                    Median                St. deviation
           Log (Carbon Emissions Scope 1 (tons CO2e)) [LOGS1TOT]                                            10.317                   10.135                    2.951
           Log (Carbon Emissions Scope 2 (tons CO2e)) [LOGS2TOT]                                            10.173                   10.233                    2.265
           Log (Carbon Emissions Scope 3 (tons CO2e)) [LOGS3TOT]                                            11.966                   12.021                    2.219
           Growth Rate in Carbon Emissions Scope 1 (winsorized at 2.5%) [S1CHG]                              9.73%                   3.34%                    41.34%
           Growth Rate in Carbon Emissions Scope 2 (winsorized at 2.5%) [S2CHG]                             15.35%                   5.83%                    49.01%
           Growth Rate in Carbon Emissions Scope 3 (winsorized at 2.5%) [S2CHG]                              8.86%                   5.44%                    25.74%

                                                                      Panel B: Carbon Emissions: Correlations
                                          S1CHG                 S2CHG                S3CHG             LOGS1TOT              LOGS2TOT                 LOGS3TOT
               S1CHG                          1
               S2CHG                        0.485                  1
               S3CHG                        0.555               0.503                   1
               LOGS1TOT                     0.040               -0.004               -0.045                  1
               LOGS2TOT                    -0.020               0.045                -0.061                0.736                   1
               LOGS3TOT                    -0.047               -0.046               -0.059                0.808                 0.824                     1

                                                                            Panel C: Regression Controls
                                Variable                                                      Mean                  Median            St. deviation
                                RET (%)                                                       1.076                 0.054                 10.229
                                LOGSIZE                                                       11.105                9.644                  5.212
                                B/M (winsorized at 2.5%)                                      0.572                 0.440                  0.510
                                LEVERAGE (winsorized at 2.5%)                                 0.227                 0.209                  0.175
                                MOM (winsorized at 0.5%)                                      0.150                 0.089                  0.452
                                INVEST/A (winsorized at 2.5%)                                 0.049                 0.035                  0.048
                                HHI                                                           0.798                 0.985                  0.252
                                LOGPPE                                                        7.748                 7.684                  3.313
                                ROE (winsorized at 2.5%)                                      11.094                10.870                16.076
                                VOLAT (winsorized at 0.5%)                                    0.092                 0.079                  0.058
                                MSCI                                                          0.337                    0                   0.473

                                                                  Table 3: Carbon Emissions by Year
The table reports the annual averages across all countries of all emission variables over the period 2005-2018.
                 year        # firms     S1TOT         S2TOT         S3TOT        S1CHG       S2CHG        S3CHG          TOTS1           TOTS2           TOTS3
                 2005         3232       2391417       246612       1822093          .            .            .        917000000        106000000      828000000
                 2006         3532       2367787       264064       1705187       16.18%      18.59%        9.83%       894000000        115000000      749000000
                 2007         3689       2488889       290500       1800563       18.89%      22.94%       15.94%       934000000        125000000      766000000
                 2008         3736       2541971       330705       1679148        9.34%      18.13%       -0.16%       955000000        146000000      728000000
                 2009         3949       2285281       311700       1643489        3.24%       8.47%       10.02%       870000000        136000000      720000000
                 2010         4098       2407166       308070       1633414       14.26%      18.14%        8.34%       904000000        130000000      689000000
                 2011         4221       2563380       322518       1825353        9.51%      15.73%       14.51%       937000000        136000000      761000000
                 2012         4253       2402493       317779       1791769        8.71%      10.60%        3.31%       868000000        133000000      748000000
                 2013         4912       2211603       297793       1619450        7.06%       8.43%        4.06%       878000000        135000000      743000000
                 2014         5323       2118666       292460       1432881        6.88%      20.46%        4.90%       895000000        142000000      694000000
                 2015         5427       2009876       276453       1228497        3.87%       2.48%       -1.76%       860000000        137000000      604000000
                 2016        11961       1038161       143425        693127        5.95%      11.13%       10.81%      1130000000        183000000      902000000
                 2017        12817       1046853       167407        759076       13.60%      26.03%       19.03%      1230000000        221000000      1050000000
                 2018         8781       1136396       148745        729199       10.53%      12.24%        6.21%      1050000000        142000000      663000000




                                                                                         34
                                                       Table 4: Predictors of Carbon Emissions
      The sample period is 2005-2018. The dependent variables are carbon emission levels (Panel A) and the percentage changes in emissions (Panel B). All variables are defined
      in Tables 1 and 2. We report the results of the pooled regression with standard errors clustered at the firm and year levels. All regressions include year-month fixed effects
      and country fixed effects. In columns (4) through (6), we additionally include industry-fixed effects. In columns (7) to (9), we instead include firm fixed effects. ***1%
      significance; **5% significance; *10% significance.
                                                                                       Panel A: Levels
                                (1)              (2)               (3)              (4)              (5)               (6)              (7)                (8)             (9)
VARIABLES                 LOGS1TOT          LOGS2TOT         LOGS3TOT          LOGS1TOT         LOGS2TOT          LOGS3TOT         LOGS1TOT          LOGS2TOT         LOGS3TOT
LOGSIZE                     -0.085**          0.265***         0.210***         0.329***         0.472***          0.453***          0.243***          0.263***        0.297***
                             (0.039)           (0.023)          (0.016)          (0.020)          (0.027)           (0.023)           (0.039)           (0.038)         (0.035)
B/M                           -0.093          0.108**            -0.007         0.371***         0.451***          0.381***          0.170***          0.188***        0.171***
                             (0.061)           (0.040)          (0.037)          (0.044)          (0.051)           (0.047)           (0.054)           (0.053)         (0.044)
ROE                         0.010***          0.011***         0.014***         0.008***         0.008***          0.009***          0.001**           0.002***        0.002***
                             (0.002)           (0.001)          (0.001)          (0.001)          (0.001)           (0.001)           (0.000)           (0.001)         (0.000)
LEVERAGE                     0.533**            0.326           -0.363*         0.669***         0.671***          0.370***          0.460***          0.462***        0.446***
                             (0.221)           (0.226)          (0.170)          (0.099)          (0.127)           (0.097)           (0.072)           (0.067)         (0.048)
INVEST/A                    5.021***          1.079**         -1.882***         -1.136***        -1.928***         -3.089***        -1.069***           -0.381*        -0.736***
                             (0.698)           (0.396)          (0.300)          (0.371)          (0.322)           (0.287)           (0.291)           (0.204)         (0.158)
HHI                        -2.038***         -0.763***        -1.232***         -1.216***        -0.660***         -0.722***        -0.591***         -0.587***        -0.399***
                             (0.145)           (0.087)          (0.118)          (0.074)          (0.059)           (0.062)           (0.091)           (0.077)         (0.052)
LOGPPE                      0.782***          0.469***         0.534***         0.428***         0.336***          0.346***          0.222***          0.165***        0.181***
                             (0.026)           (0.014)          (0.014)          (0.015)          (0.016)           (0.016)           (0.024)           (0.021)         (0.017)
MSCI                         0.119*           0.226***         0.203***         0.176***         0.256***          0.218***          0.106***          0.134***        0.093***
                             (0.059)           (0.045)          (0.041)          (0.040)          (0.049)           (0.042)           (0.019)           (0.022)         (0.016)
Constant                    6.359***          3.850***         6.456***         3.902***         2.415***          4.555***          6.203***          6.213***        7.404***
                             (0.383)           (0.263)          (0.240)          (0.215)          (0.260)           (0.212)           (0.435)           (0.363)         (0.382)
Yr/mo fixed effects            Yes               Yes               Yes             Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes             Yes
Country fixed effects          Yes               Yes               Yes             Yes              Yes               Yes               No                No              No
Industry fixed effects          No               No                No              Yes              Yes               Yes               No                No              No
Firm fixed effects              No               No                No              No               No                No                Yes               Yes             Yes
Observations                886,751           886,895          887,429           874,592          874,736           875,270          886,741           886,885          887,419
R-squared                     0.544             0.531             0.621           0.779            0.715             0.793             0.960             0.937           0.977

                                                                                 Panel B: Percentage Changes
                                (1)               (2)              (3)               (4)              (5)               (6)              (7)               (8)               (9)
VARIABLES                    S1CHG             S2CHG            S3CHG             S1CHG            S2CHG             S3CHG            S1CHG             S2CHG            S3CHG
LOGSIZE                      0.025***          0.029***         0.025***         0.025***         0.027***          0.025***          0.046***          0.059***        0.050***
                              (0.002)           (0.005)          (0.002)          (0.002)          (0.005)           (0.003)           (0.008)           (0.009)          (0.009)
B/M                         -0.060***         -0.061***        -0.066***         -0.067***        -0.069***         -0.070***        -0.077***         -0.073***        -0.084***
                              (0.009)           (0.009)          (0.006)          (0.009)          (0.009)           (0.007)           (0.013)           (0.013)          (0.013)
ROE                         -0.002***         -0.002***        -0.001***         -0.001***        -0.002***         -0.001***        -0.001***          -0.001**         -0.001**
                              (0.000)           (0.000)          (0.000)          (0.000)          (0.000)           (0.000)           (0.000)           (0.000)          (0.000)
LEVERAGE                     0.060***          0.064***         0.049***         0.060***         0.063***          0.043***            0.023             0.026            0.014
                              (0.015)           (0.012)          (0.011)          (0.012)          (0.012)           (0.008)           (0.025)           (0.025)          (0.021)
INVEST/A                     0.594***          0.589***         0.372***         0.451***         0.525***          0.317***            0.202             0.252            0.112
                              (0.073)           (0.098)          (0.069)          (0.085)          (0.063)           (0.052)           (0.133)           (0.148)          (0.092)
HHI                            0.007            -0.022          0.019***           0.011*           -0.017          0.020***          -0.070**         -0.137***          -0.038*
                              (0.008)           (0.012)          (0.005)          (0.005)          (0.014)           (0.004)           (0.027)           (0.027)          (0.017)
LOGPPE                      -0.021***         -0.021***        -0.020***         -0.023***        -0.022***         -0.021***        -0.039***         -0.035***        -0.033***
                              (0.003)           (0.002)          (0.002)          (0.003)          (0.002)           (0.002)           (0.005)           (0.006)          (0.004)
MSCI                        -0.033***         -0.041***        -0.030***         -0.033***        -0.040***         -0.029***        -0.034***         -0.051***        -0.037***
                              (0.005)           (0.005)          (0.005)          (0.005)          (0.005)           (0.004)           (0.005)           (0.007)          (0.004)
Constant                       0.004             0.037           -0.025            0.020             0.071            -0.015           -0.002            -0.075            -0.123
                              (0.024)           (0.059)          (0.026)          (0.024)          (0.062)           (0.031)           (0.092)           (0.090)          (0.094)
Yr/mo fixed effects             Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes
Country fixed effects           Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes              No                No                No
Industry fixed effects          No                No               No               Yes               Yes               Yes              No                No                No
Firm fixed effects              No                No               No                No               No                No               Yes               Yes              Yes
Observations                 765,387           765,397          765,949           755,257          755,267           755,819          765,384           765,394          765,946
R-squared                      0.036             0.044            0.119            0.047             0.055             0.131            0.256             0.248            0.361




                                                                                 35
                                 Table 5: Carbon Emissions and Stock Returns: U.S. and China
The sample period is 2005-2018. The dependent variable is RET. The main independent variables are carbon emission levels (Panel A) and the percentage
changes in emissions (Panel B). All variables are defined in Table 1 and Table 2. We report the results of the pooled regression with standard errors
clustered at the firm and year level. All regressions include year-month fixed effects, country fixed effects, and industry-fixed effects. Columns (1)-(3)
provide the results for firms from the U.S, columns (4)-(6) provide the results for firms from China. ***1% significance; **5% significance; *10%
significance.
                                                                     Panel A: Levels
      DEP. VARIABLE: RET                  (1)                (2)                 (3)                (4)               (5)                 (6)
                                                        United States                                                China
      LOGS1TOT                         0.083***                                                  0.067**
                                        (0.020)                                                  (0.028)
      LOGS2TOT                                             0.098**                                                  0.149*
                                                           (0.035)                                                  (0.072)
      LOGS3TOT                                                                0.156***                                                  0.213*
                                                                               (0.045)                                                 (0.108)
      LOGSIZE                            -0.118             -0.146              -0.175          -0.329***          -0.360***          -0.380***
                                        (0.121)            (0.126)             (0.129)           (0.094)            (0.108)            (0.112)
      B/M                                0.525               0.507               0.476           0.981**            0.938**            0.919**
                                        (0.327)            (0.321)             (0.326)           (0.404)            (0.382)            (0.371)
      LEVERAGE                          -0.482*            -0.491*             -0.503*            -0.107             -0.118             -0.194
                                        (0.249)            (0.237)             (0.240)           (0.203)            (0.188)            (0.174)
      MOM                                0.254               0.265               0.266             0.713              0.706              0.696
                                        (0.312)            (0.311)             (0.311)           (0.417)            (0.411)            (0.401)
      INVEST/A                           0.434               0.579               0.848            -0.468             -0.217             -0.121
                                        (2.462)            (2.462)             (2.394)           (0.786)            (0.859)            (0.868)
      HHI                                0.034              -0.019               0.025             0.611              0.563              0.565
                                        (0.114)            (0.091)             (0.103)           (0.429)            (0.418)            (0.413)
      LOGPPE                             0.005               0.005              -0.010             0.058              0.037              0.001
                                        (0.045)            (0.048)             (0.048)           (0.081)            (0.067)            (0.053)
      ROE                                0.005               0.005               0.005            0.026*             0.025*             0.024*
                                        (0.003)            (0.003)             (0.003)           (0.013)            (0.012)            (0.012)
      VOLAT                              3.521               3.345               3.434            -2.920             -2.962             -2.827
                                        (4.064)            (4.010)             (4.035)           (1.798)            (1.776)            (1.739)
      Constant                           0.496               0.639               0.034             2.789              2.621              2.138
                                        (0.928)            (0.976)             (1.012)           (1.582)            (1.613)            (1.825)
      Yr/mo fixed effects                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes               Yes                Yes                Yes
      Industry fixed effects              Yes                 Yes                 Yes               Yes                Yes                Yes
      Observations                      143,399            143,375            143,495             60,218             60,218             60,218
      R-squared                          0.224               0.224               0.224             0.301              0.301              0.301

                                                              Panel B: Percentage Changes
      DEP. VARIABLE: RET                   (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)               (5)                 (6)
                                                         United States                                               China
      S1CHG                             0.736***                                                 0.799**
                                         (0.168)                                                 (0.267)
      S2CHG                                                0.373**                                                  0.616***
                                                           (0.138)                                                   (0.188)
      S3CHG                                                                   1.413***                                                 1.980***
                                                                               (0.418)                                                  (0.496)
      LOGSIZE                            -0.121             -0.107              -0.141          -0.335***          -0.327***          -0.358***
                                        (0.117)            (0.117)             (0.118)           (0.098)            (0.094)             (0.104)
      B/M                                0.598*             0.578*              0.653*           1.051**            0.985**            1.111**
                                        (0.322)            (0.320)             (0.302)           (0.422)            (0.395)             (0.413)
      LEVERAGE                          -0.482*            -0.456*             -0.489*            -0.059             -0.014             -0.115
                                        (0.249)            (0.251)             (0.259)           (0.237)            (0.224)             (0.243)
      MOM                                0.204               0.226               0.142             0.608             0.621               0.479
                                        (0.306)            (0.309)             (0.301)           (0.423)            (0.409)             (0.372)
      INVEST/A                           -0.100              0.078              -0.406            -0.766             -1.104             -1.201
                                        (2.472)            (2.422)             (2.475)           (0.853)            (0.826)             (0.850)
      HHI                                -0.097             -0.061              -0.109             0.542             0.538               0.421
                                        (0.097)            (0.100)             (0.098)           (0.418)            (0.405)             (0.387)
      LOGPPE                             0.069               0.057               0.087             0.108             0.102               0.120
                                        (0.047)            (0.045)             (0.050)           (0.084)            (0.083)             (0.095)
      ROE                               0.007**            0.007**            0.008**             0.029*             0.029*             0.029*
                                        (0.003)            (0.003)             (0.003)           (0.014)            (0.014)             (0.014)
      VOLAT                              3.191               3.297               3.225            -2.976             -3.167             -3.137
                                        (4.140)            (4.135)             (4.204)           (1.806)            (1.866)             (1.847)
      Constant                           1.056               0.984               1.052            3.082*             3.073*             3.241*
                                        (0.899)            (0.914)             (0.927)           (1.575)            (1.567)             (1.588)
      Yr/mo fixed effects                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes               Yes               Yes                 Yes
      Industry fixed effects              Yes                 Yes                 Yes               Yes               Yes                 Yes
      Observations                      143,423            143,363            143,495             60,218             60,218             60,218
      R-squared                          0.224               0.224               0.225             0.302             0.301               0.303


                                                                           36
                                       Table 6: Carbon Emissions and Stock Returns: Full Sample
  The sample period is 2005-2018. The dependent variable is RET. The main independent variables are carbon emission levels (Panel A) and the percentage
  changes in emissions (Panel B). All variables are defined in Table 1 and Table 2. We report the results of the pooled regression with standard errors
  clustered at the firm and year level. All regressions include year-month fixed effects and country fixed effects. In columns (4) through (6), we additionally
  include industry-fixed effects. In columns (7) to (9), we instead include firm fixed effects. ***1% significance; **5% significance; *10% significance.

                                                                                   Panel A: Levels
DEP. VARIABLE: RET               (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)            (5)           (6)            (7)           (8)            (9)

LOGS1TOT                        0.029                                     0.066***                                    0.140***
                               (0.022)                                     (0.016)                                     (0.044)
LOGS2TOT                                     0.096***                                    0.118***                                    0.154**
                                              (0.030)                                     (0.027)                                    (0.056)
LOGS3TOT                                                   0.118***                                     0.174***                                   0.620***
                                                             (0.032)                                     (0.037)                                    (0.180)
LOGSIZE                       -0.150***      -0.182***     -0.182***      -0.186***      -0.225***     -0.249***     -2.557***      -2.568***     -2.718***
                                (0.040)        (0.042)       (0.042)        (0.041)        (0.042)       (0.045)       (0.341)        (0.345)       (0.391)
B/M                             0.501**       0.496**        0.505**       0.610**         0.588**       0.576**         0.458          0.455         0.390
                                (0.216)        (0.214)       (0.215)        (0.216)        (0.210)       (0.211)       (0.268)        (0.271)       (0.282)
LEVERAGE                       -0.439**       -0.443**      -0.371**       -0.387**       -0.417**      -0.401**      -1.108**       -1.110**      -1.330**
                                (0.182)        (0.170)       (0.168)        (0.163)        (0.151)       (0.154)       (0.455)        (0.455)       (0.489)
MOM                             0.823**       0.830**        0.828**       0.815**         0.824**       0.825**         0.557          0.561         0.594
                                (0.325)        (0.325)       (0.324)        (0.330)        (0.330)       (0.329)       (0.458)        (0.457)       (0.455)
INVEST/A                         -0.775        -0.724         -0.409        -0.466          -0.303        -0.003         1.047          0.907         1.295
                                (1.115)        (1.176)       (1.236)        (1.065)        (1.093)       (1.111)       (1.789)        (1.812)       (1.806)
HHI                              0.014          0.031         0.104          0.059          0.059         0.108         -0.099         -0.087         0.069
                                (0.120)        (0.118)       (0.115)        (0.126)        (0.122)       (0.128)       (0.283)        (0.283)       (0.289)
LOGPPE                           -0.003        -0.025         -0.042         0.008          -0.003        -0.023       -0.183*        -0.176*     -0.256***
                                (0.018)        (0.022)       (0.024)        (0.017)        (0.018)       (0.019)       (0.090)        (0.088)       (0.081)
ROE                           0.013***       0.013***      0.012***        0.013***      0.013***       0.012***       0.015**        0.015**       0.014**
                                (0.004)        (0.004)       (0.004)        (0.004)        (0.004)       (0.004)       (0.006)        (0.006)       (0.006)
VOLAT                            -0.404        -0.560         -0.494        -0.182          -0.231        -0.202        -0.606         -0.633        -0.489
                                (3.465)        (3.415)       (3.451)        (3.244)        (3.222)       (3.238)       (3.647)        (3.628)       (3.633)
Yr/mo fixed effects               Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes
Country fixed effects             Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes            No             No            No
Industry fixed effects             No            No             No            Yes            Yes           Yes            No             No            No
Firm fixed effects                 No            No             No            No              No            No            Yes            Yes           Yes
Observations                   746,642        746,797       747,290        736,851        737,006       737,499       746,615        746,770       747,263
R-squared                        0.150          0.150         0.150          0.151          0.151         0.151          0.176          0.176         0.177

                                                                            Panel B: Percentage Changes
DEP. VARIABLE: RET               (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)            (5)           (6)            (7)           (8)            (9)

S1CHG                         0.500***                                    0.515***                                    0.586***
                               (0.089)                                     (0.091)                                     (0.086)
S2CHG                                        0.301***                                    0.307***                                   0.354***
                                              (0.062)                                     (0.065)                                    (0.071)
S3CHG                                                      1.342***                                     1.364***                                   1.628***
                                                             (0.257)                                     (0.266)                                    (0.230)
LOGSIZE                       -0.162***      -0.159***     -0.178***      -0.174***      -0.170***     -0.189***     -2.539***      -2.537***     -2.576***
                                (0.042)        (0.041)       (0.042)        (0.041)       (0.041)        (0.041)       (0.327)        (0.328)       (0.328)
B/M                             0.519**       0.513**        0.557**       0.657**        0.650**       0.696***       0.512*         0.500*        0.580**
                                (0.215)        (0.214)       (0.217)        (0.219)       (0.218)        (0.221)       (0.265)        (0.266)       (0.260)
LEVERAGE                       -0.455**       -0.441**      -0.492**       -0.372**       -0.357*       -0.403**      -1.051**       -1.048**      -1.060**
                                (0.185)        (0.179)       (0.180)        (0.170)       (0.166)        (0.165)       (0.445)        (0.448)       (0.433)
MOM                             0.785**       0.800**        0.705**       0.773**        0.789**        0.694*          0.517          0.530         0.452
                                (0.321)        (0.321)       (0.314)        (0.327)       (0.327)        (0.320)       (0.452)        (0.454)       (0.449)
INVEST/A                         -0.908        -0.768         -1.115        -0.758         -0.661        -0.961          0.732          0.811         0.638
                                (1.187)        (1.205)       (1.204)        (1.065)       (1.065)        (1.058)       (1.815)        (1.836)       (1.802)
HHI                              -0.050        -0.040         -0.071        -0.028         -0.018        -0.050         -0.145         -0.138        -0.130
                                (0.124)        (0.126)       (0.121)        (0.122)       (0.124)        (0.120)       (0.280)        (0.283)       (0.278)
LOGPPE                           0.030          0.026        0.045**       0.048**        0.043**       0.063***        -0.133         -0.140        -0.104
                                (0.021)        (0.020)       (0.021)        (0.016)       (0.016)        (0.017)       (0.092)        (0.094)       (0.094)
ROE                           0.014***       0.014***      0.015***        0.014***      0.014***       0.015***       0.016**        0.016**       0.016**
                                (0.004)        (0.004)       (0.004)        (0.004)       (0.004)        (0.004)       (0.006)        (0.006)       (0.006)
VOLAT                            -0.500        -0.434         -0.450        -0.289         -0.239        -0.222         -0.593         -0.560        -0.330
                                (3.461)        (3.477)       (3.524)        (3.241)       (3.256)        (3.286)       (3.646)        (3.640)       (3.678)
Yr/mo fixed effects               Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes
Country fixed effects             Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            No             No            No
Industry fixed effects             No            No             No            Yes           Yes            Yes            No             No            No
Firm fixed effects                 No            No             No            No             No            No             Yes            Yes           Yes
Observations                   746,738        746,749       747,290        736,947        736,958       737,499       746,711        746,722       747,263
R-squared                        0.150          0.150         0.151          0.152         0.151          0.152          0.177          0.177         0.177



                                                                              37
                                        Table 7: Carbon Emissions and Stock Returns: Regional
The sample period is 2005-2018. The dependent variable is RET. The main independent variables are carbon emission levels (Panel A) and the percentage
changes in firm-level total emissions (Panel B). All variables are defined in Table 1 and Table 2. We report the results of the pooled regression with
standard errors clustered at the firm and year level. All regressions include year-month fixed effects and country fixed effects. All regression models
include the controls of Table 6 (unreported for brevity). In columns (3)-(4) and (7)-(8), we additionally include industry-fixed effects. Our sample firms
include alternately North America, North America (ex U.S.), Europe, the European Union, Asia, Asia (ex. China), and Others (Africa, Australia, and
South America). ***1% significance; **5% significance; *10% significance.

                                                                              Panel A: Levels
            DEP. VARIABLE: RET                      (1)         (2)       (3)                   (4)        (5)          (6)         (7)                 (8)
                                                                North America                                      North America (excl. USA)
            LOGS1TOT                           0.042                           0.077***                   0.013                       0.136**
                                              (0.024)                           (0.018)                  (0.034)                      (0.046)
            LOGS3TOT                                          0.116***                      0.135***                   0.091*                         0.196**
                                                               (0.036)                       (0.042)                   (0.051)                        (0.080)
            Controls                            Yes              Yes             Yes           Yes        Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
            Year/month fixed effects            Yes              Yes             Yes           Yes        Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
            Country fixed effects               Yes              Yes             Yes           Yes        Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
            Industry fixed effects              No               No              Yes           Yes        No             No              Yes            Yes
            Observations                      170,635         170,791          168,452      168,608      25,215        25,275          25,053         25,113
            R-squared                          0.202            0.202           0.205         0.205      0.158          0.158           0.168          0.168

          DEP. VARIABLE: RET                  (1)             (2)              (3)           (4)         (5)               (6)          (7)             (8)
                                                                    Europe                                                       EU
         LOGS1TOT                            0.035                          0.045**                     0.042                         0.054*
                                            (0.021)                         (0.021)                    (0.025)                        (0.026)
         LOGS3TOT                                           0.127***                       0.158***                   0.135***                        0.166***
                                                             (0.029)                        (0.046)                    (0.034)                         (0.049)
         Controls                             Yes              Yes            Yes             Yes        Yes             Yes            Yes              Yes
         Yr/mo fixed effects                  Yes              Yes            Yes             Yes        Yes             Yes            Yes              Yes
         Country fixed effects                Yes              Yes            Yes             Yes        Yes             Yes            Yes              Yes
         Industry fixed effects               No               No             Yes             Yes        No              No             Yes              Yes
         Observations                       170,338         170,518         167,506        167,686     148,080        148,188         145,436         145,544
         R-squared                           0.189            0.189          0.193           0.193      0.195           0.195          0.199            0.200

         DEP. VARIABLE: RET                   (1)             (2)              (3)           (4)         (5)               (6)          (7)             (8)
                                                                     Asia                                                  Asia (excl. China)
         LOGS1TOT                          0.023                       0.070**                          0.025                         0.068**
                                          (0.024)                      (0.025)                         (0.023)                        (0.024)
         LOGS3TOT                                         0.116**                         0.204***                    0.113**                         0.197***
                                                          (0.043)                          (0.057)                    (0.038)                          (0.046)
         Controls                          Yes              Yes          Yes                 Yes         Yes            Yes             Yes              Yes
         Yr/mo fixed effects               Yes              Yes          Yes                 Yes         Yes            Yes             Yes              Yes
         Country fixed effects             Yes              Yes          Yes                 Yes         Yes            Yes             Yes              Yes
         Industry fixed effects            No               No           Yes                 Yes         No             No              Yes              Yes
         Observations                    335,387          335,531      331,338            331,482      274,842        274,986         271,120         271,264
         R-squared                        0.161            0.161        0.163               0.163       0.159          0.160           0.161            0.162

               DEP. VARIABLE: RET                                     (1)                       (2)                  (3)                        (4)
                                                                                                       Others
               LOGS1TOT                                             -0.007                                         0.110***
                                                                    (0.031)                                         (0.032)
               LOGS3TOT                                                                       0.054                                       0.249***
                                                                                             (0.050)                                       (0.065)
               Controls                                               Yes                      Yes                  Yes                      Yes
               Yr/mo fixed effects                                    Yes                      Yes                  Yes                      Yes
               Country fixed effects                                  Yes                      Yes                  Yes                      Yes
               Industry fixed effects                                 No                       No                   Yes                      Yes
               Observations                                         68,812                   68,980                68,085                  68,253
               R-squared                                             0.126                    0.127                0.131                    0.131




                                                                                     38
                                                       Panel B: Percentage Changes
 DEP. VARIABLE: RET                (1)         (2)         (3)             (4)          (5)        (6)         (7)         (8)
                                                North America                                 North America (excl. USA)
 S1CHG                           0.722***               0.762***                     0.683***               0.771***
                                  (0.109)                (0.119)                      (0.173)                (0.193)
 S3CHG                                      1.427***                     1.488***               1.513***                1.645***
                                             (0.317)                      (0.354)                (0.414)                 (0.406)
 Controls                          Yes         Yes         Yes              Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes
 Yr/mo fixed effects               Yes         Yes         Yes              Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes
 Country fixed effects             Yes         Yes         Yes              Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes
 Industry fixed effects            No          No          Yes              Yes         No         No          Yes         Yes
 Observations                    170,659    170,791     168,476          168,608      25,215     25,275      25,053      25,113
 R-squared                        0.203       0.203       0.206            0.206       0.159      0.159       0.168       0.169

DEP. VARIABLE: RET                  (1)         (2)          (3)            (4)         (5)               (6)          (7)           (8)
                                                     Europe                                                     EU
S1CHG                            0.290***                 0.306***                    0.267**                        0.286***
                                  (0.081)                  (0.079)                    (0.091)                         (0.089)
S3CHG                                        1.093***                    1.166***                   1.108***                      1.190***
                                              (0.277)                     (0.276)                    (0.319)                       (0.324)
Controls                            Yes         Yes          Yes            Yes         Yes            Yes             Yes           Yes
Yr/mo fixed effects                 Yes         Yes          Yes            Yes         Yes            Yes             Yes           Yes
Country fixed effects               Yes         Yes          Yes            Yes         Yes            Yes             Yes           Yes
Industry fixed effects              No          No           Yes            Yes         No             No              Yes           Yes
Observations                      170,362    170,518      167,530        167,686      148,080       148,188          145,436      145,544
R-squared                          0.189       0.189        0.193          0.193       0.195          0.195           0.199         0.200

DEP. VARIABLE: RET                (1)         (2)             (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)            (7)            (8)
                                                       Asia                                            Asia (excl. China)
S1CHG                           0.606***                   0.613***                  0.530***                     0.537***
                                 (0.140)                    (0.135)                   (0.114)                      (0.107)
S3CHG                                       1.623***                     1.623***                  1.443***                       1.450***
                                             (0.359)                      (0.353)                   (0.318)                        (0.311)
Controls                          Yes          Yes              Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes            Yes             Yes
Yr/mo fixed effects               Yes          Yes              Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes            Yes             Yes
Country fixed effects             Yes          Yes              Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes            Yes             Yes
Industry fixed effects            No           No               Yes         Yes         No            No             Yes             Yes
Observations                    335,411     335,531           331,362    331,482      274,866      274,986         271,144        271,264
R-squared                        0.161        0.162            0.163       0.164       0.160         0.161          0.162           0.163



       DEP. VARIABLE: RET                               (1)                 (2)                   (3)                     (4)
                                                                                     Others
       S1CHG                                          0.162*                                     0.157
                                                      (0.084)                                   (0.105)
       S3CHG                                                              0.573*                                        0.603*
                                                                          (0.296)                                       (0.298)
       Controls                                         Yes                 Yes                  Yes                      Yes
       Yr/mo fixed effects                              Yes                 Yes                  Yes                      Yes
       Country fixed effects                            Yes                 Yes                  Yes                      Yes
       Industry fixed effects                           No                  No                   Yes                      Yes
       Observations                                   68,836              68,980                68,109                  68,253
       R-squared                                       0.127               0.127                0.131                    0.131




                                                                    39
                                                Table 8: Carbon Emissions and Stock Returns: Economic Development
      The sample period is 2005-2018. The dependent variable is RET. The main independent variables are carbon emission levels (Panel A) and the percentage changes in emissions (Panel
      B). GDPPC measures a country's GDP per capita in current dollars in a given year; MANUFPERC is the percentage of a country's GDP that is produced in a given year in
      manufacturing sector; HLTHEXPPC is a country's health expenditures per capita in current dollars in a given year. All other variables are defined in Table 1 and Table 2. We report
      the results of the pooled regression with standard errors clustered at the firm and year level. All regression models include the controls of Table 6 (unreported for brevity), year-month
      fixed effects, and country fixed effects. In selected columns, we additionally include industry-fixed effects. ***1% significance; **5% significance; *10% significance.
                                                                                              Panel A: Levels
DEP. VARIABLE: RET                     (1)            (2)            (3)                (4)              (5)            (6)           (7)           (8)           (9)       (10)       (11)          (12)

GDPPC                              -108.632**     -108.841**     -104.037**      -103.935**
                                    (50.241)       (50.648)       (50.451)        (50.872)
MANUFPERC                                                                                           13.870        15.634*        14.703*        16.358*
                                                                                                    (8.430)       (8.642)        (8.426)        (8.591)
HLTHEXPPC                                                                                                                                                     -0.053      -0.137      -0.045       -0.114
                                                                                                                                                              (0.196)     (0.202)     (0.193)      (0.196)
LOGS1TOT                              0.031                       0.067***                           0.033                       0.077***                      0.010                 0.050***
                                     (0.021)                       (0.018)                          (0.023)                       (0.019)                     (0.022)                 (0.018)
LOGS3TOT                                           0.122***                       0.178***                        0.143***                     0.202***                   0.083**                 0.139***
                                                    (0.032)                        (0.034)                         (0.032)                      (0.033)                   (0.032)                  (0.034)
GDPPC*LOGS1TOT                       -0.098                        -0.087
                                     (0.415)                       (0.400)
GDPPC*LOGS3TOT                                      -0.196                         -0.259
                                                    (0.647)                        (0.604)
MANUFPERC*LOGS1TOT                                                                                  -0.032                       -0.072
                                                                                                    (0.112)                      (0.106)
MANUFPERC*LOGS3TOT                                                                                                -0.150                        -0.173
                                                                                                                  (0.172)                       (0.163)
HLTHEXPPC*LOGS1TOT                                                                                                                                             0.003                   0.003
                                                                                                                                                              (0.003)                 (0.003)
HLTHEXPPC*LOGS3TOT                                                                                                                                                         0.008*                   0.007
                                                                                                                                                                          (0.005)                  (0.005)
Controls                              Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes              Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
Yr/mo fixed effects                   Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes              Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
Country fixed effects                 Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes              Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
Industry fixed effects                No              No             Yes            Yes              No             No             Yes            Yes          No            No         Yes          Yes
Observations                        712,472         713,120        702,886        703,534          679,890        680,514        671,392        672,016      484,683      485,199     478,854      479,370
R-squared                            0.150           0.150          0.152          0.152            0.152          0.152          0.153          0.153        0.175        0.175       0.177        0.177

                                                                                   Panel B: Percentage Changes
   DEP. VARIABLE: RET                (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)              (5)            (6)           (7)           (8)           (9)           (10)        (11)        (12)
   GDPPC                          -110.884**    -113.493**     -105.512**     -107.949**
                                   (50.122)      (50.128)       (50.314)       (50.315)
   MANUFPERC                                                                                     12.517         11.138        12.897        11.568
                                                                                                 (8.177)        (8.157)       (8.190)       (8.173)
   HLTHEXPPC                                                                                                                                               -0.039       -0.075       -0.029     -0.067
                                                                                                                                                           (0.193)      (0.194)      (0.191)    (0.193)
   S1CHG                          0.631***                      0.646***                          0.169                       0.191*                      0.763***                  0.797***
                                   (0.112)                       (0.111)                         (0.107)                      (0.107)                      (0.124)                   (0.124)
   S3CHG                                         1.655***                     1.678***                         0.737***                     0.790***                    1.711***                1.776***
                                                  (0.260)                      (0.263)                          (0.270)                      (0.266)                     (0.285)                 (0.289)
   GDPPC*S1CHG                     -4.004                        -4.003
                                   (2.608)                       (2.592)
   GDPPC*S3CHG                                   -11.011*                      -11.134*
                                                  (6.287)                       (6.277)
   MANUFPERC*S1CHG                                                                              2.120***                      2.068***
                                                                                                 (0.660)                       (0.666)
   MANUFPERC * S3CHG                                                                                            3.525**                     3.311**
                                                                                                                (1.502)                     (1.501)
   HLTHEXPPC*S1CHG                                                                                                                                        -0.052**                  -0.053**
                                                                                                                                                           (0.025)                   (0.024)
   HLTHEXPPC*S3CHG                                                                                                                                                      -0.099*                 -0.104*
                                                                                                                                                                        (0.058)                 (0.058)
   Controls                          Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes               Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes
   Yr/mo fixed effects               Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes               Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes
   Country fixed effects             Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes               Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes
   Industry fixed effects            No            No             Yes            Yes               No            No             Yes           Yes           No            No          Yes         Yes
   Observations                    712,568       713,120        702,982        703,534           679,998       680,514        671,500       672,016       484,767       485,199     478,938     479,370
   R-squared                        0.150         0.151          0.152          0.152             0.152         0.152          0.153         0.154         0.175         0.176       0.177       0.177




                                                                                                   40
                                               Table 9: Carbon Emissions and Stock Returns: Energy Structure
The sample period is 2005-2018. The dependent variable is RET. The main independent variables are carbon emission levels (Panel A) and the percentage changes in emissions (Panel
B). ELRENEW measures a country's share of electricity generated by renewable power plants in total electricity generated by all types of plants in a given year; ENINT is the ratio
between energy supply and gross domestic product measured at purchasing power parity in a given country. Energy intensity is an indication of how much energy is used to produce
one unit of economic output in a given year; ENUSEPC is a country's energy consumption (in kg of oil equivalent per capita) in a given year. All other variables are defined in Table 1
and Table 2. We report the results of the pooled regression with standard errors clustered at the firm and year level. All regression models include the controls of Table 6 (unreported
for brevity), year-month fixed effects, and country fixed effects. In selected columns, we additionally include industry-fixed effects. ***1% significance; **5% significance; *10%
significance.
                                                                                    Panel A: Levels
DEP. VARIABLE: RET                 (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)          (9)         (10)          (11)         (12)
ELRENEW                          7.954*        2.655      8.341**       2.397
                                 (4.147)      (4.998)     (4.163)      (5.015)
ENINT                                                                                -9.341        0.731     -11.106        3.719
                                                                                    (60.820)     (61.283)    (60.793)     (61.388)
ENUSEPC                                                                                                                                -1.403**     -1.452***    -1.459***     -1.435**
                                                                                                                                        (0.548)      (0.553)      (0.550)       (0.558)
LOGS1TOT                          0.008                   0.064***                   0.031                   0.073***                   -0.006                     0.039*
                                 (0.024)                   (0.020)                  (0.028)                   (0.028)                   (0.024)                   (0.022)
LOGS3TOT                                     0.080**                  0.140***                   0.164***                 0.230***                  0.082**                    0.155***
                                             (0.031)                   (0.035)                    (0.053)                  (0.054)                  (0.040)                     (0.042)
ELRENEW*LOGS1TOT                  0.016                    -0.004
                                 (0.175)                   (0.176)
ELRENEW*LOGS3TOT                              0.478*                   0.516*
                                              (0.286)                  (0.286)
ENINT*LOGS1TOT                                                                      -0.440                    -0.201
                                                                                    (0.552)                   (0.529)
ENINT*LOGS3TOT                                                                                   -1.176                    -1.290
                                                                                                 (0.847)                   (0.844)
ENUSEPC*LOGS1TOT                                                                                                                         0.005                     0.006
                                                                                                                                        (0.005)                   (0.005)
ENUSEPC*LOGS3TOT                                                                                                                                     0.008                      0.003
                                                                                                                                                    (0.007)                    (0.007)
Controls                          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes
Yr/mo fixed effects               Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes
Country fixed effects             Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes
Industry fixed effects            No           No           Yes          Yes          No           No          Yes          Yes          No           No            Yes          Yes
Observations                    438,536      439,016      433,339      433,819      438,578      439,058     433,381      433,861      423,384      423,864       418,319      418,799
R-squared                        0.185        0.185        0.187        0.187        0.185        0.185       0.187        0.187        0.190        0.190         0.192        0.192

                                                                              Panel B: Percentage Changes
DEP. VARIABLE: RET                  (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)         (7)          (8)          (9)         (10)        (11)         (12)
ELRENEW                          8.110**      8.064**      8.276**      8.219**
                                 (3.345)      (3.344)      (3.359)      (3.358)
ENINT                                                                                -19.894      -23.873      -19.200      -23.389
                                                                                     (60.286)     (60.130)     (60.250)     (60.040)
ENUSEPC                                                                                                                                  -1.340**    -1.318**     -1.386**    -1.361**
                                                                                                                                          (0.550)     (0.549)      (0.551)     (0.550)
S1CHG                            0.702***                  0.750***                    0.139                     0.153                    0.380**                  0.381**
                                  (0.105)                   (0.105)                   (0.208)                   (0.208)                   (0.160)                  (0.158)
S3CHG                                         1.405***                  1.500***                    0.370                     0.419                   0.955**                  0.991**
                                               (0.279)                   (0.275)                   (0.410)                   (0.405)                  (0.385)                  (0.385)
ELRENEW*S1CHG                    -2.207**                  -2.463**
                                  (1.086)                   (1.082)
ELRENEW*S3CHG                                  -0.198                    -0.699
                                               (2.665)                   (2.661)
ENINT*S1CHG                                                                          8.584**                   8.961**
                                                                                     (4.159)                   (4.195)
ENINT*S3CHG                                                                                       19.559**                  19.946**
                                                                                                   (7.946)                   (7.959)
ENUSEPC*S1CHG                                                                                                                              0.038                    0.046
                                                                                                                                          (0.036)                  (0.035)
ENUSEPC*S3CHG                                                                                                                                          0.086                    0.096
                                                                                                                                                      (0.086)                  (0.085)
Controls                           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
Yr/mo fixed effects                Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
Country fixed effects              Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
Industry fixed effects             No           No           Yes          Yes          No           No           Yes          Yes          No           No          Yes          Yes
Observations                     438,632      439,016      433,435      433,819      438,674      439,058      433,477      433,861      423,480      423,864     418,415      418,799
R-squared                         0.186        0.186        0.188        0.188        0.185        0.186        0.187        0.188        0.190        0.190       0.192        0.192




                                                                                            41
                                        Table 10: Carbon Emissions and Stock Returns: Socio-political Environment
 The sample period is 2005-2018. The dependent variable is RET. The main independent variables are carbon emission levels (Panel A) and the percentage changes in emissions (Panel
 B). RULELAW measures a country's perceptions in a given year of the extent to which agents have confidence in and abide by the rules of society, and in particular the quality of
 contract enforcement, property rights, the police, and the courts, as well as the likelihood of crime and violence. Estimate gives the country's score on the aggregate indicator, in units
 of a standard normal distribution; VOICE captures perceptions in a given year of the extent to which a country's citizens are able to participate in selecting their government, as well
 as freedom of expression, freedom of association, and a free media. Estimate gives the country's score on the aggregate indicator, in units of a standard normal distribution; GINI is
 a country's GINI index in a given year. All other variables are defined in Table 1 and Table 2. We report the results of the pooled regression with standard errors clustered at the firm
 and year level. All regression models include the controls of Table 6 (unreported for brevity), year-month fixed effects, and country fixed effects. In selected columns, we additionally
 include industry-fixed effects. ***1% significance; **5% significance; *10% significance.

                                                                                     Panel A: Levels
DEP. VARIABLE: RET                 (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)              (5)                (6)           (7)           (8)           (9)             (10)        (11)          (12)
RULELAW                          -0.679       -0.725       -0.661       -0.710
                                 (0.752)      (0.767)      (0.756)      (0.777)
VOICE                                                                                 -0.734             -0.712         -0.755        -0.733
                                                                                      (0.808)            (0.826)        (0.805)       (0.832)
GINI                                                                                                                                                 -6.733        -7.363          -6.902        -7.989
                                                                                                                                                    (11.996)      (11.973)        (11.979)      (11.975)
LOGS1TOT                          0.027                   0.064***                    0.033*                           0.071***                       0.018                         0.021
                                 (0.017)                   (0.014)                    (0.017)                           (0.014)                      (0.082)                       (0.082)
LOGS3TOT                                     0.113***                  0.170***                         0.125***                     0.182***                       0.082                         0.080
                                              (0.026)                   (0.029)                          (0.025)                      (0.028)                      (0.115)                       (0.116)
RULELAW*LOGS1TOT                  0.002                     0.002
                                 (0.009)                   (0.009)
RULELAW*LOGS3TOT                               0.004                     0.003
                                              (0.015)                   (0.015)
VOICE*LOGS1TOT                                                                        -0.005                            -0.006
                                                                                      (0.011)                           (0.011)
VOICE*LOGS3TOT                                                                                           -0.009                       -0.009
                                                                                                         (0.018)                      (0.017)
GINI*LOGS1TOT                                                                                                                                        0.034                          0.132
                                                                                                                                                    (0.220)                        (0.221)
GINI*LOGS3TOT                                                                                                                                                       0.079                        0.205
                                                                                                                                                                   (0.299)                      (0.306)
Controls                           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes                Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes
Yr/mo fixed effects                Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes                Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes
Country fixed effects              Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes                Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes
Industry fixed effects             No           No           Yes          Yes           No                 No            Yes            Yes           No             No             Yes           Yes
Observations                     746,432      747,080      736,641      737,289       746,432            747,080       736,641        737,289       238,087        238,279        235,066       235,258
R-squared                         0.150        0.150        0.151        0.151         0.150              0.150         0.151          0.151         0.195          0.195          0.198         0.198

                                                                                Panel B: Percentage Changes
   DEP. VAR.: RET               (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)                (6)           (7)           (8)           (9)            (10)            (11)          (12)
   RULELAW                    -0.656       -0.629       -0.639       -0.610
                              (0.737)      (0.739)      (0.738)      (0.739)
   VOICE                                                                           -0.738             -0.744        -0.771        -0.771
                                                                                   (0.807)            (0.812)       (0.807)       (0.813)
   GINI                                                                                                                                          -6.899         -8.554          -6.069        -7.769
                                                                                                                                                (12.315)       (12.315)        (12.266)      (12.254)
   S1CHG                     0.653***                   0.669***                  0.593***                          0.606***                     -0.293                         -0.234
                              (0.095)                    (0.095)                   (0.073)                           (0.073)                     (0.387)                        (0.391)
   S3CHG                                   1.684***                  1.700***                         1.485***                    1.499***                     -0.890                        -0.680
                                            (0.225)                   (0.226)                          (0.176)                     (0.177)                     (1.028)                       (1.023)
   RULELAW*S1CHG             -0.137**                   -0.138**
                              (0.062)                    (0.062)
   RULELAW*S3CHG                           -0.319**                  -0.315**
                                            (0.152)                   (0.151)
   VOICE * S1CHG                                                                   -0.139**                         -0.136**
                                                                                    (0.054)                          (0.054)
   VOICE * S3CHG                                                                                      -0.232*                     -0.221*
                                                                                                      (0.130)                     (0.130)
   GINI * S1CHG                                                                                                                                 2.207**                        2.078*
                                                                                                                                                (1.053)                        (1.065)
   GINI * S3CHG                                                                                                                                                5.957**                       5.562**
                                                                                                                                                               (2.675)                       (2.672)
   Controls                    Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes                Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes             Yes           Yes
   Yr/mo fixed effects         Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes                Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes             Yes           Yes
   Country fixed effects       Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes                Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes             Yes           Yes
   Industry fixed effects      No            No           Yes          Yes           No                 No            Yes           Yes           No             No              Yes           Yes
   Observations              746,528       747,080      736,737      737,289       746,528            747,080       736,737       737,289       238,135        238,279         235,114       235,258
   R-squared                  0.150         0.151        0.152        0.152         0.150              0.151         0.152         0.152         0.195          0.196           0.198         0.198




                                                                                                 42
                          Table 11: Carbon Emissions and Stock Returns: Climate Policy Tightness
The sample period is 2005-2018. The dependent variable is RET. The main independent variables are carbon emission levels (Panel A) and the percentage
changes in emissions (Panel B). INTPOLICY measures the strictness of a country's international climate policy in a given year. DOMPOLICY measures
the strictness of a country's domestic climate policy in a given year. All other variables are defined in Table 1 and Table 2. We report the results of the
pooled regression with standard errors clustered at the firm and year level. All regression models include the controls of Table 6 (unreported for brevity),
year-month fixed effects, and country fixed effects. In selected columns, we additionally include industry-fixed effects. ***1% significance; **5%
significance; *10% significance.
                                                                     Panel A: Levels
     DEP. VARIABLE: RET                       (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)             (5)           (6)           (7)        (8)
     INTPOLICY                              -0.656        -1.106        -0.593         -1.205
                                            (0.393)       (1.058)       (0.390)        (1.030)
     DOMPOLICY                                                                                      -1.058*       -2.555**       -1.061*     -2.637**
                                                                                                    (0.566)        (1.067)       (0.534)      (1.025)
     LOGS1TOT                               0.047*                     0.089***                      0.005                        0.042
                                            (0.022)                     (0.022)                     (0.023)                      (0.025)
     LOGS3TOT                                            0.132***                    0.184***                      0.050                    0.102***
                                                          (0.040)                     (0.041)                     (0.028)                    (0.031)
     INTPOLICY*LOGS1TOT                     -0.018                      -0.023
                                            (0.041)                     (0.042)
     INTPOLICY*LOGS3TOT                                    0.021                        0.029
                                                          (0.091)                      (0.088)
     DOMPOLICY*LOGS1TOT                                                                              0.062                        0.062
                                                                                                    (0.050)                      (0.048)
     DOMPOLICY*LOGS3TOT                                                                                            0.174*                    0.181**
                                                                                                                  (0.080)                    (0.076)
     Controls                                 Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes         Yes
     Yr/mo fixed effects                      Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes         Yes
     Country fixed effects                    Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes         Yes
     Industry fixed effects                   No            No            Yes          Yes            No             No            Yes         Yes
     Observations                           551,190       551,766       544,240      544,816        551,190       551,766        544,240     544,816
     R-squared                               0.153         0.153         0.155        0.155          0.153         0.153          0.154       0.155

                                                               Panel B: Percentage Changes
     DEP. VAR.: RET                           (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)           (6)           (7)           (8)
     INTPOLICY                             -0.842**     -0.876**     -0.831**      -0.874**
                                            (0.307)      (0.303)      (0.309)       (0.307)
     DOMPOLICY                                                                                    -0.408       -0.431         -0.405       -0.431
                                                                                                  (0.267)      (0.279)        (0.275)      (0.286)
     S1CHG                                 0.652***                  0.674***                    0.580***                    0.596***
                                            (0.115)                   (0.105)                     (0.117)                     (0.102)
     S3CHG                                               1.546**                   1.540***                    1.342**                     1.363**
                                                         (0.504)                    (0.475)                    (0.572)                     (0.537)
     INTPOLICY*S1CHG                        -0.200                    -0.199
                                            (0.146)                   (0.134)
     INTPOLICY*S3CHG                                     -0.277                    -0.198
                                                         (0.622)                   (0.598)
     DOMPOLICY* S1CHG                                                                            -0.067                      -0.056
                                                                                                 (0.184)                     (0.172)
     DOMPOLICY* S3CHG                                                                                           0.069                       0.096
                                                                                                               (0.767)                     (0.730)
     Controls                                Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
     Yr/mo fixed effects                     Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
     Country fixed effects                   Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
     Industry fixed effects                  No            No           Yes          Yes           No            No            Yes           Yes
     Observations                          551,298       551,766      544,348      544,816       551,298       551,766       544,348       544,816
     R-squared                              0.153         0.154        0.155        0.155         0.153         0.153         0.155         0.155




                                                                            43
                                                    Table 12: Carbon Emissions and Stock Returns: Reputational Risk
The sample period is 2005-2018. The sample excludes companies in the oil & gas (gic=2), utilities (gic=65-69), and motor (gic=18, 19, 23) industries. The dependent variable is RET. The
main independent variables are carbon emission levels (columns (1)-(4)) and the percentage changes in emissions (columns (5)-(8)). All variables are defined in Table 1 and Table 2. We
report the results of the pooled regression with standard errors clustered at the firm and year level. All regressions include year-month fixed effects and country fixed effects. All regression
models include the controls of Table 6 (unreported for brevity). In even-numbered columns, we additionally include industry-fixed effects. ***1% significance; **5% significance; *10%
significance.
                             DEP. VARIABLE: RET                (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)           (5)          (6)          (7)           (8)
                             LOGS1TOT                        0.045*                     0.072***
                                                             (0.024)                     (0.020)
                             LOGS3TOT                                     0.109**                      0.173***
                                                                          (0.036)                       (0.041)
                             S1CHG                                                                                   0.524***                  0.533***
                                                                                                                      (0.097)                   (0.096)
                             S3CHG                                                                                                1.487***                   1.500***
                                                                                                                                   (0.283)                    (0.289)

                            Controls                          Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes
                            Yr/mo fixed effects               Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes
                            Country fixed effects             Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes
                            Industry fixed effects            No             No           Yes           Yes            No            No          Yes           Yes
                            Observations                    670,416        671,064      660,781       661,429        670,524       671,064     660,889       661,429
                            R-squared                        0.152          0.153        0.154         0.154          0.153         0.153       0.154         0.155

                                                      Table 13: Carbon Emissions and Stock Returns: Physical Risk
       The sample period is 2005-2018. The dependent variable is RET. The main independent variables are carbon emission levels (columns 1-4) and the percentage changes in
       emissions (columns 5-8). All variables are defined in Table 1 and Table 2. We report the results of the pooled regression with standard errors clustered at the firm and year
       level. Climate Risk Index (CRI) measures the extent to which countries and regions have been affected by impacts of weather-related loss events (storms, floods, heatwaves
       etc.). All regression models include the controls of Table 6 (unreported for brevity), year-month fixed effects, and country fixed effects. In selected columns, we additionally
       include industry-fixed effects. ***1% significance; **5% significance; *10% significance.
                             DEP. VARIABLE: RET                       (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)          (8)

                           CRI                                        -0.043      -0.044       -0.024      -0.071        -0.281      -0.298      -0.315       -0.331
                                                                      (0.476)     (0.708)      (0.490)     (0.726)       (0.379)     (0.386)     (0.384)      (0.391)
                           LOGS1TOT                                    0.041                  0.080***
                                                                      (0.025)                  (0.020)
                           LOGS3TOT                                              0.131***                  0.186***
                                                                                  (0.037)                   (0.042)
                           S1CHG                                                                                        0.428***                 0.445***
                                                                                                                         (0.136)                 (0.136)
                           S3CHG                                                                                                     1.145**                  1.169**
                                                                                                                                     (0.398)                  (0.398)
                           CRI*LOGS1TOT                               -0.023                   -0.028
                                                                      (0.021)                  (0.021)
                           CRI*LOGS3TOT                                           -0.021                   -0.021
                                                                                  (0.038)                  (0.038)
                           CRI*S1CHG                                                                                      0.165                    0.164
                                                                                                                         (0.166)                  (0.165)
                           CRI*S3CHG                                                                                                  0.441                     0.439
                                                                                                                                     (0.399)                   (0.382)
                           Controls                                   Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
                           Yr/mo fixed effects                        Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
                           Country fixed effects                      Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
                           Industry fixed effects                     No           No           Yes          Yes          No           No           Yes          Yes
                           Observations                             728,383      729,019      718,825      719,461      728,467      729,019      718,909      719,461
                           R-squared                                 0.147        0.147        0.149        0.149        0.148        0.148        0.149        0.150




                                                                                               44
                                   Table 14: Carbon Emissions and Stock Returns: The Role of Investor Awareness
The dependent variable is RET. The main independent variables are carbon emission levels (columns 1-4) and the percentage changes in emissions (columns 5-8). All variables are
defined in Table 1 and Table 2. We report the results of the pooled regression with standard errors clustered at the firm and year level. Panel A reports the results for a sample covering
the period January 2014-November 2015 (two years before Paris COP 21 conference). Panel B reports the results for a sample covering the period January 2016-December 2017 (two
years after Paris COP 21 conference). All regression models include the controls of Table 7 (unreported for brevity), year-month fixed effects, and country fixed effects. In selected
columns, we additionally include industry-fixed effects. ***1% significance; **5% significance; *10% significance.

                                                                                  Panel A: Pre Paris
                        DEP. VARIABLE: RET                (1)           (2)          (3)            (4)          (5)          (6)           (7)          (8)
                        LOGS1TOT                        -0.032                      0.019
                                                        (0.023)                    (0.018)
                        LOGS3TOT                                       0.007                      0.096*
                                                                      (0.038)                     (0.050)
                        S1CHG                                                                                 0.731***                   0.722***
                                                                                                               (0.119)                    (0.119)
                        S3CHG                                                                                              1.924***                   1.891***
                                                                                                                            (0.338)                    (0.345)
                        Controls                          Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes
                        Yr/mo fixed effects               Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes
                        Country fixed effects             Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes
                        Industry fixed effects            No           No            Yes            Yes         No            No           Yes           Yes
                        Observations                    109,394      109,578       108,143        108,327     109,394      109,578       108,143      108,327
                        R-squared                        0.090        0.090         0.098          0.098       0.091         0.092        0.099         0.100

                                                                                  Panel B: Post Paris
                         DEP. VAR.: RET                  (1)          (2)          (3)            (4)          (5)           (6)           (7)          (8)
                         LOGS1TOT                     0.095***                  0.096***
                                                       (0.031)                   (0.025)
                         LOGS3TOT                                  0.209***                     0.265***
                                                                    (0.043)                      (0.043)
                         S1CHG                                                                              0.527***                    0.509***
                                                                                                             (0.100)                     (0.105)
                         S3CHG                                                                                            1.611***                   1.584***
                                                                                                                           (0.237)                    (0.247)
                         Controls                       Yes          Yes          Yes             Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes
                         Yr/mo fixed effects            Yes          Yes          Yes             Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes
                         Country fixed effects          Yes          Yes          Yes             Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes
                         Industry fixed effects         No           No           Yes             Yes          No            No           Yes           Yes
                         Observations                 192,678      192,810      190,047         190,179      192,678      192,810       190,047      190,179
                         R-squared                     0.048        0.049        0.053           0.053        0.048         0.049        0.053         0.054




                                                                                           45
                     Table 15: Carbon Total Firm Emissions and Stock Returns: Awareness (Regional)
Our sample firms include alternately North America, North America (ex U.S.), Europe, the European Union, Asia, Asia (ex. China), and Others (Africa,
Australia, and South America). The dependent variable is RET. The main independent variable is carbon emission level. All variables are defined in Table
1 and Table 2. We report the results of the pooled regression with standard errors clustered at the firm and year level. Panel A reports the results for a
sample covering the period January 2014-November 2015 (two years before Paris COP 21 conference). Panel B reports the results for a sample covering
the period January 2016-December 2017 (two years after Paris COP 21 conference). All regression models include the controls of Table 7 (unreported
for brevity), year-month fixed effects, and country fixed effects. In selected columns, we additionally include industry-fixed effects. ***1% significance;
**5% significance; *10% significance.
                                                                       Panel A: Pre Paris
DEP. VARIABLE: RET                       (1)         (2)          (3)                   (4)              (5)                (6)            (7)           (8)
                                                       North America                                                     North America (excl. USA)
LOGS1TOT                            -0.014                       0.008                              -0.038                               -0.055
                                    (0.049)                     (0.040)                             (0.065)                              (0.094)
LOGS3TOT                                           -0.004                              0.040                              0.163*                        0.087
                                                   (0.088)                            (0.094)                             (0.080)                      (0.217)
Controls                             Yes             Yes          Yes                   Yes           Yes                   Yes            Yes           Yes
Yr/mo fixed effects                  Yes             Yes          Yes                   Yes           Yes                   Yes            Yes           Yes
Country fixed effects                Yes             Yes          Yes                   Yes           Yes                   Yes            Yes           Yes
Industry fixed effects               No              No           Yes                   Yes           No                    No             Yes           Yes
Observations                        26,898         26,955       26,551                26,608         5,357                 5,380          5,345         5,368
R-squared                           0.150           0.150        0.166                 0.165         0.161                 0.162          0.184         0.185

DEP. VARIABLE: RET                       (1)          (2)             (3)               (4)              (5)                 (6)                (7)     (8)
                                                              Europe                                                                 EU
LOGS1TOT                             0.018                          0.068*                           0.020                                0.106***
                                    (0.033)                         (0.037)                         (0.034)                                (0.036)
LOGS3TOT                                            0.082                             0.215**                               0.108                     0.281***
                                                   (0.067)                            (0.080)                              (0.077)                     (0.087)
Controls                             Yes             Yes                 Yes            Yes           Yes                    Yes            Yes          Yes
Yr/mo fixed effects                  Yes             Yes                 Yes            Yes           Yes                    Yes            Yes          Yes
Country fixed effects                Yes             Yes                 Yes            Yes           Yes                    Yes            Yes          Yes
Industry fixed effects               No              No                  Yes            Yes           No                     No             Yes          Yes
Observations                        27,815         27,850              27,349         27,384        23,588                 23,612          23,145      23,169
R-squared                           0.117           0.117               0.132          0.133         0.127                  0.127          0.146        0.146

DEP. VARIABLE: RET                        (1)         (2)                (3)            (4)              (5)                 (6)             (7)        (8)
                                                               Asia                                                          Asia (excl. China)
LOGS1TOT                             -0.058*                           -0.044                       -0.045                                 -0.042
                                     (0.029)                           (0.038)                      (0.032)                               (0.036)
LOGS3TOT                                            -0.026                             0.069                                0.040                      0.121
                                                    (0.057)                           (0.084)                              (0.072)                    (0.080)
Controls                              Yes             Yes               Yes             Yes           Yes                    Yes             Yes        Yes
Yr/mo fixed effects                   Yes             Yes               Yes             Yes           Yes                    Yes             Yes        Yes
Country fixed effects                 Yes             Yes               Yes             Yes           Yes                    Yes             Yes        Yes
Industry fixed effects                No              No                Yes             Yes           No                     No              Yes        Yes
Observations                         42,151         42,208             41,828         41,885        33,588                 33,645         33,288      33,345
R-squared                            0.116           0.116             0.124           0.124         0.093                  0.093           0.104      0.104

                DEP. VARIABLE: RET                               (1)                    (2)                      (3)                      (4)
                                                                                                Others
                LOGS1TOT                                       -0.100                                          0.168*
                                                               (0.065)                                         (0.098)
                LOGS3TOT                                                              -0.054                                          0.230*
                                                                                      (0.090)                                         (0.122)
                Controls                                         Yes                    Yes                     Yes                     Yes
                Yr/mo fixed effects                              Yes                    Yes                     Yes                     Yes
                Country fixed effects                            Yes                    Yes                     Yes                     Yes
                Industry fixed effects                           No                     No                      Yes                     Yes
                Observations                                   12,231                 12,266                   12,115                 12,150
                R-squared                                       0.086                  0.085                   0.112                   0.112




                                                                                 46
                                                                            Panel B: Post Paris
  DEP. VARIABLE: RET                      (1)           (2)            (3)                  (4)            (5)                   (6)            (7)            (8)
                                                           North America                                                      North America (excl. USA)
  LOGS1TOT                               0.038                       0.069                               -0.053                                0.071
                                        (0.042)                     (0.051)                              (0.072)                              (0.113)
  LOGS3TOT                                             0.115                               0.091                                0.028                         0.095
                                                      (0.076)                             (0.092)                              (0.098)                       (0.185)
  Controls                               Yes            Yes           Yes                   Yes           Yes                    Yes            Yes            Yes
  Yr/mo fixed effects                    Yes            Yes           Yes                   Yes           Yes                    Yes            Yes            Yes
  Country fixed effects                  Yes            Yes           Yes                   Yes           Yes                    Yes            Yes            Yes
  Industry fixed effects                 No             No            Yes                   Yes           No                     No             Yes            Yes
  Observations                          47,539        47,575        46,918                46,954         7,625                  7,649          7,535          7,559
  R-squared                             0.065          0.066         0.075                 0.075         0.068                  0.069          0.087          0.088

   DEP. VARIABLE: RET                      (1)          (2)                 (3)             (4)               (5)                (6)                (7)       (8)
                                                                 Europe                                                                   EU
   LOGS1TOT                               0.052                           0.049                          0.074*                                    0.065
                                         (0.038)                         (0.036)                         (0.043)                                  (0.044)
   LOGS3TOT                                           0.201***                            0.265***                            0.223***                      0.317***
                                                       (0.061)                             (0.087)                             (0.066)                       (0.087)
   Controls                               Yes            Yes                Yes              Yes           Yes                   Yes                Yes        Yes
   Yr/mo fixed effects                    Yes            Yes                Yes              Yes           Yes                   Yes                Yes        Yes
   Country fixed effects                  Yes            Yes                Yes              Yes           Yes                   Yes                Yes        Yes
   Industry fixed effects                 No             No                 Yes              Yes           No                    No                 Yes        Yes
   Observations                          36,155        36,191             35,567           35,603        29,779                29,779             29,247     29,247
   R-squared                             0.087          0.088              0.102            0.102         0.096                 0.097              0.112      0.113

DEP. VARIABLE: RET                              (1)       (2)                (3)             (4)              (5)                 (6)               (7)        (8)
                                                                  Asia                                                              Asia (excl. China)
LOGS1TOT                                  0.108**                         0.127***                       0.105**                                 0.106**
                                          (0.041)                          (0.043)                       (0.040)                                 (0.043)
LOGS3TOT                                               0.235***                           0.331***                             0.187***                     0.256***
                                                        (0.061)                            (0.061)                              (0.062)                      (0.064)
Controls                                    Yes           Yes                 Yes            Yes          Yes                     Yes              Yes         Yes
Yr/mo fixed effects                         Yes           Yes                 Yes            Yes          Yes                     Yes              Yes         Yes
Country fixed effects                       Yes           Yes                 Yes            Yes          Yes                     Yes              Yes         Yes
Industry fixed effects                      No            No                  Yes            Yes          No                      No               Yes         Yes
Observations                               92,619       92,643              91,408         91,432        71,817                 71,841           70,728      70,752
R-squared                                  0.062         0.062               0.068          0.069        0.048                   0.048            0.056       0.056


                         DEP. VARIABLE: RET                           (1)                    (2)                      (3)                   (4)
                                                                                                     Others
                         LOGS1TOT                                    0.081                                           0.095
                                                                    (0.056)                                         (0.077)
                         LOGS3TOT                                                           0.142                                          0.219
                                                                                           (0.116)                                        (0.146)
                         Controls                                     Yes                    Yes                     Yes                    Yes
                         Yr/mo fixed effects                          Yes                    Yes                     Yes                    Yes
                         Country fixed effects                        Yes                    Yes                     Yes                    Yes
                         Industry fixed effects                       No                     No                      Yes                    Yes
                         Observations                               16,029                 16,065                   15,818                15,854
                         R-squared                                   0.056                  0.057                   0.077                  0.077




                                                                                     47
                                                                Online Appendix

                                                   Table A.1: Industry Representation
The table reports the distribution of unique firms in our sample with regard to GIC 6 industry classification. #Co. represents the total number of firms
in each industry. The sample period is 2005-2018.
                        Industry                                                             GICSIX                 # Co.
                        Energy Equipment & Services                                             1                    170
                        Oil, Gas & Consumable Fuels                                             2                    467
                        Chemicals                                                               3                    530
                        Construction Materials                                                  4                    162
                        Containers & Packaging                                                  5                    102
                        Metals & Mining                                                         6                    506
                        Paper & Forest Products                                                 7                     92
                        Aerospace & Defense                                                     8                     99
                        Building Products                                                       9                    165
                        Construction & Engineering                                             10                    380
                        Electrical Equipment                                                   11                    282
                        Industrial Conglomerates                                               12                    144
                        Machinery                                                              13                    580
                        Trading Companies & Distributors                                       14                    195
                        Commercial Services & Supplies                                         15                    261
                        Professional Services                                                  16                    150
                        Air Freight & Logistics                                                17                     70
                        Airlines                                                               18                     75
                        Marine                                                                 19                     87
                        Road & Rail                                                            20                    115
                        Transportation Infrastructure                                          21                    124
                        Auto Components                                                        22                    313
                        Automobiles                                                            23                     75
                        Household Durables                                                     24                    270
                        Leisure Products                                                       25                     73
                        Textiles, Apparel & Luxury Goods                                       26                    262
                        Hotels, Restaurants & Leisure                                          27                    359
                        Diversified Consumer Services                                          28                    105
                        Media                                                                  29                    325
                        Distributors                                                           30                     64
                        Internet & Direct Marketing Retail                                     31                     92
                        Multiline Retail                                                       32                    117
                        Specialty Retail                                                       33                    354
                        Food & Staples Retailing                                               34                    200
                        Beverages                                                              35                    126
                        Food Products                                                          36                    440
                        Tobacco                                                                37                     25
                        Household Products                                                     38                     41
                        Personal Products                                                      39                    100
                        Health Care Equipment & Supplies                                       40                    229
                        Health Care Providers & Services                                       41                    224
                        Health Care Technology                                                 42                     35
                        Biotechnology                                                          43                    273
                        Pharmaceuticals                                                        44                    371
                        Life Sciences Tools & Services                                         45                     61
                        Banks                                                                  46                    679
                        Thrifts & Mortgage Finance                                             47                     70
                        Diversified Financial Services                                         48                    180
                        Consumer Finance                                                       49                    116
                        Capital Markets                                                        50                    351
                        Mortgage Real Estate Investment Trusts (REITs)                         51                      2
                        Insurance                                                              52                    234
                        Internet Software & Services                                           53                    180
                        IT Services                                                            54                    301
                        Software                                                               55                    367
                        Communications Equipment                                               56                    154
                        Technology Hardware, Storage & Peripherals                             57                    167
                        Electronic Equipment, Instruments & Components                         58                    520
                        Semiconductors & Semiconductor Equipment                               59                    398
                        Diversified Telecommunication Services                                 60                    131
                        Wireless Telecommunication Services                                    61                     74
                        Media                                                                  62                    142
                        Entertainment                                                          63                    114

                                                                          48
                                       Interactive Media & Services                                                   64                      36
                                       Electric Utilities                                                             65                     159
                                       Gas Utilities                                                                  66                      66
                                       Multi-Utilities                                                                67                      57
                                       Water Utilities                                                                68                      44
                                       Independent Power and Renewable Electricity Producers                          69                     152
                                       Equity Real Estate Investment Trusts (REITs)                                   70                     274
                                       Real Estate Management & Development                                           71                     619


                                Table A2: Carbon Emissions and Stock Returns: Interaction with Foreign Operations
              The sample period is 2005-2018. The dependent variable is RET. The main independent variables are carbon emission levels (Panel A) and the percentage
              changes in emissions (Panel B). FORDUM is an indicator variable equal to one if a firm has any sales generated abroad and zero if all its sales are
              generated domestically. All variables are defined in Table 1 and Table 2. We report the results of the pooled regression with standard errors clustered at
              the firm and year level. All regressions include year-month fixed effects and country fixed effects. In columns (4) through (6), we additionally include
              industry-fixed effects. In columns (7) to (9), we instead include firm fixed effects. ***1% significance; **5% significance; *10% significance.

                                                                                               Panel A: Levels
           DEP. VARIABLE: RET                (1)            (2)              (3)         (4)                (5)             (6)             (7)              (8)              (9)

           LOGS1TOT*FORDUM                  0.004                                       0.002                                             -0.073
                                           (0.012)                                     (0.010)                                            (0.042)
           LOGS2TOT*FORDUM                                 0.008                                           0.005                                          -0.037
                                                          (0.020)                                         (0.016)                                         (0.057)
           LOGS3TOT*FORDUM                                               0.012                                           0.016                                              0.026
                                                                        (0.023)                                         (0.020)                                            (0.061)
           Yr/mo fixed effects               Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes               Yes               Yes             Yes              Yes
           Country fixed effects             Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes               Yes               No              No               No
           Industry fixed effects            No            No             No             Yes            Yes               Yes               No              No               No
           Firm fixed effects                No            No             No             No             No                No                Yes             Yes              Yes
           Observations                    650,522       650,712        651,110        641,794        641,984           642,382           650,495         650,685          651,083
           R-squared                        0.148         0.148          0.148          0.150          0.150             0.150             0.177           0.177            0.177

                                                                                         Panel B: Percentage Changes
           DEP. VARIABLE: RET                (1)            (2)              (3)         (4)                (5)             (6)             (7)              (8)              (9)

           S1CHG *FORDUM                   -0.098                                      -0.083                                              0.019
                                           (0.097)                                     (0.098)                                            (0.130)
           S2CHG *FORDUM                                   0.025                                           0.040                                          0.125*
                                                          (0.060)                                         (0.064)                                         (0.070)
           S3CHG *FORDUM                                                 0.264*                                         0.301**                                            0.674***
                                                                        (0.131)                                         (0.131)                                             (0.207)
           Yr/mo fixed effects               Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes               Yes               Yes             Yes               Yes
           Country fixed effects             Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes               Yes               No              No                No
           Industry fixed effects            No            No              No            Yes            Yes               Yes               No              No                No
           Firm fixed effects                No            No              No            No             No                No                Yes             Yes               Yes
           Observations                    650,594       650,664        651,110        641,866        641,936           642,382           650,567         650,637          651,083
           R-squared                        0.149         0.149          0.149          0.150          0.150             0.151             0.177           0.177             0.178



                                       Table A.3: Carbon Emissions and Stock Returns: Economic Development
The sample period is 2005-2018. The dependent variable is RET. The main independent variables are carbon emission levels (columns 1-4) and the percentage changes in emissions
(columns 5-8). All variables are defined in Table 1 and Table 2. We report the results of the pooled regression with standard errors clustered at the firm and year level. Panel A reports
the results for a sample of firms coming from G-20 and non-G20 countries. Panel B reports the results for a sample of firms from OECD and non-OECD countries. All regression
models include the controls of Table 7 (unreported for brevity), year-month fixed effects, and country fixed effects. In selected columns, we additionally include industry-fixed effects.
***1% significance; **5% significance; *10% significance.

                                                                                      Panel A: G20
                        Developed (G20)                   (1)          (2)            (3)           (4)               (5)           (6)             (7)              (8)
                        LOGS1TOT                         0.032                     0.072***
                                                        (0.026)                     (0.015)
                        LOGS3TOT                                    0.126***                      0.185***
                                                                     (0.036)                       (0.037)
                        S1CHG                                                                                       0.517***                      0.538***
                                                                                                                     (0.093)                       (0.093)
                        S3CHG                                                                                                     1.276***                         1.308***
                                                                                                                                   (0.275)                          (0.286)
                        Controls                         Yes          Yes            Yes            Yes               Yes            Yes            Yes               Yes
                        Yr/mo fixed effects              Yes          Yes            Yes            Yes               Yes            Yes            Yes               Yes
                        Country fixed effects            Yes          Yes            Yes            Yes               Yes            Yes            Yes               Yes
                        Industry fixed effects           No           No             Yes            Yes               No             No             Yes               Yes
                        Observations                   575,858      576,338        567,704        568,184           575,930       576,338         567,776          568,184
                        R-squared                       0.151        0.151          0.153          0.153             0.151          0.152          0.153             0.153


                                                                                             49
               Developing (non-G20)               (1)        (2)            (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)           (7)          (8)
               LOGS1TOT                        0.028**                   0.060**
                                               (0.012)                   (0.023)
               LOGS3TOT                                    0.105***                   0.167***
                                                            (0.032)                    (0.052)
               S1CHG                                                                               0.427***                 0.416***
                                                                                                    (0.101)                  (0.103)
               S3CHG                                                                                           1.438***                  1.461***
                                                                                                                (0.231)                   (0.235)
               Controls                         Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
               Yr/mo fixed effects              Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
               Country fixed effects            Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
               Industry fixed effects           No           No            Yes          Yes          No           No           Yes          Yes
               Observations                   170,784      170,952       169,147      169,315      170,808     170,952       169,171     169,315
               R-squared                       0.163        0.163         0.166        0.166        0.164        0.165        0.166        0.167

                                                                        Panel B: OECD
                Developed (OECD)                   (1)          (2)          (3)             (4)       (5)         (6)           (7)        (8)
                LOGS1TOT                          0.038                   0.055***
                                                 (0.022)                   (0.013)
                LOGS3TOT                                     0.124***                   0.149***
                                                              (0.028)                    (0.029)
                S1CHG                                                                               0.471***                  0.495***
                                                                                                     (0.088)                   (0.091)
                S3CHG                                                                                           1.185***                 1.219***
                                                                                                                 (0.279)                  (0.295)
                Controls                           Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes
                Yr/mo fixed effects                Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes
                Country fixed effects              Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes
                Industry fixed effects             No          No            Yes          Yes          No          No           Yes         Yes
                Observations                     524,888     525,512       517,058      517,682      524,984    525,512       517,154    517,682
                R-squared                         0.158       0.159         0.160        0.161        0.159       0.159        0.161       0.161

                Developing (non-OECD)            (1)         (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)         (6)           (7)         (8)
                LOGS1TOT                        0.011                   0.085***
                                               (0.024)                   (0.023)
                LOGS3TOT                                   0.105*                     0.223***
                                                           (0.049)                     (0.069)
                S1CHG                                                                               0.509***                 0.514***
                                                                                                     (0.130)                  (0.129)
                S3CHG                                                                                          1.462***                  1.455***
                                                                                                                (0.286)                   (0.284)
                Controls                         Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes
                Yr/mo fixed effects              Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes
                Country fixed effects            Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes
                Industry fixed effects           No          No           Yes           Yes           No          No            Yes         Yes
                Observations                   221,754     221,778      219,793       219,817       221,754    221,778        219,793    219,817
                R-squared                       0.174       0.174        0.176         0.177         0.175       0.176         0.177       0.177

           Table A.4: Carbon Total Firm Emissions and Stock Returns: Pre/Post Paris (Economic Development)
The dependent variable is RET. The main independent variable is carbon emission level. All variables are defined in Table 1 and Table 2. We report the results of
the pooled regression with standard errors clustered at the firm and year level. Columns (1)-(4) consider a sample of firms located in developed (G-20) countries,
columns (5)-(8) consider a sample from developing (non-G20) countries. Panel A reports the results for a sample covering the period January 2014-November 2015
(two years before Paris COP 21 conference). Panel B reports the results for a sample covering the period January 2016-December 2017 (two years after Paris COP
21 conference). All regression models include the controls of Table 7 (unreported for brevity), year-month fixed effects, and country fixed effects. In selected
columns, we additionally include industry-fixed effects. ***1% significance; **5% significance; *10% significance.
                                                                        Panel A: Pre Paris
DEP. VARIABLE: RET                  (1)           (2)            (3)                   (4)             (5)                (6)            (7)            (8)
                                              Developed Countries (G-20)                                                 Developing Countries
LOGS1TOT                         -0.046                         0.012                                 0.009                            -0.000
                                 (0.029)                       (0.024)                               (0.033)                           (0.033)
LOGS3TOT                                        -0.010                               0.088*                              0.066                         0.086
                                                (0.041)                              (0.051)                            (0.053)                       (0.092)
Controls                           Yes            Yes            Yes                   Yes            Yes                 Yes            Yes            Yes
Yr/mo fixed effects                Yes            Yes            Yes                   Yes            Yes                 Yes            Yes            Yes
Country fixed effects              Yes            Yes            Yes                   Yes            Yes                 Yes            Yes            Yes
Industry fixed effects             No             No             Yes                   Yes            No                  No             Yes            Yes
Observations                      83,578        83,727         82,556                82,705          25,816             25,851         25,587         25,622
R-squared                         0.095          0.095          0.104                 0.104          0.091               0.091          0.103          0.103




                                                                               50
                                                                                Panel B: Post Paris
       DEP. VARIABLE: RET                       (1)           (2)            (3)                  (4)               (5)               (6)            (7)             (8)
                                                          Developed Countries (G-20)                                                 Developing Countries
       LOGS1TOT                           0.112***                        0.100***                             0.055*                             0.090**
                                           (0.034)                         (0.025)                             (0.030)                            (0.037)
       LOGS3TOT                                            0.221***                             0.259***                           0.187***                       0.289***
                                                            (0.046)                              (0.047)                            (0.055)                        (0.071)
       Controls                              Yes              Yes            Yes                   Yes            Yes                 Yes           Yes              Yes
       Yr/mo fixed effects                   Yes              Yes            Yes                   Yes            Yes                 Yes           Yes              Yes
       Country fixed effects                 Yes              Yes            Yes                   Yes            Yes                 Yes           Yes              Yes
       Industry fixed effects                No               No             Yes                   Yes            No                  No            Yes              Yes
       Observations                        148,067         148,151        145,875               145,959         44,611              44,659        44,171           44,219
       R-squared                            0.051            0.051          0.056                 0.057          0.050               0.051         0.062            0.063

                                Table A.5: Carbon Emissions and Stock Returns: Policy Change and Reputational Risk
The sample excludes companies in the oil & gas (gic=2), utilities (gic=65-69), and motor (gic=18, 19, 23) industries. The dependent variable is RET. The main independent variables
are carbon emission levels (columns 1-4) and the percentage changes in emissions (columns 5-8). All variables are defined in Table 1 and Table 2. We report the results of the pooled
regression with standard errors clustered at the firm and year level. Panel A reports the results for a sample covering the period January 2014-November 2015 (two years before
Paris COP 21 conference). Panel B reports the results for a sample covering the period January 2016-December 2017 (two years after Paris COP 21 conference). All regression
models include the controls of Table 7 (unreported for brevity), year-month fixed effects, and country fixed effects. In selected columns, we additionally include industry-fixed
effects. ***1% significance; **5% significance; *10% significance.
                                                                                Panel A: Pre Paris
                       DEP. VARIABLE: RET                 (1)         (2)          (3)            (4)         (5)           (6)           (7)         (8)
                       LOGS1TOT                        -0.045*                    0.005
                                                       (0.026)                   (0.022)
                       LOGS3TOT                                     -0.047                       0.052
                                                                    (0.044)                     (0.057)
                       S1CHG                                                                               0.741***                    0.746***
                                                                                                            (0.120)                     (0.114)
                       S3CHG                                                                                              2.131***                 2.182***
                                                                                                                           (0.275)                  (0.276)
                       Controls                         Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes          Yes            Yes         Yes          Yes
                       Yr/mo fixed effects              Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes          Yes            Yes         Yes          Yes
                       Country fixed effects            Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes          Yes            Yes         Yes          Yes
                       Industry fixed effects           No           Yes          No             Yes          No             Yes         No           Yes
                       Observations                    96,826       97,010       95,597         95,781      96,826         97,010       95,597      95,781
                       R-squared                       0.088        0.088        0.096          0.096        0.089          0.090       0.096        0.097

                                                                                Panel B: Post Paris
                       DEP. VARIABLE: RET                (1)          (2)           (3)            (4)        (5)            (6)           (7)        (8)
                       LOGS1TOT                       0.129***                   0.122***
                                                       (0.037)                    (0.031)
                       LOGS3TOT                                    0.207***                     0.272***
                                                                    (0.045)                      (0.049)
                       S1CHG                                                                               0.559***                     0.533***
                                                                                                            (0.114)                      (0.108)
                       S3CHG                                                                                              1.824***                  1.787***
                                                                                                                           (0.255)                   (0.249)
                       Controls                         Yes           Yes          Yes             Yes        Yes            Yes           Yes         Yes
                       Yr/mo fixed effects              Yes           Yes          Yes             Yes        Yes            Yes           Yes         Yes
                       Country fixed effects            Yes           Yes          Yes             Yes        Yes            Yes           Yes         Yes
                       Industry fixed effects           No            Yes          No              Yes        No             Yes           No          Yes
                       Observations                   175,629       175,761      173,034         173,166    175,629       175,761        173,034    173,166
                       R-squared                       0.049         0.049        0.054           0.054      0.048          0.050         0.054       0.055




                                                                                           51
                           Table A.6: Carbon Emissions and Stock Returns: Policy Change and Market Uncertainty
The sample period is 2005-2018. The sample are all firms that have presence in the sample any year prior to 2016. The dependent variable is RET. The main independent
variables are carbon emission levels (columns (1)-(4)) and the percentage changes in emissions (columns (5)-(8)). All variables are defined in Table 1 and Table 2. We report the
results of the pooled regression with standard errors clustered at the firm and year level. All regressions include year-month fixed effects and country fixed effects. All regression
models include the controls of Table 7 (unreported for brevity). Panel A reports the results for a sample covering the period January 2014-November 2015 (two years before
Paris COP 21 conference). Panel B reports the results for a sample covering the period January 2016-December 2017 (two years after Paris COP 21 conference). In even-
numbered columns, we additionally include industry-fixed effects. ***1% significance; **5% significance; *10% significance.
                                                                                 Panel A: Pre Paris
                       DEP. VARIABLE: RET                (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)           (6)          (7)          (8)
                       LOGS1TOT                        -0.032                       0.019
                                                       (0.023)                     (0.018)
                       LOGS3TOT                                       0.007                      0.096*
                                                                     (0.038)                     (0.050)
                       S1CHG                                                                                 0.731***                   0.722***
                                                                                                              (0.119)                    (0.119)
                       S3CHG                                                                                              1.924***                   1.891***
                                                                                                                           (0.338)                    (0.345)
                       Controls                          Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes
                       Yr/mo fixed effects               Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes
                       Country fixed effects             Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes
                       Industry fixed effects            No            No            Yes          Yes           No           No           Yes           Yes
                       Observations                    109,394       109,578       108,143      108,327       109,394     109,578       108,143      108,327
                       R-squared                        0.090         0.090         0.098        0.098         0.091        0.092        0.099         0.100

                                                                                 Panel B: Post Paris
                       DEP. VARIABLE: RET                 (1)          (2)            (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)          (7)          (8)
                       LOGS1TOT                        0.081**                     0.057**
                                                       (0.030)                     (0.026)
                       LOGS3TOT                                     0.217***                    0.230***
                                                                     (0.052)                     (0.055)
                       S1CHG                                                                                 0.299***                   0.288***
                                                                                                              (0.094)                    (0.090)
                       S3CHG                                                                                              1.148***                   1.101***
                                                                                                                           (0.270)                    (0.281)
                       Controls                          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes
                       Yr/mo fixed effects               Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes
                       Country fixed effects             Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes
                       Industry fixed effects            No            No           Yes           Yes           No           No           Yes           Yes
                       Observations                    125,199       125,331      123,715       123,847       125,199     125,331       123,715      123,847
                       R-squared                        0.071         0.071        0.077         0.078         0.070        0.071        0.078         0.078




                                                                                         52
