                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               LIMITED-TENURE CONCESSIONS FOR COLLECTIVE GOODS

                                           Nicolas Quérou
                                           Agnes Tomini
                                         Christopher Costello

                                        Working Paper 28518
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w28518


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2021




N. Querou acknowledges the ANR project GREEN-Econ (Grant ANR-16-CE03-0005). A. Tomini
acknowledges the ANR financial support (Grant ANR-17-EUR-0020). C. Costello acknowledges the
Bren Chair in Environmental Management and the Environmental Market Solutions Lab. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2021 by Nicolas Quérou, Agnes Tomini, and Christopher Costello. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Limited-Tenure Concessions for Collective Goods
Nicolas Quérou, Agnes Tomini, and Christopher Costello
NBER Working Paper No. 28518
February 2021
JEL No. H41,Q2

                                          ABSTRACT

We analyze theoretically an institution called a "limited-tenure concession" for its ability to
induce efficient public goods contribution and common-pool resource extraction. The basic idea
is that by limiting the tenure over which an agent can enjoy the public good, but offering the
possibility of renewal contingent on ample private provision of that good, efficient provision may
be induced. We first show in a simple repeated game setting that limited-tenure concessions can
incentivize socially-efficient provision of public goods. We then analyze the ability of this
instrument to incentivize the first best provision for common-pool natural resources such as fish
and water, thus accounting for spatial connectivity and natural growth dynamics of the resource.
The duration of tenure and the dispersal of the resource play pivotal roles in whether this limited-
duration concession induces the socially optimal private provision. Finally, in a setting with
costly monitoring, we discuss the features of a concession contract that ensure first-best behavior,
but at least cost to the implementing agency.

Nicolas Quérou                                   Christopher Costello
CEE-M (Center for Environmental                  Bren School of Environmental
Economics - Montpellier)                         Science & Management
nicolas.querou@umontpellier.fr                   University of California, Santa Barbara
                                                 Santa Barbara, CA 93106
Agnes Tomini                                     and NBER
Aix-Marseille University                         costello@bren.ucsb.edu
School of Economics
5-9 Bd Maruice Bourdet
F-13001
Marseille
France
agnes.tomini@univ-amu.fr
1       Introduction
The impediments to private provision of public goods, carefully described over half a
century ago (Samuelson 1954; Buchanan 1965), remain pervasive and economically
relevant today (Kotchen 2006; Marx and Matthews 2000; Cornes and Sandler 1996).
While governments can (and do) provide these goods, there is a perpetual quest to
develop institutions and incentives that give rise to efficient private provision. In this
paper we formalize and analyze an institution called a "limited-tenure concession"
for its ability to induce the efficient private provision of public goods.
    While we will analyze a general model of public goods, we are motivated by the
tragedy of the commons, a particular public goods setting in which natural resources
are over-extracted by agents who fail to internalize the consequences of their ex-
traction on others' payoffs. In this way, agents' over-extraction can be viewed as
under-provision of the public good. Even today many natural resources including
forests, fisheries, and irrigation water are over-extracted and are thus inefficiently
provided.1 One increasingly common approach is to devolve ownership of these re-
sources to individuals, communities or cooperatives; the idea being that this assign-
ment of property rights creates a sole-owner-like incentive to steward the resource.
But even in that setting, because these resources often move in space, one owners'
extraction affects other owners' future payoffs, and the externality persists. In other
words, even perfectly delineated spatial property rights cannot solve the tragedy of
the commons for spatially-connected natural resources.
    We find that over-extraction of natural resources in a common pool is a particular
public goods setting that is ripe for limited-tenure concessions. Here, a concession is
a limited-duration assignment of property rights, under which the temporary owner
is completely autonomous and can behave in any manner she sees fit - that is, she
is free to extract as much or as little as she wishes over the duration of her tenure.2
Two parameters of a concession contract will turn out to be pivotal for our analysis.
First, the duration of tenure plays an important role in incentives and can make, or
break, the ability of the concession to induce efficient provision of the public good.
Second, we allow for the possibility of renewal of the concession contract, provided
that certain conditions have been met. We will show that the enticement of renewal
    1
      Other relevant examples include green goods and climate protection infrastructure, provided
their collective benefits may be potentially excludable. We refer to Section 2 for a discussion of
other consistent real-world examples.
    2
      In real world settings, trade in concession contracts is usually forbidden because the resource
is held in public trust and approved concessionaries must meet certain criteria. However, allowing
trade in concession contracts is innocuous in our model so long as the buyer is bound by the same
terms as was the seller.


                                                 2
can induce efficient private provision of a public good, even from completely self-
interested parties.
    Limited-tenure concessions are also applicable across a much broader set of public
goods, whose efficient provision is hindered by free-riding incentives.3 In the general
public goods setting, a concession can be thought of as a limited-duration assignment
of a property right to a temporary owner. Over her tenure she enjoys all the benefits
of the public good and she may also decide to contribute to the public good. At
the conclusion of her tenure there is the possibility of renewal, which is contingent
on her private contributions over the preceding tenure block. If her tenure is not
renewed, then she is excluded from enjoying the future benefits of the public good.
It is intuitive to see how the ability to exclude the player from enjoying the future
benefits of the public good could induce private provision in the present. We begin
the analysis with a simple, stylized repeated public goods contribution game. That
simple analysis highlights the important tradeoffs and incentives engendered by a
limited-tenure concession.
    After illustrating the principal incentives of this intervention in a highly stylized
setting, we turn to a more substantial application to common pool natural resources.
Natural resources generalize the simple case in important dimensions including nat-
ural resource growth (i.e. a production function in which next year's resource stock
depends on this year's resource stock), mobility (water flows and fish swim), and
heterogeneity (e.g. growth or movement can differ over space) in incentives across
users. These features may exacerbate the tragedy of the commons4 and we examine
whether, and how, these features undermine the ability of limited-tenure concessions
to induce efficient private provision. When concessions are awarded over a fixed geo-
graphical area, the resources they are meant to encapsulate may disperse beyond the
concessionaire's domain; this could significantly alter incentives for efficient resource
use, since this implies a spatial externality.5 We thus amend the model to account for
these characteristics. Introducing a set of spatially-distinct property right owners,
we consider three management regimes: (i) the socially optimal regime, (ii) the de-
centralized regime and (iii) the concession regime. The last regime involves assigning
limited-duration tenure of each patch to a concessionaire, with conditional renewal.
The grantor of the concession (which we call a "regulator") announces for each patch
   3
     Bergstrom et al. (1986) provides the seminal paper on this issue, which has received attention
in many areas, including the environmental field (Vicary 2000; Kotchen 2006; Kotchen 2009).
   4
     For instance, Cornes and Sandler (1983) provide a detailed analysis of this tragedy.
   5
     The world's oceans consist of about 200 property right assignments (exclusive economic zones)
traversed by species such as tuna, sharks, and whales (White and Costello 2014). The mismatch
between the scales of property rights and of the resource is emphasized as a limitation (Aburto-
Oropeza et al. 2017) for mobile resources (Costello et al. (2015) or Kapaun and Quaas (2013)).


                                                3
a minimum stock below which the concessionaire should never extract. This is a styl-
ized version of how many concessions are implemented.6 Each concessionaire must
decide whether to comply or to defect, given that her payoff will depend on others'
strategies. Complying guarantees renewal, which raises future payoffs, while driving
the stock below the requirement returns large current payoffs, but ensures the con-
tract will not be renewed. One special case of this model is when all agents have
perpetual decentralized property rights, and we show that limited-tenure concessions
outperform this oft-touted benchmark.
    We show that limited-tenure concessions can induce the first best (that is, socially
optimal) behavior in this setting, and analyze the properties ensuring cooperation.
We find an interesting result: longer tenure is more likely to lead to defection from
the first best. This result has crucial implications for policy design, and it seems to
contradict the intuition that more secure property rights (here, the longer the tenure
duration) give rise to more efficient resource use. Indeed, Costello and Kaffine (2008)
show that any tenure length may induce efficient resource use, provided the renewal
probability is high enough. In our paper, under a long tenure period the regulator
loses the ability to affect an agent's incentives via the promise of tenure renewal.
Thus, for sufficiently long tenure length, concessionaires always defect: tenure must
not be too long. Finally, we discuss how concessions may still induce first-best
behavior even when monitoring and enforcement are imperfect and costly.
    This discussion highlights the shortcomings of short tenure equal to, say, a single
period. That case corresponds more closely to command and control regulation.
Here, however, compliance is incentivized by the promise of renewal, rather than
punished with a monetary penalty. Short tenure can induce efficient behavior, but
would be costly to implement if more frequent monitoring brings higher costs. Thus,
shorter tenure may induce stronger incentives to comply, but could increase the
expected monitoring costs. We analytically solve for the tenure length ensuring
compliance at least cost.
    Overall this paper makes three primary contributions. First, we show in a re-
   6
     TURF systems in Japan, Mexico and Chile contain maximum harvest provisions, whose adher-
ence is required for renewal. As a yearly stock assessment is carried out by consultants approved by
the government to determine a total allowable catch (TAC) for each TURF, such a requirement may
translate into a minimum stock requirement (Hilborn et al. (2005)). Wildlife management areas in
developing countries rely on ownership devolution to local communities and also require coordina-
tion from governments ( Pailler et al. (2015)). Groundwater is increasingly managed by property
rights, where an adjudication process relies on a watermaster to enforce the terms of the property
right. Because groundwater migrates spatially according to geological features, the groundwater
management setting shares the basic features of our concession system (see Ayres et al. (2018) for
real-world cases).


                                                 4
peated public good contribution game that limited-tenure concessions can induce
efficient provision of public goods. Second, we extend the model to account for
characteristics of common-pool resources more typical in natural resource settings:
spatially-connected resources, and growth dynamics. We show that the system can
incentivize the first best. Finally, in a setting with costly monitoring of a concession
contract by an implementing agency, we discuss the features that ensure first-best
behavior, but at least cost to implement. All results are analytically derived, allowing
us to draw general conclusions.
    The paper is structured as follows: Section 2 introduces a motivating model of
the private contribution to a public good and highlights how a concession alters
incentives for private provision. In Section 3 the model is generalized to allow for
heterogeneity and complex resource dynamics. In Section 4 we highlight the condi-
tions for cooperation with an emphasis on spatial characteristics of the model and
the tenure length. Various extensions are discussed in Section 5. A comparison with
other potential policies is provided in Section 6 and Section 7 concludes the paper.
Proofs are provided in an Appendix.


2       A simple model of public good contributions
To motivate our main contribution, and to build intuition, we begin with a simple
model of individual behavior with both private and public consequences. Consider
initially a static game in which (exogenous) N agents interact, where each agent
takes other agents' actions as given. Agent i chooses action (or "contribution") zi ,
which confers a public benefit but comes at a private cost. Her utility in this static
game is given by:

                                    W         zl + ui ( - zi )                                   (1)
                                          l

Here, the function W (·) represents the public component of utility and ui (·) repre-
sents the private component. The fixed parameter  denotes an agent's endowment
(or maximum effort level). Assuming that both functions are increasing and concave
ensures an interior equilibrium.7 This is a version of the canonical public goods model
popularized by Samuelson (1954). We slightly depart from this canonical model by
assuming that the public and private components of utility are bundled.8
    7
     Existence and uniqueness further require that W ((N - 1))  ui () and W ()  ui (0) hold
for any agent i.
   8
     This public good is more aptly referred to as an excludable public good, because we restrict its


                                                 5
     Here, increasing contribution zi comes at the cost of decreasing the private ben-
efits ui ( - zi ). It is straightforward to show that agent i under-provides this ex-
cludable public good because she fails to consider the beneficial effect of a larger
contribution on other players' utilities. That is, agent i maximizes Equation 1 by
setting ui ( - z  ^i ) = W ( l z
                               ^l ), while the social planner would like to maximize the
sum of utility across all agents, so she sets ui ( - zi ) = N W ( l zl ). Straightforward
comparative statics reveals that private agents will contribute too little: z  ^i < zi .
     Attempting to incentivize efficient provision, consider a new institution under
which this game is repeated every period for a limited duration tenure. That is,
each period, all N members contribute to, and enjoy the benefits from, public good
provision, but any player i's tenure lasts only for a limited duration. For example,
tenure may extend for a period of T = 10 years. A manager has the ability to renew
tenure to agent i, and agrees to do so if and only if agent i has acted responsibly, for
example if and only if she has chosen zi in every preceding period (up to T ). This
limited-duration tenure with the possibility of renewal is the focus of the rest of this
paper, and in this section we use this simple setup to illustrate how this institution
can induce efficient provision of the public good.
     Clearly, the enticement of renewal induces a tension in agent i's decision about her
contribution. On one hand, if she chooses to defect from the renewal rule stated by
the manager (while all other agents choose to comply and thus collectively contribute
        
   l=i zl ), she maximizes her payoff in any given period by choosing a contribution
to the public good that is lower than the socially optimal level (ziD instead of zi ,
                                                                         
where defection strategy ziD is, implicitly, ui ( - ziD ) = W                 D
                                                                    l=i zl + zi .). She is
permitted do so each period for the duration of her tenure (which lasts T periods).
On the other hand, the revocation rule ensures that by doing so, she will obtain
zero benefit after T periods. Instead, by contributing zi in all T periods, she is
ensured renewal for another tenure block. This tradeoff - of large current period
benefits from defection vs. infinite, though lower, benefits from cooperation - is
similar to the tradeoff in a Nash Reversion punishment strategy (see, e.g., Mas-Colell
et al. (1995)), except that: (1) the punishment happens at date T (not immediately
upon defection), (2) the punishment payoff is zero (rather than the Nash equilibrium
payoff), and (3) under this setup, other players besides i are not required to play
Nash upon defection. Here, it is the limited-tenure institution that is designed to
induce efficient contributions and punishment comes in the form of the failure to
renew tenure. We refer to this institution as a "limited-tenure concession".
     We now sketch why this type of concession contract can be designed to maintain
consumption to a limited set of N agents. In this way our model departs from a pure public good
setting, see Wang and Zudenkova (2016) for a recent analysis.


                                              6
cooperation around zi , and that there is a Folk-theorem-like result that ensures co-
operation (Mailath and Samuelson (2006), and see Dutta (1995) for a generalization
to stochastic games). If other agents comply, how will i respond? In that case, agent
i's infinite horizon cooperation payoff is given by:

                                    ui ( - zi ) + W ( l zl )
                                C
                                i =                                              (2)
                                             1-
where  is the discount factor. Instead, if agent i defects, it can be shown that she
will do so in the first tenure block, so her defection payoff is:
                                                                          
                         1 -  T +1
                D =                   ui ( - z D ) + W 
                                                 i                  zl + ziD  + 0               (3)
                           1-                                 l=i

which is just the defection payoff for a total of T periods and zero thereafter.9 In this
simple situation the agent compares C           D
                                         i  i . Straightforward algebraic manipula-
tion implies that a necessary and sufficient condition ensuring that the limited-tenure
instrument induces the first-best outcome as an equilibrium is the following:

                    ui ( - ziD ) + W ( l=i zl + ziD ) - (ui ( - zi ) + W (          l   zl ))
           T +1 >                                                                               (4)
                                   ui ( - ziD ) + W ( l=i zl + ziD )
    The right hand side is the percentage loss in single-period utility to agent i from
cooperating, rather than defecting. If the discount factor is sufficiently large, so
agents are sufficiently patient, then cooperation will always be supported as an equi-
librium outcome. Notice that, depending on the fundamentals, the actual value of
the bound defined in condition 4 might not be very high. One interesting consequence
of Condition 4 is that longer tenure blocks (i.e. larger T ) require higher discount
factors (i.e. lower discount rates) to sustain cooperation - sustaining cooperation
under a long tenure period requires more patience on the part of the agents.
    Even the simple repeated game presented here provides some useful and interest-
ing insights about the ability of a limited-tenure concession to induce socially opti-
mal provision of a public good. Versions of limited-tenure concessions are employed
commonly in real-world settings in which club members are expected to regularly
contribute to an excludable public good. For example, the North Atlantic Treaty Or-
ganization was one of the first such clubs to receive focused attention by economists
(Olson and Zeckhauser 1966). There, 29 member countries each contributes finan-
cially and agrees to uphold certain democratic and humanitarian ideals. In exchange
   9
   The defection payoff is zero thereafter because the public and private components of utility are
bundled.


                                                7
for the contributions, members receive public good defense (among other) benefits
that depend on others' contributions. If a member refuses to contribute the agreed-
upon share (which, by the way, differs among members), they face likely expulsion
from the club (and thus exclusion from the future benefits), though this process can
take time (so T > 1). Most social clubs, such as the historical Confrerie des Cheva-
liers du Tastevin in Burgundy, France (12,000 members), the exclusive Yellowstone
Club in Montana (250 members), and the service-oriented Rotary Club International
(1.2 million members) require contributions of time, money, and expertise to sustain
membership and enjoy club benefits. Formal charters ensure that the failure to con-
tribute leads to exclusion from the club's future benefits. In natural resources, some
clubs come in the form of international environmental agreements. For example, to
govern fisheries on the high seas, regional fishery management organizations func-
tion as clubs where member countries contribute resources and data to the group,
and agree to uphold certain sustainable practices. Failure to meet those require-
ments leads to future exclusion of public goods such as scientific information and
management coordination. Thus, the limited-tenure concession concept may even
be applicable to international settings, provided there is a mechanism to exclude
defecting members from public goods.
    This paper is motivated by a class of public goods challenges that has historically
led to the tragedy of the commons. We are interested in whether a limited-tenure con-
cession can help reverse over-extraction incentives for complex, spatially-connected
natural resources, so the simple model presented above will require some elabora-
tion. In what follows, we maintain the basic idea behind this simple model, but allow
for a sophisticated array of economic and ecological interactions including spatially
owned natural resource patches, natural resource growth and dispersal across space:
we thus move from a repeated game to a spatially dynamic game setting. Modeling
this richer environment allows us to draw conclusions about the features of a natu-
ral resource setting in which limited-tenure concessions can be designed to achieve
socially efficient outcomes.


3    Model & strategies
We now introduce a model of natural resource exploitation with spatially-connected
property owners. We then home-in on the incentives for harvest strategies cor-
responding to three property right regimes: a social planner optimizing resource
extraction over space and time; decentralized perpetual property right holders; the
case of decentralized limited-tenure concessions, on which we focus. The social plan-
ner's benchmark and the case of perpetual property right holders have been analyzed

                                          8
previously in the literature: we briefly state the corresponding properties.

3.1     The model
We follow the basic setup of Costello et al. (2015) where a natural resource stock is
distributed heterogeneously across a discrete spatial domain consisting of N patches
or properties. Patches may be heterogeneous in size, shape, economic, and envi-
ronmental characteristics, and resource extraction can occur in each patch. Using a
discrete-time model, the stock residing in property i at the beginning of time period
t is given by xit , and harvests undertaken in that property, hit , reduces the stock
over the course of that time period: Thus leaves a "residual stock" at the end of the
period of eit  xit - hit . The residual stock may grow, and the growth conditions
may be patch-specific denoted by the parameter i . Finally, as the resource is mobile
and can migrate around this system, we follow the natural science literature (see,
e.g., Nathan et al. (2002), or Siegel et al. (2003)) who denote dispersion by Dij  0
the fraction of the resource stock in patch i that migrates to patch j in a single
time period.10 Since some fraction of the resource may indeed flow out of the system
entirely, the dispersal fractions need not sum to one: i Dji  1. The equation of
motion in patch i is thus given as follows:
                                              N
                                    xit+1 =          Dji g (ejt , j ).                           (5)
                                              j =1


Here g (ejt , j ) is the period-t resource growth in patch j . As usual we require that
g (e,)                     2 (e,)           2 g (e,)

   e
       > 0, g   (e,)
                     > 0,  ge2
                                  < 0, and  e        > 0.11 We also assume that extinction
is absorbing, g (0; j ) = 0, and that the growth rate is finite, g(    e,)
                                                                       e
                                                                           |e=0 < .12 All
standard biological production functions are special cases of g (e, ).
    We assume that both price and marginal harvest cost are constant in a patch,
  10
     When j = i parameter Dii denotes the fraction of the resource stock in patch i that remains
in this patch. This model assumes density-independent dispersal parameters, Dij . We thus follow
a large part of the literature on metapopulation and source-sink dynamics (Sanchirico and Wilen
2009). This allows us to analyze the comparative statics effect of dispersal on cooperation vs.
defection incentives. In Section 5.4 we consider the case of density-dependent dispersal.
  11
     These assumptions must be satisfied within the relevant range of variable e. The logistic growth
function is consistent with them.
  12
     We will omit the growth-related parameter except briefly before Section 3.2 and in Section
3.3, where its effect will be analyzed. Thus, we will use the notation gi (e) and gi (e) instead of
                             2
(respectively) g(ee,i )
                        and  ge(e,i )
                                 2    in most parts of the paper.



                                                     9
though they can differ across patches. The resulting net price is given by pi .13 The
current profit from harvesting hit  xit - eit in patch i at time t is:

                                          it = pi (xit - eit ) .                                   (6)

We will employ this framework to compare the outcome and welfare implications
of three alternative property right systems. At this stage it is important to make
the following observation. Real world natural resource management is more complex
than the setting depicted here. For instance, there could be more complicated cost
structures. We propose a relatively simple, analytically tractable model to gain
insights on the performance of our concession instrument, while keeping the most
relevant features when studying this issue. This model allows for dynamic and spatial
externalities, and for strategic behavior between patch owners: we thus consider a
spatial dynamic game, instead of a repeated game as in Section 2. It allows to gain
sharp insights on the effects of ecological and economic fundamentals and of features
of the instrument (tenure length, target stock requirements) on its performance.
We will obtain sharp analytical results by exploiting the structure of our dynamic
and spatial game. We will derive closed form expressions of the owners' optimal
payoffs when committing to the instrument, and when following their best defection
strategies. This is necessary to analytically assess the performance of the instrument.
We discuss the case of stock-dependent costs in Section 5.3.14

3.1.1    Social Planner's Problem
Our benchmark is the case of the social planner who maximizes the net present value
of profit across the entire domain given the discount factor  . Her objective is:
                                                       N
                                    max                       t pi (xit - eit ) ,                  (7)
                                {e1t ,...,eN t }
                                                   t=0 i=1

subject to the equation of motion (5) for each patch i = 1, 2, ..., N . Focusing on
interior solutions, in any patch i, the planner should achieve the residual stock level:
                                                                 pi
                                         gi (eit ) =                                               (8)
                                                                j Dij pj

  13
     This assumption is fairly common and consistent with cases where the market price is the same
in all patches, while marginal costs are patch-specific (due to geographical locations, different costs
of access). Moreover, for many natural resources the number of implemented concession systems is
large: as such the output from any one concession system will have negligible effects on price.
  14
     This corresponds to cases where resource rents are not constant: situations where the resource
price is either time or stock dependent are also consistent cases.

                                                        10
The optimal residual stock results from the trade-off between the present profits from
harvest and the discounted sum of future benefits given growth and dispersal to all
patches. Note, by inspection, that these optimal residual stock levels are time and
state independent. Thus, each patch has a single optimal residual stock level that
should be achieved every period into perpetuity satisfying, for any period t:
                                             e      
                                              it = ei .                                           (9)
Since biological growth, dispersal, and economic returns are patch-specific, the opti-
mal policy will vary across patches. Equation 8 highlights that this policy depends
on patch-specific net prices, growth, and dispersal and self-retention parameters.
    We focus on policies with an interior solution - that is, those that are consistent
with the sustainable management of the resource. This emphasizes the importance
of ecological and economic fundamentals on the performance of the instrument, and
is formally equivalent to assuming gi (0) >            
                                                            pi
                                                             Dij pj
                                                                      and xi0 > (gi )-1   
                                                                                             pi
                                                                                              Dij pj
                                                            j                                j
are satisfied, that is, marginal growth gi (0) and initial stock level xi0 lie above min-
imum threshold values. In Section 3.1.2 we characterize the decentralized property
rights case, and highlight that the resulting extraction levels are higher than the
socially optimal levels: thus, in the decentralized reference setting, the resource is
over exploited. We then show that limited-tenure concessions can overcome this
over-exploitation problem.

3.1.2   Decentralized Perpetual Property Right Holders
The second regime is the case in which each patch is owned in perpetuity by a different
owner who seeks to maximize the net economic value of harvest from his patch,
with complete information about the stock, growth characteristics, and economic
conditions present throughout the system. In that case owner i solves:
                                          
                                max             t pi (xit - eit ) .                              (10)
                                {eit }
                                         t=0

subject to the equation of motion (5). Following Lemma 1 in Kaffine and Costello
(2011), in this uncoordinated benchmark setting, owner i will always harvest down
to a residual stock level e
                          ¯it that satisfies:
                                                       1
                                         gi (¯
                                             eit ) =       .                                     (11)
                                                       Dii
We thus assume that the decentralized situation correspond to an interior equilib-
                                          1
rium outcome: this requires that gi (0) > D ii
                                               and xi0 > (gi )-1 D
                                                                 1
                                                                   ii
                                                                      be satisfied.

                                                 11
Thus, marginal growth gi (0) lies above a minimum threshold value. This keeps the
exposition as simple as possible, but our instrument can address cases where this
does not hold. Moreover, as efficient policies are interior (see Section 3.1.1), the
condition on the initial stock level is satisfied already.
    At the equilibrium outcome, the owner takes other owners' behaviors as given
and realizes that he will not be the residual claimant of any conservative harvesting
behavior. Thus, he behaves as if any additional resource that disperses out of his
patch will be lost (indeed it will be harvested by his competitors). This is why the
only dispersal term to enter the optimal residual stock term is Dii , the fraction of
the resource that remains in his patch. We have e     ¯it  e  it (with strict inequality as
long as Dii = 1): achieving social efficiency requires some kind of intervention or
cooperation. Moreover, Equation (11) implies that e     ¯it = e¯i for any time period.15
    In our specification of decentralized property rights, we implicitly assume no
trade in property rights. While this assumption accords with many real-world cases
in which concessions are used, some elaboration is instructive. As we have shown, all
owners have the incentive to extract at a rate that exceeds what is socially optimal.
If trade were allowed, but consolidation was not, then this result would maintain -
ownership of an area may change hands, but this would not dilute the incentive to
overextract. However, if consolidation is allowed, there is in principle a solution in
which one owner buys up all areas and can then implement the social planner's solu-
tion. For the remainder of this analysis we focus on the case in which consolidation
is not allowed, so each property is managed by a different owner.
    Unlike in Section 2, the game setting here is dynamic, owing to the stock growth
over time. This raises several conceptual differences from a standard repeated game.
First, the usual equilibrium concept for dynamic games is Markov perfect nash equi-
librium (MPNE): there is no implicit assumption of agents' binding commitment
about actions they will take at future dates (Reinganum and Stokey 1985) and the
outcome is subgame perfect. Since the perpetual decentralized property rights set-
ting can be considered a wholly uncoordinated setting, it makes sense to consider
that the benchmark assumes no binding commitment and, as such, that the appro-
priate equilibrium concept in the benchmark is MPNE. Second, the trigger strategy
equilibrium (another solution concept) is often criticized as it implicitly assumes that
non-deviating agents can credibly commit to punish a deviating agent. This also im-
plies that these agents would also punish themselves by using trigger strategies. But
this is often regarded as not credible because the trigger strategy equilibrium is not
renegotiation-proof (Heitzig, Lessmann, and Zou 2011).
  15
       Kaffine and Costello (2011) show that the open loop and feedback control rules are identical.



                                                  12
3.1.3    Decentralized, Limited-Tenure Property Rights
In the final regime, and the one on which we focus in this paper, we assume that own-
ership over patch i is granted to a private concessionaire for a duration of Ti periods,
to which we will refer as the "tenure block" for the concession. All concessionaires
have the possibility of renewal provided that certain conditions are met. Indeed,
it is the possibility of renewal that will ultimately incentivize the concessionaire to
deviate from her (excessively high) privately-optimal harvest rate; we will leverage
this fact to design concession contracts to induce efficient outcomes.16 We begin by
defining an arbitrary set of instrument parameters.

Definition 1. The Limited-Tenure Concession Instrument is defined by, for any
concessionaire i: a per-period "target stock," Si , a tenure period, Ti , and a renewal
probability 0  fi  1 which is the scalar probability of renewal conditional upon
meeting the announced target stock.

   The concessionaire is allowed to extract as much of the resource as she wishes
over her tenure block, and the regulator imposes only one rule on the concessionaire:
At time Ti - 1 (since the block starts at t = 0) the concession will be renewed (under
terms identical to those of the first tenure block) with probability fi if and only if the
stock is maintained at or above the target stock (Si ) in every period. So, concession
i will be renewed with probability fi if and only if:

                                eit  Si                t  Ti - 1.                                (12)

The renewal requirement is defined with respect to the stock level at the end of any
given time period: the residual stock level in patch i at time period t (eit ) must
lie above the target stock Si . We allow for this instrument to be explicitly spatial
(Si = Sj ). If the announced target stock Si is not met then the probability of renewal
is zero.
    Beyond the enforcement of the concession contract, the regulator plays no role:
all harvest decisions are made privately by the concessionaire. Because the regu-
lator would like to replicate the social planner's solution (see Section 3.1.1), she
must determine a set of target stocks in each area {S1 , S2 , ..., SN }, tenure lengths
{T1 , T2 , ...TN } and renewal probabilities {f1 , f2 , ...fN } (i.e., a {Si , Ti , fi } triple to of-
fer concessionaire i) that will incentivize all concessionaires to simultaneously, and
  16
     While we continue to implicitly rule out trade in property rights, it is innocuous to allow trade
in concession contracts (again, without consolidation) because the incentives facing the buyer would
be identical to those facing the seller.



                                                 13
in every period, deliver the efficient level of harvest in all patches. We will restrict
attention to tenure lengths satisfying Ti = T , i.17
    We will show that, if designed properly, limited-tenure concessions can be used
to induce concessionaires to manage resources in an efficient manner. Agents may, or
may not, comply with the terms of the concession contract. If all N concessionaires
choose to comply with the target stocks in every period of every tenure block, we
refer to this as cooperation. All owners will then earn an income stream in perpetuity.
Instead, if a particular owner i fails to meet the target stock requirement (i.e, in
some period she harvests the stock below Si ), then, while she will retain ownership
for the remainder of her tenure block (and thus be able to choose any harvest over
that period), she will certainly not have her tenure renewed. In that case, owner
i's payoff will be zero every period after her current tenure block expires. Thus,
the instrument raises a trade-off for each concessionaire who chooses whether to
cooperate or to defect. Since an owner's payoff depends on others' actions, we assume
that if concessionaire i defects, then the concession is granted to a new concessionaire
in the subsequent tenure block. If all initial owners decide to defect and are not
renewed at the end of the current tenure, then the game ends.18

3.2     Cooperation vs. Defection
We now characterize (i) the payoffs that each concessionaire could achieve under
cooperation, and (ii) the concessionaires' best defection strategies. We first consider
that all N concessionaires cooperate and thus comply with the target stocks in every
period of every tenure block. Provided they do not exceed the target stock then
concessionaire i's expected payoff is:
                                                                                          
                             T -1                                  (l+1)T -1
                                                               l
       c
       i = pi xi0 - Si +
                                     t (xi - Si ) +         (fi )               t (xi - Si )
                                                                                             .   (13)
                             t=1                      l=1             t=lT


where xi0 is the (given) starting stock and x  i =   j Dji g (Sj ). Because it is funda-
mental to the externality we examine, the role of resource migration deserves a few
remarks. First, whether a player can achieve eit  Si depends on what the other
players do. Of course, in (at least pure strategy) equilibria, agents rationally expect
  17
     Since concessionaires are heterogeneous, tenure lengths could be heterogeneous. In order to
limit complexity, and because the use of a uniform tenure length for renewal seems to be the
norm for real-world cases of concessions-regulated resources, we consider the longest tenure that is
compatible with concessionaires' incentives to cooperate (see expression 18 in Section 4).
  18
     This rule is irrelevant: as we later show, if everyone defects, the resource is driven extinct.



                                                 14
others to follow the equilibrium strategy, and this dependence is not an issue. Sec-
ond, a deviating agent considers only Dii . This is because, agent i knows that agent
j will make sure that ejt  Sj regardless of the amount migrating from patch i to
patch j . Hence, no matter what agent i does, the amount migrating from patch j to
patch i remains at Dji g (Sj ).
    We turn to the characterization of the concessionaires' best defection strategies.
If concessionaire i defects during an arbitrary tenure block k and all other conces-
sionaires follow their equilibrium strategies (that is, they cooperate), we have:19
                                                        pi                        1
Proposition 1.          1. First assume that             Dij pj
                                                                  < gi (0)        Dii
                                                                                      .   Then the best
                                                       j
       defection strategy of concessionaire i in tenure block k is given by e
                                                                            ¯it = 0 for
       any period (k - 1)T  t  kT - 1.
                                      1
   2. Second, assume that gi (0) > D    ii
                                           . Then the best defection strategy of conces-
      sionaire i in tenure block k is characterized by e  ¯ikT -1 = 0 and, for any period
      (k - 1)T  t  kT - 2, we have e       ¯it = e
                                                 ¯i > 0 where:
                                   1
                      gi (¯
                          ei ) =         with x
                                              ¯i = Dii g (¯
                                                          ei ) +          Dji g (Sj ) > e
                                                                                        ¯i .
                                   Dii                             j =i


    When marginal growth gi (0) is sufficiently low in area i, a concessionaire who
decides to defect sometime during tenure block k , will completely mine the resource
in his patch at every period of the tenure block. By contrast, when marginal growth
is high enough, this defecting concessionaire will (1) choose the non-cooperative level
of harvest (see Section 3.1.2) up until the final period of the tenure block and (2)
then completely mine the resource.20 Either way, the resource is completely mined
in that patch by the end of the tenure block. The best defection strategy depends
neither on the tenure block, k , nor on the renewal probabilities, and so we have:

Lemma 1. Suppose the regulator can choose the renewal probabilities to maximize
the likelihood of cooperation. Then she chooses fi = 1 for any concessionaire i.

    Combined with Proposition 1, this feature simplifies the characterization of equi-
librium strategies. We thus consider now that fi = 1 for any concessionaire i. The
present value of owner i's defection payoffs is:
  19
     The proof relies on backward induction arguments since defection would occur on one tenure
block, and the defecting agent would not be renewed again.
  20
     Note that if only one concessionaire defects, the entire stock will not be driven extinct because
patch i can be restocked via dispersal from patches with owners who cooperated.



                                                 15
                                                                                                             
                     (k-1)T -1                                            kT -2
d
i = pi xi0 - Si +
                                  t (xi - Si ) + 
                                                  (k-1)T
                                                         (xi -e
                                                              ¯i ) +                  t (¯    ¯i ) +  kT -1 x
                                                                                         xi - e             ¯i 
                       t=1                                             t=(k-1)T +1
                                                                                  (14)
    Patch owner i's defection payoffs during tenure block k is given by (1) the profit
obtained while abiding by the target stock prior to the k th tenure block (first two
terms on the right-hand side of (14)), and (2) the profit from non-cooperative har-
vesting during tenure block k (the third and fourth terms on the RHS of (14)), until
finally extracting all the stock in the final period of the k th tenure block, kT - 1
(the fifth and final term on the RHS of (14)). We will extensively use the defection
strategy in what follows. We next turn to the conditions ensuring cooperation.


4     Conditions for Cooperation
Here we derive the conditions under which all concessionaires willingly choose to
cooperate in perpetuity. First, we derive the target stocks (S1 , ..., SN ) that must be
announced by the regulator to replicate the efficient level of extraction in every patch
at every time, and we derive necessary and sufficient conditions for cooperation to
be sustained. Second we discuss the effects of the patch-level parameters. Finally,
we assess the influence of the tenure duration T on the emergence of cooperation.

4.1    The emergence of cooperation
Our interest here is to design the concession instrument to replicate the socially-
optimal harvest in each patch at every time. We first prove that the regulator must
announce, as a patch-i target stock, the socially-optimal residual stock for that patch.

Lemma 2. A necessary condition for social optimality is that the regulator an-
nounces: S1 = e                                   
               1 , S2 = e2 ,..., SN = eN , where ei is given in Equation 8.

    Lemma 2 relies on two main results from above. First, because e      ¯i  e  i , if the
                                    
regulator announces any Si < ei , then the concessionaire will optimally drive the
stock below e  i , which is not socially optimal. Second, if the regulator sets a high
target, so Si > e  i , then the concessionaire either complies with the target (and the
stock is inefficiently high) or defects and reaches an inefficiently low target stock.
Thus, Lemma 2 provides the target stocks that must be announced. We can now
restrict attention to the target stocks Si = e      i i: concessionaire i's compliance



                                               16
requires that eit  ei t, so she must never harvest below that level. We show that,
while concessionaire i is free to choose eit > ei she will never do so.

Proposition 2. If concessionaire i chooses to cooperate, she sets eit = ei i, t.

Proposition 2 establishes that, if it can be achieved, cooperation involves each con-
cessionaire leaving precisely the socially-optimal residual stock in each period. We
proceed as follows. We characterize the conditions ensuring that any given conces-
sionaire i lacks incentives to defect from the strategy characterized by Proposition 2
when all other concessionaires follow this strategy.21 In any tenure block, the decision
facing concessionaire i is whether or not to comply with the target stock requirement
in each period. When all other concessionaires follow the strategy characterized by
Proposition 2, one simply calculates her payoff from the best defection strategy (see
Proposition 1) and compares it to her payoff from the cooperation strategy. We
define concessionaire i's willingness-to-cooperate by:

                                        W i  c   d
                                             i - i .                                         (15)

Reminiscent of Folk-Theorem results in repeated games (see Mailath and Samuelson
(2006)), each concessionaire must trade off between a mining effect, in which she
achieves high short-run payoffs from defection during the current tenure block, and
a renewal effect, in which she abides by the regulator's announced target stock, and
thus receives lower short-run payoff, but ensures renewal in perpetuity.

Proposition 3. Cooperation emerges as an equilibrium outcome if and only if, for
any concessionaire i, the following condition holds:

                             x     
                              i - ei > 1 - 
                                            T -1
                                                   ¯i - e
                                                 ( x    ¯i ) .                               (16)

    Condition 16 is the analog to Condition 4, which was derived in the simple case
of private provision of public goods. Proposition 3 shows that the gains from cooper-
ation to concessionaire i (x       
                              i - ei ) must be large enough compared to defection gains
  ¯i - e
( x     ¯i ): we get cooperation forever.22 Consider that concessionaires are patient,
thus the discount factor  is high: The right-hand side of Condition 16 gets close to
zero, and the left-hand side to x       
                                  i - ei , so as long as the solution to the optimal spatial
problem is interior, the condition holds. By contrast, when concessionaires are im-
patient (the discount factor gets close to zero), as e    i > e¯i , cooperation never arises.
  21
     These conditions ensure that the socially optimal outcome constitutes an equilibrium outcome.
  22
     The proof of Proposition 1 highlights that defection entails at least some harvest (the stock
          ¯i = j =i Dji g (e
satisfies x                 j ) + Dii g (¯
                                         ei ) > e
                                                ¯i ). Thus, there are no corner solutions.

                                               17
These cases are just examples: there are cases (depending on spatial parameters)
where Condition 16 holds without assuming sufficiently patient concessionaires.
    While the stock dynamics make our model more complicated than a repeated
game, insights from the repeated game literature can still provide intuition for our
results. Here, setting Ti = 1 relaxes the incentive constraint the most. This is
comparable to the perfect monitoring setup in repeated games, so the optimal penal
code applies (Abreu 1988). Hence, as soon as one concessionaire deviates, she should
be punished as severely as possible. In the current setup, the most severe punishment
is to kick the concessionaire out of the game for the rest of time.
    We show that our concession instrument can lead to efficient extraction across
space and time in perpetuity.23 But this relies on a relatively strict enforcement
system (an owner who defects is not renewed). Because the welfare gains from coop-
eration vs. non-cooperation are potentially large, less stringent systems might also
lead to efficient behavior. Yet, the renewal process adopted here is consistent with
the main characteristics of real-world cases of concessions-regulated resources. Our
analysis highlights that, even without accounting for additional incentives (financial
penalties), limited-tenure concessions have attractive practical appeal.24
    How does limited-tenure compare to alternatives that rely on self-punishment?
The trigger strategy equilibrium is often criticized as it implicitly assumes that non-
deviating agents can credibly commit to punish a deviating agent. This also implies
that these agents will also punish themselves by using trigger strategies. But this is
typically non-credible, as a trigger strategy equilibrium is not renegotiation-proof. In
contrast, under our proposed instrument, the non-deviating agents are not required to
punish themselves; that is, rather than being punished by other players, a deviating
player is simply kicked out of the game. Moreover, we can show that there is a set of
tenure durations for which a wider set of conditions ensure that the social optimum
is implemented as an equilibrium outcome under our instrument (compared to under
the use of trigger strategies).25
    We conclude this section by discussing some salient cases that can be addressed
by our instrument. First, the polar case where social efficiency requires e      it = 0
   23
      Under our instrument, there might exist equilibria in which all agents extract more than the
amount specified by the concession contract. It is straightforward to show that there is a set of
tenure durations for which such candidates cannot constitute an equilibrium provided there is at
least one patch i which growth-related parameter i is large enough (formal proof available upon
request).
   24
      Financial penalties may be infeasible in developing countries, as financial constraints may be
tight. As the effect of financial capacity on natural resource management is ambiguous (Tarui
(2007)), the concession instrument avoids potential problems related to the use of monetary devices.
   25
      Formal details are available upon request.


                                                18
t  0 (that is, harvesting the entire stock) in some patches can be addressed
by our instrument: the marginal incentives for these patches in the decentralized
situation also correspond to this case. Second, the other polar case, where e  it = xit
t  0 (where it is optimal to forbid extraction) in at least one patch i, cannot
be addressed by our instrument or by any concession instrument. To implement
the socially optimal path, this would require combining our instrument with a side-
payment scheme. However, in cases where there exists a time period t0 such that
e                     
 it = xit t  t0 and eit < xit thereafter for any patch i, one can design a concession
instrument inducing the socially optimal path starting at t = t0 + 1. It would be
defined as: t  t0 we have Sit = S   ¯i < xit (where this target level is characterized
depending on the fundamentals of the setting) and t  t0 + 1 we have Sit = e       i.


4.2    Effects of Patch-Level Characteristics
Patch-level characteristics will affect a concessionaire's payoffs and therefore play a
role in the decision of whether to defect or cooperate. The fact that these character-
istics may also affect the announced target stocks further complicates the analysis.
We next examine the effects of price, growth, and dispersal on the concessionaire
i's willingness-to-cooperate, defined by Condition (15). As a parameter changes, we
trace its effects through the entire system, including how it alters others' decisions.
Assuming that the willingness to cooperate is initially positive, the impact of prices
{pi , pj } is as follows: Concessionaire i's willingness-to-cooperate, Wi , is increasing in
pi , but is ambiguous in the price of the adjacent area, pj , and depends on the degree
of the connection between patches.
     The effect of productivity of connected patches is also nuanced. Agent i will have
higher incentives to cooperate with a higher growth rate of the adjacent property,
j . Since defection implies harvesting one's entire stock, there is little opportunity
(under defection) to take advantage of one's neighbor's high productivity. But under
cooperation, a larger j implies larger immigration, which translates into higher
profit. The impact of own growth (i ) is negative when the self-retention rate, Dii ,
is small, and is positive for sufficiently large Dii . The direct impact on the residual
stock in patch i offsets all other impacts, but as a small proportion of the resource
stays in the area; this decreases the gains from cooperation.
     Finally, we provide cases in the Appendix where the cooperation incentives are
increasing in self-retention, Dii , but its impact is mixed as it affects the resource
stock under defection and cooperation. Wi is increasing in Dji for reasons similar
to those driving comparative statics on j . In contrast, a higher emigration rate
(Dij ) reduces the incentives to cooperate: defection incentives are not altered much


                                            19
(since concessionaire i harvests the entire stock under defection), but cooperation
incentives are reduced because the regulator will instruct concessionaire i to reduce
her harvest under a larger Dij .

      Table 1: Effect of patch-specific parameters on willingness-to-cooperate.
                          pi    pj      i    j Dii Dij Dji
                   Wi
                    
                          +   + / -   + / -  + +/- -           +


    These results provide insight about how the strength of i's cooperation incentive
depends on parameters. Whether this incentive is sufficiently strong to induce coop-
eration (i.e. whether Wi > 0) remains to be seen. We focus on resource dispersal.
If the resource was immobile, the patches would not be interconnected, and private
property owners with secure property rights would harvest at a socially optimal level
in perpetuity. Dispersal undermines this outcome and induces a spatial externality
which leads to overexploitation. Thus, the nature and degree of dispersal will play
an important role in each concessionaire's cooperation decision.
    Dispersal is characterized by the N xN matrix whose rows sum to something less
than or equal to 1 ( j Dij  1). There are N 2 free parameters describing dispersal,
so at first glance it seems difficult to get general traction on how dispersal affects
cooperation. But Proposition 1 provides a useful insight: If concessionaire i defects,
she will optimally do so by considering only Dii , thus ignoring all other N 2 - 1
elements of the dispersal matrix. We can thus assess the effect of spatial parameters
on the emergence of cooperation. We show that a high degree of self-retention in
all patches ­ that is a situation with low migration rates ­ is sufficient to ensure
cooperation.

Proposition 4. Let patch i be the patch with smallest self-retention parameter. For
sufficiently large Dii , cooperation over all N concessions can be sustained as an
equilibrium outcome.

    Intuitively, if all patches have high enough self-retention, then the externality
across patches is relatively small, which implies that the renewal effect outweighs
the mining effect in all patches. When spatial externalities are not too large, the
concession instrument overcomes the externality caused by strategic interaction. If
self-retention is very low a large externality exists, and it may be more difficult to
sustain cooperation. The formal result is not quite as straightforward because Dii
also plays a role in e j for all patches j , and affects defection incentives in all patches.



                                             20
Proposition 5. Let patch i be the patch with the largest self-retention parameter.
For sufficiently small Dii , cooperation will not emerge as an equilibrium outcome
provided the following condition is satisfied:

                          pi          Dji g (ej) <          Dij pj g (e    
                                                                       i )ei .      (17)
                               j =i                  j =i


Proposition 5 establishes that if the resource is highly mobile (sufficiently low self-
retention rates), then cooperation might be destroyed. This result relies on the
fact that economic benefits mainly depend on resource immigration. Condition (17)
compares concessionaire i's cooperation benefits due to incoming resources and the
sum of benefits others may get from the resource migrating from patch i.

4.3    Effect of tenure duration
Thus far we have focused on inherent features of the system as a whole that affect a
concessionaire's incentives to cooperate or defect. But Condition (16) also depends
on the tenure length T . This is a policy issue for a concession regime to be successful.
We now focus on the optimal determination of T .
   A basic tenet of property rights and resource exploitation is that more secure
property rights lead to more efficient resource use. Costello and Kaffine (2008) found
that longer tenure duration indeed increased the likelihood of sustainable resource
extraction in limited-tenure (though aspatial) concessions. So at first glance, we
might expect a similar finding here. In fact, we find the opposite:

Proposition 6. For sufficiently long tenure duration, T , cooperation cannot be sus-
tained as an equilibrium outcome.

Proposition 6 seems to contradict basic intuition: if tenure duration is long, it is
impossible to achieve efficient extraction of a spatially-connected resource by using
our instrument. But upon deeper inspection this result accords with economic prin-
ciples, due to defection incentives driven by spatial externalities, while such effects
are absent in Costello and Kaffine (2008). Consider the case of very long tenure
duration - in the extreme, when tenure is infinite, gains from defection always out-
weigh gains from cooperation. The promise of renewal has no effect on incentives, so
each concessionaire acts in his own best interest, which involves the defection path
identified in Proposition 1. Proposition 6 also holds in an extended version of the
instrument, where the regulator can (with some probability  < 1) terminate tenure
immediately upon defection (rather than waiting until the end of the tenure block
in which defection occurs). This extended version is described in sub-section 5.1.

                                                 21
    Short tenure duration harbors two incentives for cooperation: First, when tenure
is short, the defection payoff is small because the concessionaire has few periods in
which to defect. Second, the renewal promise is significant because it involves a
much longer future horizon than does the current tenure block. This result obtains
because the spatial externality drives a wedge between the privately optimal decision
and the socially optimal one. In fact, we can characterize a threshold tenure length
                                               ¯i , and owner i will cooperate otherwise:
for which concessionaire i will defect if Ti > T
                                                xi -x
                                               (¯           ¯
                                                     i )+ei -e i
                                         ln        x¯i -e
                                                        ¯i
                              ¯i = 1 +
                              T                                                     (18)
                                                   ln( )

Thus, cooperation is sustained by assigning to all N concessionaires a threshold
value, which we summarize as follows:

Proposition 7. Assume the following holds for concessionaire i:

                             x     
                              i - ei > (1 -  ) ( x
                                                 ¯i - e
                                                      ¯i ) ;                        (19)
                                    ¯ = mini {T
Then there exists a threshold value T          ¯i } > 1 such that cooperation is sus-
tained as an equilibrium outcome if and only if T  T  ¯.

   Condition (19) is a restatement of Proposition 3 for a tenure period T = 2. Thus,
we know that a tenure period of 1 will guarantee cooperation. Since T   ¯ = mini {T
                                                                                  ¯i }
depends on patch level characteristics, we briefly examine its dependence on patch,
and system-level characteristics in Section B of the Appendix.


5     Robustness checks
To maintain analytical tractability, and to sharpen the analysis, we have relied on a
number of simplifications. Here we discuss the issue of stock assessment and monitor-
ing, then examine the consequences of three noteworthy assumptions. Specifically,
we discuss the effect of a finite horizon on incentives to cooperate, then the cases of,
respectively, stock-dependent costs and density-dependent dispersal.

5.1    Stock assessment and monitoring
We assume that the regulator can monitor the stock to verify compliance with the
terms of the concession contract. In practice, stock assessment may be difficult to
implement, and the cost of monitoring may thus prove important. Several points

                                              22
are worth highlighting. First, Proposition 6 also holds in an extended version of the
instrument, where the regulator can (with some probability  < 1) terminate tenure
immediately upon defection (rather than waiting until the end of the tenure block
in which defection occurs).26 Indeed, the best defection will retain the features of
Proposition 1: e¯it = e
                      ¯i () > 0 at every period but the last one, and e¯ikT -1 = 0 (as
long as 1 -  is large enough so that e ¯i () > 0 holds). Since cooperation payoffs re-
main unchanged, results in Proposition 3 and thus Proposition 6 remain valid under
this extension. Parameter  could also reflect stock assessment uncertainty (so  is
the probability of correct assessment). Then the instrument is robust to imperfect
stock assessment (when  is large enough). On the other hand, if it denotes the
probability that stock assessment is actually implemented, then the expected mon-
itoring cost would decrease as the tenure length increases. Thus, when it is costly
to frequently monitor users' actions, and to revoke and reallocate rights upon defec-
tion, there is a trade-off for tenure duration: Long tenure duration might result in
defection, while short duration might entail higher monitoring costs.27

Second, several contributions suggest that regular stock assessment is a mandatory
part of a well-designed concession system, even if it is based on extraction levels. In
successful systems an annual stock assessment is carried out by technical consultants
approved by the government and paid by concession members.28 This requirement
is further supported by Hilborn et al. (2005): successful concession systems based
on extraction levels tend to engage in active research programs funding stock assess-
ments. Thus, for a system to be effective, proper stock assessment is mandatory,
whether the system is based on extraction or on (residual) stock requirements.

Moreover, endogenous enforcement might be strengthened by parameters inducing
persistent cooperation over time, particularly when monitoring involves capital ex-
penditures.29 Enforcement issues may be driven by lack of legitimacy or the "need"
for profit versus risk of deterrence. In developing countries this motivation might be
greater than in developed ones; this might underscore enforcement issues. Yet, ini-
tiatives like community-based concessions might improve legitimacy while reducing
  26
     We maintain the assumption that, at the last period of the tenure block, the regulator can
terminate tenure immediately upon defection with probability one.
  27
     The same conclusion holds in the public good setting when monitoring is costly.
  28
     See Wilen et al. (2012) for a discussion.
  29
     Concession rights might strengthen endogenous enforcement, and this could be rewarded via
management certification, which may in turn provide improvements in market access. Thus, certifi-
cations might decrease transaction costs and strengthen agents' monitoring activities; both mecha-
nisms would plausibly ease the conditions under which our instrument induces the efficient outcome.


                                                23
monitoring costs.30 These institutional arrangements are receiving increasing atten-
tion in developing countries. Since participation in the organization of the concession
instrument can contribute to its legitimacy, such concessions might be interesting to
increase enforcement in such areas. Finally, real-world cases suggest that science-
based stock assessment is an integral part of the property rights system, which makes
it less onerous for managers to monitor stocks and assess patch-specific characteris-
tics. Cooperation between communities and government might help to decrease the
cost of stock assessment, providing incentives for engagement in assessment practices
(Hilborn et al. (2005)). Indeed, it allows increasing interactions between concession
owners and public-sector scientists, who might contribute to stock assessment, thus
decreasing the assessment cost in return for access to the data collected.

Finally, if stock assessments require a fixed cost each year, they also influence the
planner's optimized payoff, but will not affect her optimal choice of residual stock
(Section 3.1.1). This will also be the case for concessionaires under our proposed
instrument: their optimized payoffs will be affected, but their optimal choice to co-
operate/defect will not. Monitoring costs will affect the agents' optimized payoff, but
they will not affect the ability of the instrument to act as an effective cooperation
device.

5.2     The case of a finite horizon
In this analysis, concessionaires must trade off a finite single tenure block against an
infinite number of renewed tenure blocks. It raises the question of whether the in-
strument is still effective at inducing cooperation when the horizon is finite. Suppose
time ends after K tenure blocks where 1 < K <  after which all concessionaires'
payoffs are zero. We briefly explain here why cooperation is subgame perfect under
the finite horizon problem, and that this requires more stringent conditions than
under an infinite horizon.
    Specifically, it can be proved that the instrument then induces cooperation for
the first K - 1 tenure blocks.31 Thus, the time horizon need not be infinitely long for
our instrument to be effective: yet this requires more stringent conditions. Indeed, a
condition equivalent to the one provided in Proposition 3 characterizes the incentive
constraint. The gains from defection remain the same than in the infinite horizon
setting, while the gains from cooperation become more complex. Concessionaires
  30
    Monitoring costs are likely to be lower compared to the case of state monitoring. Legitimacy
may increase because of active and engaged leadership (Crona et al. 2017).
 31
    Formal details rely on backward induction arguments and are available upon request.


                                              24
anticipate that they will not be renewed at the end of the final tenure block: they
thus follow the cooperative strategy during the first tenure blocks, then they all defect
in a similar manner than in the infinite-horizon case (they choose a positive residual
stock before mining the resource in the final period). The cooperation payoffs during
the entire process are now lower due to the increase in the defection payoffs in the
final period. In other words, shorter time horizons require more stringent conditions
for cooperation to be effective: longer time horizons (not to be confused with longer
tenure durations) are most effective.

5.3       Stock-dependent costs
So far, we assume that extraction costs are linear in the amount extracted. Here we
discuss how this assumption can be relaxed. Concessionaire i's period-t payoffs then
become:
                                                         xit
                               it = pi (xit - eit ) -          ci (s)ds
                                                        eit

where ci (s) < 0 is continuously differentiable (see Reed (1979) for an early treatment
of stock-dependent costs). We now explain briefly why the logic of Proposition 3
remains valid here. The proof relies mainly on two arguments.32 . First, the best
defection strategy does not depend on the tenure block considered. Second, for the
tenure block during which defection occurs, patch owner i's best defection strategy
remains qualitatively the same as in Proposition 1: He chooses the non-cooperative
level of harvest up until the final period of the block, and he then mines the resource
by eventually harvesting down to level c-      1
                                             i (pi ).
                                                     33
                                                        Thus, even though the charac-
terization of the best defection strategy differs, and so the conditions ensuring the
emergence of cooperation differ from Conditions (16), the qualitative conclusion of
Proposition 3 still remains valid.
    There is one interesting difference though. When costs are stock independent,
an agent (say i) who would choose to defect would eventually drive the resource to
extinction in his own patch. By contrast, if costs do depend on stock levels, agent i
does not drive the resource to extinction if he chooses to defect, but he eventually
harvests it down to level c-    1
                             i (pi ) > 0. This has a negative effect on this agent's
incentives to defect by lowering the potential benefits from defection. The assumption
of stock-dependent costs, through its negative effect on defection incentives, would
make cooperation easier to sustain compared to the case of stock-independent costs.
 32
      Full details are available upon request.
 33
      These properties rely on backward reasoning arguments.


                                               25
5.4    Stock dependent dispersal
We assume so far that the dispersal process does not depend on residual stock levels.
We now relax this assumption. Thus, we define for any patch i the law of motion as
xit+1 = j D(ejt )gj (ejt ) which models density-dependent dispersal, and where D(eit )
denotes the difference between self-retention and dispersal rate.
    In this amended version of the model, following Costello and Polasky (2008) it
is easily checked that the socially-optimal policy still remains time and state inde-
pendent. Moreover, the characterization of the best defection strategy follows from
backward induction arguments as in Section 3.2: assuming defection occurs at tenure
k + 1, we obtain ei(k+1)T -1 = 0 and then, for any preceding time period t in tenure
k + 1, we have eit = e^i satisfying

                      -1 +  [D (eit )gi (eit ) + D(eit )gi (eit )] = 0

This condition highlights two effects: a direct effect on marginal productivity, which
might result in higher or lower defection strategy, and an indirect effect on dispersal,
which tends to increase benefits from higher in-migration if one assumes negative
density-dependent dispersal. Specifically, we deduce:

                                     1 - D (^
                                            ei )gi (^
                                                    ei )
                              gi (^
                                  ei ) =                                         (20)
                                         D(^ ei )
Compared to the case of density-independent dispersal, it is more difficult to induce
cooperation under negative density-dependent dispersal.
Proposition 8. Denote Dii  D(^        ei ) and consider e^i the solution to condition
(20). Then e^i < e¯i where e
                           ¯i denotes agent i's best defection strategy under density-
independent dispersal when self-retention rate in patch i is given by Dii . The de-
fection payoff increases, and the conditions for cooperation becomes more stringent
under density-dependent dispersal.
   Since the optimal defection strategy yields higher payoffs under density-dependent
dispersal, it becomes more difficult to sustain cooperation.


6     Comparison with other potential policies
Our paper explicitly compares three alternative policies. First, we examine the social
planner's problem: externalities are internalized and the result is Equation 4 in each
and every patch, which yields the highest possible present value of the spatially-
connected resource. Second, we examine the completely decentralized policy where

                                            26
property rights are allocated, but without coordination across properties. This leads
to over-extraction in all patches (as shown in Equation 7). Finally, we examine a
range of possible concession instruments (longer and shorter tenure duration, higher
and lower target stocks). We derive the parameters of the concession contract that
guarantee that the efficient extraction level will take place every period.
    One might consider alternative concession approaches, though a full comparison
is beyond the scope of this paper. One candidate is to consider concessions with
renewal based on maximum total extraction. The characterization of the socially
optimal paths obtained in Section 3.1.1, together with the characterization of the
best defection path in Proposition 1, suggest that this instrument would not achieve
the socially optimal outcome. Even if total extraction requirements are satisfied by
the end of the tenure, it will induce over-harvest in certain time periods. Thus, it
cannot ensure that the socially optimal outcome is implemented at any time period.
    Second, consider that renewal is based on the maximum total extraction in any
time period. This is similar to our proposed system, except that the tenure renewal
requirements is based on extraction target levels every time period, rather than a
target stock. If one focuses on the capacity to induce the socially optimal outcome,
then the conditions under which it is effective are equivalent to those related to our
instrument. By the identity hit = xit - eit , one could choose either extraction or
residual stock as the main defining variable (given the state of the system (xt ) one
derives from the other). Moreover, as discussed in Section 5.1, both instruments
require regular stock assessment.
    Third, consider policies that employ property rights over the resource rather than
over space. This approach induces challenges for spatial resources because biological
growth, dispersal, and economic returns are patch-specific, and the optimal policy
will thus vary across patches. Equation 8 reveals that the optimal policy depends on
patch-specific net prices, growth, and dispersal and self-retention parameters. So the
efficient outcome is spatially explicit, while using property rights over the resource
results in a non-spatial instrument. Thus, it cannot achieve the first best, unlike our
proposed instrument. Furthermore, as explained in Section 5.1 it is not clear that
such system would be less demanding in terms of the related monitoring costs if the
manager wants this policy to be as effective as possible.34
    While the size of concessions is not endogenously chosen here, this dimension
might be part of the manager's decision. If size is somehow related to biological
productivity, then the findings from Section 4.2 suggest that variations in the size
of connected patches may have complex effects. Indeed, agent i's willingness to
cooperate increases as the size of an adjacent property increases, but the effect of an
 34
      See Wilen et al. (2012) for other advantages of spatially explicit instruments.


                                                  27
increase in the size of agent i's own property on his incentives to do so is ambiguous.
Such a policy would then have to account for a variety of direct and indirect effects.
This will raise many new questions about design and effectiveness.
    While we have implicitly ruled out consolidation of all areas to a sole owner, it
is possible to consider tradeable versions of our property rights approach. There
are two ways to think about tradeability. First, one could consider transferability
within a concession regime where the "buyer" is bound by the same concession terms
as was the "seller". This kind of transferability is innocuous because all extraction
incentives remain unchanged. Second, we could consider perpetual, property rights
with transferability. If properties are not consolidated, then again, no change in in-
centives would arise. But if one agent was to acquire and consolidate all properties,
then she could act as a sole owner and implement the first best policy derived in
Section 3.1.1. Without complete consolidation, some spatial externalities would re-
main between non-consolidated properties, and inefficiencies would still result from
decentralized management.


7       Conclusion
We have analyzed the ability of limited-tenure concessions to induce socially-efficient
private provision of a class of public goods. We first analyzed a stylized public goods
contribution setting and then turned to a more complicated natural resource extrac-
tion setting with resource growth, mobility, and heterogeneity across space. That
limited-tenure concessions can achieve first-best private contributions may be sur-
prising, as it does not rely on any transfers or side-payments,35 though it does accord
with many real-world institutions for managing natural resources and public goods.
The instrument works effectively by offering the promise of concession renewal, and
therefore the promise of future benefits of the public good, but only if socially-optimal
behavior has been undertaken in the past. Thus, if well-designed, concessionaires will
be incentivized to adhere to efficient contribution, and to thus achieve renewal, rather
than to under-contribute in the short run, and thus fail to achieve renewal. Contrary
to an initial intuition, longer tenure actually induces underprovision. This implies
that there is an optimal tenure length, which we derive in the paper.
    Several extensions remain; we discuss some of the salient ones for common-pool re-
sources. There could be imperfect (incomplete) information, or the resource growth
could be stochastic. As long as patches are symmetric regarding the anticipated
effects, we expect no drastic change in the qualitative results. The regulator's in-
 35
      This feature of our instrument consequently yields an advantage over market-based instruments.


                                                 28
centives in offering concessions may also be an interesting issue. In this setting, the
regulator could be viewed as a Stackelberg leader. The focus was on identifying
design parameters that induce cooperation. A next step could involve introducing
different regulators' objectives. Finally, depending on the ecosystem dynamics, there
could be different timing of growth. This reduces model tractability and neither ren-
ders our results moot nor obviously makes the analysis more realistic.
    Overall, the results suggest that limited-tenure concessions may be one important
institutional tool to help achieve socially-optimal private provision of public goods,
all while allowing concessionaires the autonomy to make decentralized decisions,
which is important for the acceptability of the instrument. The analysis in this
paper suggests that concessions may not only have attractive intuitive appeal for
managing natural resources and other collective goods, but if designed with care,
they could be theoretically grounded in economic efficiency.


References
  Abreu, D. (1988). On the theory of infinitely repeated games with discounting.
     Econometrica 56, 383­396.
  Aburto-Oropeza, O., H. Leslie, A. Mack-Crane, S. Nagavarapu, S. Reddy, and
    L. Sievanen (2017). Property rights for fishing cooperatives: How (and how
    well) do they work? World Bank Economic Review 31, 295­328.
  Ayres, A. B., E. C. Edwards, and G. D. Libecap (2018). How transaction costs
     obstruct collective action: The case of california's groundwater. Journal of
     Environmental Economics and Management 91, 46­65.
  Bergstrom, T., L. Blume, and H. Varian (1986). On the private provision of public
     goods. Journal of Public Economics 29, 25­49.
  Buchanan, J. (1965). An economic theory of clubs. Economica 32, 1­14.
  Cornes, R. and T. Sandler (1983). On commons and tragedies. American Economic
     Review 73, 787­792.
  Cornes, R. and T. Sandler (1996). The Theory of Externalities, Public Goods, and
     Club Goods. Cambridge University Press.
  Costello, C. and D. Kaffine (2008). Natural resource use with limited-tenure prop-
     erty rights. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 55 (1), 20­
     36.



                                          29
Costello, C. and S. Polasky (2008). Optimal harvesting of stochastic spatial re-
   sources. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 56, 1­18.
Costello, C., N. Qu´
                   erou, and A. Tomini (2015). Partial enclosure of the commons.
   Journal of Public Economics 121, 69­78.
Crona, B., S. Gelcich, and O. Bodin (2017). The importance of interplay between
   leadership and social capital in shaping outcomes of rights-based fisheries gov-
   ernance. World Development 91, 70­83.
Dutta, P. K. (1995). A folk theorem for stochastic games. Journal of Economic
  Theory 66 (1), 1­32.
Heitzig, J., K. Lessmann, and Y. Zou (2011). Self-enforcing strategies to deter
   free-riding in the climate change mitigation game and other repeated public
   good games. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
   States of America 108 (38), 15739­15744.
Hilborn, R., J. Orensanz, and A. Parma (2005). Institutions, incentives and the
   future of fisheries. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 360, 47­
   57.
Kaffine, D. and C. Costello (2011). Unitization of spatially connected renewable
  resources. BE Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy (Contributions) 11 (1).
Kapaun, U. and M. Quaas (2013). Does the optimal size of a fish stock increase
  with environmental uncertainties? Environmental and Resource Economics 54,
  21­39.
Kotchen, M. (2006). Green markets and private provision of public goods. Journal
   of Political Economy 114, 816­834.
Kotchen, M. (2009). Voluntary provision of public goods for bads: A theory of
   environmental offsets. Economic Journal 119, 883­899.
Mailath, G. J. and L. Samuelson (2006). Repeated games and reputations: long-run
  relationships. Oxford university press.
Marx, L. M. and S. A. Matthews (2000). Dynamic voluntary contribution to a
  public project. The Review of Economic Studies 67 (2), 327­358.
Mas-Colell, A., M. Whinston, and J. Green (1995). Microeconomic Theory. Oxford
  University Press.
Nathan, R., G. G. Katul, H. S. Horn, S. M. Thomas, R. Oren, R. Avissar, S. W.
   Pacala, and S. A. Levin (2002). Mechanisms of long-distance dispersal of seeds
   by wind. Nature 418 (6896), 409­413.

                                       30
  Olson, M. and R. Zeckhauser (1966). An economic theory of alliances. The Review
     of Economics and Statistics , 266­279.
  Pailler, S., R. Naidoo, N. D. Burgess, O. E. Freeman, and B. Fisher (2015). Impacts
     of community-based natural resource management on wealth, food security and
     child health in tanzania. PLoS ONE 10 (7), e0133252.
  Reed, W. J. (1979). Optimal escapement levels in stochastic and deterministic
     harvesting models. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 6,
     350­363.
  Reinganum, J. and N. Stokey (1985). Oligopoly extraction of a common property
     natural resource: the importance of the period of commitment in dynamic
     games. International Economic Review 26, 161­173.
  Samuelson, P. A. (1954). The pure theory of public expenditure. Review of Eco-
     nomics and Statistics 36, 387­389.
  Sanchirico, J. and J. Wilen (2009). Economically optimal management of a
     metapopulation, Chapter 16, pp. 317­332. CRC Press.
  Siegel, D., B. Kinlan, B. Gaylord, and S. Gaines (2003). Lagrangian descriptions
     of marine larval dispersion. Marine Ecology Progress Series 260, 83­96.
  Tarui, N. (2007). Inequality and outside options in common-property resource use.
     Journal of Development Economics 83, 214­239.
  Vicary, S. (2000). Donations to a public good in a large economy. European Eco-
     nomic Review 44, 609­618.
  Wang, C. and G. Zudenkova (2016). Non-monotonic group-size effect in repeated
    provision of public goods. European Economic Review 89, 116­128.
  White, C. and C. Costello (2014). Close the high seas to fishing? PLoS biol-
    ogy 12 (3), e1001826.
  Wilen, J. E., J. Cancino, and H. Uchida (2012). The economics of territorial use
     rights fisheries, or turfs. Review of Environmental Economics and Policy 6 (2),
     237­257.


Appendix
Proof of Proposition 1
                                            1
We first consider the case where gi (0) >   Dii .   At final period kT - 1, concessionaire i's problem is
                                     max pi (xikT -1 - eikT -1 )
                                   eikT -1 0


                                                     31
                                           ¯ikT -1 = 0 and, moving backward, at period T - 2, this
    Using the first order condition yields e
concessionaire's problem becomes:
                                                                                     

           max pi xikT -2 - eikT -2 +                        ejkT -2 ) + Dii g (eikT -2 ) - e
                                                      Dji g (¯                              ¯ikT -1  .
         eikT -2 0
                                               j =i


    Using the first order condition and e
                                        ¯ikT -1 = 0, we have Dii g (¯   eikT -2 ) = 1 since e
                                                                                            ¯ikT -2 = 0 is
                                                                                               -1      1
ruled out by the lower bound on g (0), and e ¯ikT -2 = xikT -2 is ruled out if xikT -2 > (g )        Dii
holds. Using again backward induction highlights that any e  ¯it ((k - 1)T  t  kT - 3) is character-
                                                     -1   1
ized by the same condition provided that xit > (g )      Dii = e   ¯i . We have, by definition of e ¯i and
                                                e
concavity of g (.), that g (¯                   ¯i
                                         ei ) = D
                                   ¯i g (¯
                            ei ) > e              ii
                                                                          ei ) > e
                                                     which implies Dii g (¯      ¯i
                                                                                  e ¯i for  ]0, 1], and we
deduce that xit > e  ¯i for any tenure block but the first one. Even if concessionaire i defects initially,
                -1        pi              -1   1
since xi0 > (g )           Dij pj
                                    > (g )     Dii      by assumption, the same conclusion follows. The
                         j
second case follows from similar arguments because of the upper bound on g (0).


Proof of Lemma 1
Let us consider the case of concessionaire i. If this concessionaire chooses to defect in tenure block
k , then his payoff from cooperation and his payoff from defection are the same during the first
k - 1 tenure blocks. Then, during tenure block k , his payoff from defection does not depend on the
renewal probability. By contrast, from tenure block k on, his payoff from cooperation does increase
as fi increases (due to expression 13). Thus, a direct implication is that raising fi always increases
the likelihood that concessionaire i chooses to cooperate.


Proof of Proposition 2
If there is t during which concessionaire i chooses eit > ei : eit is strictly profitable only if:
                                                                                      

               pi (1 +  ) (x              
                            i - ei ) < pi (xi - eit ) + 
                                                                      Dji g ej + Dii g (eit )
                                                                                               .
                                                               j =i


Simplifying this inequality, we obtain:

                                    Dii (g (eit ) - g (e              
                                                        i )) > eit - ei .                                (21)

Since g (.) is continuously differentiable and increasing, there exists ei ]ei , eit [ such that g (eit ) -
g (ei ) = (eit - e i
                   
                     ) g ( e i ) and we rewrite expression 21 as follows:
                                                                          1
                      Dii (eit - e                     
                                  i ) g (ei ) > eit - ei  g (ei ) >           = g (¯
                                                                                   ei ).
                                                                          Dii
Since g (.) is strictly concave we have ei < ei < e  ¯i , which is a contradiction (since ei  e
                                                                                              ¯i as
explained in subsection 3.1.2). This implies that eit = e  i for any time period t .


                                                      32
Proof of Proposition 3
If concessionaire i deviates during tenure k + 1 then his payoff is d
                                                                    i = pi A, where :

                   (1 -  kT -1 )                                 kT +1 (1 -  T -2 )
A = xi0 - ei +                  (xi - ei ) +  kT
                                                 ( xi
                                                    
                                                      - e
                                                        ¯ i ) +                      xi - e
                                                                                    (¯    ¯i ) +  (k+1)T -1 x
                                                                                                            ¯i .
                      1-                                              1-

Now, using Condition (13), we compute c   d
                                      i - i = pi B , with:

                                   kT pi
                             B=          x     
                                          i - ei - (1 - 
                                                         T -1
                                                                  ¯i - e
                                                              ) ( x    ¯i )                                 (22)
                                  1-
The conclusion follows from Equality (22).


Proof of Proposition 4
We prove that the concessionaire does not defect from the initial period until the end of the first
tenure. From the proof of Proposition 3 (using the expression (22) when k = 0) we know that:
                                       pi
                         c   d
                         i - i =          x     
                                           i - ei - 1 - 
                                                         T -1
                                                                ¯i - e
                                                              ( x    ¯i )
                                      1-
                                                           ¯i gets arbitrarily close to e
    When Dii gets arbitrarily close to one, we deduce that e                             i , so that x
                                                                                                     ¯i
                                                  c     d
gets arbitrarily close to xi . We can deduce that i - i gets arbitrarily close to:
                              pi
                                 x     
                                  i - ei - 1 - 
                                                T -1
                                                     (x     
                                                       i - ei ) > 0                                         (23)
                             1-

    Thus, for Dii = 1 we know that c             d
                                           i - i > 0 which, by a continuity argument, implies that
this deviation is not profitable for sufficiently large (but less than one) values of self retention.


Proof of Proposition 5
Using Proposition 3, we know that concessionaire i would defect if x            
                                                                           i - ei < 1 - 
                                                                                         T -1
                                                                                                 ¯i - e
                                                                                               ( x     ¯i )
holds. The right hand side increases as T increases: its derivative is - T -1 ln( ) ( x     ¯i - e
                                                                                                 ¯i ) > 0
since ln( ) < 0 and  x       ¯i is positive.36 As such, for any tenure length T there will be defection
                        ¯i - e
if x  i - e
           i is negative. Now,                                     ¯i = 0 and we focus on cases where e
                                if Dii is sufficiently small, then e                                     i
is still positive. We examine the extreme case where e       i > 0 even when Dii is equal to zero. Using
                                                                                                p
the characterization of e                           
                         i , we can rewrite xi - ei =           j =i   Dji g (ej) -   j =i   Dij pj
                                                                                                  i
                                                                                                    g (e    
                                                                                                        i )ei and
thus, when Condition 17 holds, then x         
                                         i - ei is negative.

  36
   Indeed,  x    ¯i - e   ¯i =  j =i Dji g (e               ei ) - Dii g (¯
                                               j ) + Dii g (¯                 ei =  j =i Dji g (e
                                                                          ei )¯                  j) +
        ei ) - g (¯
Dii (g (¯          ei )¯
                       ei ) > 0 since the second term is positive by concavity of g . If Dii = 0 then
¯i - e
x    ¯i =  x  ¯i is positive too.




                                                    33
Proof of Proposition 6
Assume that any concessionaire j = i follows the cooperation path; we analyze concessionaire i's
incentives to defect. According to Proposition 1, his payoff from the best defection strategy is equal
to d                        c    d
    i and we prove that i - i  0 for large enough values of T . Using the proof of proposition
3 we have:
                                    kT pi
                       c      d
                         i - i =          x       
                                            i - ei - 1 - 
                                                            T -1
                                                                 ( x¯i - e
                                                                         ¯i ) .
                                   1-
    When T gets large, the term between brackets gets close to

                                              [x     
                                                i - ei - ( x
                                                           ¯i - e
                                                                ¯i )] .                                 (24)

    Now, we obtain x  i -x ¯i = Dii (g (ei ) - g (¯              ei )(e
                                                  ei )) < Dii g (¯        ¯i ) and [Dii (g (e
                                                                       i -e                  i ) - g (¯
                                                                                                      ei )) -
              pi
(ei-e                              
                        ei ) - 1](ei - e
     ¯i )] < 1- [Dii g (¯              ¯i ) = 0 and we conclude that (24) is negative. A continuity
argument implies that c        d
                        i - i  0 for sufficiently large values of T .



Proof of Proposition 7
                                       ¯i defined implicitly by:
For a given concessionaire i, consider T
                                                              ¯
                                                    (1 -  Ti -1 )               ¯
                     ¯i -
                     e      ei   +    (x     
                                        i - ei ) -                (¯    ¯i ) -  Ti -1 e
                                                                   xi - e             ¯i = 0.
                                   1-                  1-

    Since e¯i and e                                    ¯
                   i do not depend on the value of Ti we can differentiate with respect to T and we
        T -1 ln( )
obtain        1- ( x¯i - e
                         ¯i ) < 0 since ln( ) < 0 as 0 <   1 and  x   ¯i - e
                                                                           ¯i is positive (as shown in the
proof of Proposition 5). Thus this function is decreasing and continuous in T (where T is assumed
to take continuous values). Since the proof of Proposition 2 implies that this function takes on
negative values as T becomes large, if it has a positive value when T = 2 then T     ¯i is uniquely defined
     ¯      37
and Ti > 1. Then, the proof of Proposition 4 implies that concessionaire i will have incentives to
defect as soon as the renewal time horizon is larger than T  ¯i . For T = 2 the value of the function is
given by the following expression:
                                                 1
                 ¯i - e
                 e     i +     (x - ei ) - x
                                           ¯i =    [x     
                                                                        ¯i - e
                                                     i - ei - (1 -  ) ( x    ¯i )] .
                             1- i               1-
                                                                               ¯i -(x -e )
                                                                          ¯ i -e
                                                                          x
                                                                     ln                 i i
                                                                                x¯ i -e
                                                                                      ¯i
It is positive by Assumption (19), which implies T ¯i = 1 +                   is well defined. This
                                                                  ln( )
                          ¯         ¯
concludes the proof since T = mini Ti qualifies as the appropriate threshold value.


Proof of Proposition 8
Negative density-dependent dispersal implies that D (.) < 0 holds, and we conclude from (20) that
gi (^
    ei ) > gi (¯
               ei ) which, due to concavity of the growth function, allows to conclude the proof.
  37      ¯i actually takes on discrete values, the proof implies that T
       As T                                                            ¯i is at least equal to 2.




                                                         34
Sections 4.2 and 4.3
We have the following stocks, respectively, when patch i defects and when all patches cooperate:

                    x           ei , i ) +
                    ¯i = Dii g (¯                       Dji g ej , j ;   xi =        Dji g ej , j
                                                 j =i                            j


We assume that one parameter, i = {pi , i , Dii , Dij } or j = {pj , j , Dji }, is elevated. We obtain:

                  dx
                   ¯i   ¯i  e
                        x   ¯i   x
                                 ¯i                        ¯i e
                                                           x   j   dx
                                                                    ¯i   x
                                                                         ¯i                   ¯i e
                                                                                              x
                      =   ·    +    +                        ·   ;     =    +                    · l        (25)
                  di    e
                        ¯i i     i                         ej i dj       j                    el  j
                                                   j =i                                 l=i

                  dxi   xi                    xi
                                                  ej dxi   xi                   xi  e
                      =    +                     · ;     =    +                    · l                      (26)
                  di    i                 j
                                              ej i dj      j                    el j
                                                                           l




                                    Table 2: Computations of derivatives
                                    e                            e
                                                                 ¯i             x                   x
                                                                                                    ¯i
                                    
                                     i
                                                                                
                                                                                 i
                                                                                                    



                         1-Dii gei
             pi         N                        <0               0              0                  0
                        j =1
                               Dij pj gei ei


                               Dij gei
             pj     -     N                      >0               0              0                  0
                          l=1
                                 Dil pl gei ei

                                g                           g
             i            - gei i
                             e e
                                  >0                      - gei i
                                                             e e
                                                                  >0     Dii gi
                                                                                >0            Dii g¯i > 0
                                    i i                          i i



            j                        0                            0      Dji gj
                                                                                >0            Dji gj
                                                                                                     >0
                                pi gei                       g
            Dii     -     N                      >0       - geee
                                                               i
                                                                 >0       g (ei) > 0             ei ) > 0
                                                                                              g (¯
                          j =1
                                 Dij pj gei ei                   i i


                                pj gei
            Dij     -     N                      >0               0              0                  0
                          j =1
                                 Dij pj gei ei


            Dji                      0                            0            g (ej)           g (ej)


    with gi
             gi (ei ) and g¯ i  g     ei ).
                                 ¯ i (¯




                                                                35
A. Impact on the emergence of cooperation
Impact of net price, p
Impact of pi
We first analyze the impact of pi on concessionaire i's willingness to cooperate, and we obtain:


                   d c   d
                     i - i    kT
                           =        x     
                                     i - ei - (1 - 
                                                    T -1
                                                            ¯i - e
                                                         )( x    ¯i )
                     dpi     1-
                                                                              
                                                                   
                              kT pi  e                          e  j T
                           +        - i 1 - Dii ge       +            Dji ge  
                             1-       pi              i
                                                                pi          j
                                                                     j =i

                                                          e                                e
The second term between brackets is positive as pii < 0, 1 - Dii ge         i
                                                                              > 0 and pj  i
                                                                                            > 0. Thus
    c  d
d(i -i )
   dpi     > 0 if the condition on concessionaire i's willingness-to-cooperate is satisfied. So, an
                                            d(c   d
                                              i -i )
increase in pi results in a larger value of   dpi    , thus an increase in the willingness-to-cooperate.

Effect of pj , j = i
In this case we have
                                                                                               
                                                               
          d c   d
            i - i    kT pi          e                                           e
                                                                                           
                                                               ej
                                   - i 1 - Dii ge + T                            l
                                                                                           
                  =                                               D g 
                                                               pj ji ej +          D   g 
                                                                                     li el 
                                                                                           
            dpj     1-              pj           i
                                                                                pj
                                                                          l=i,j            
                                              <0                    <0
                                                                                     >0

First, if both dispersal rates Dij and Dji are small, then the first and second term between brackets
                                                           d(c     d
                                                              i -i )
on the RHS of the equality are small, which implies that      dpj     is positive. Indeed, when Dij and
                       e          e
Dji are small, then pi  j
                          and pj j
                                   Dji gej
                                           are small. And the sign of the term between brackets (and
          c    d
        d(i -i )                                       e
thus of   dpj    ) is similar to the sign of l=i,j pl    j
                                                           Dli gel
                                                                   , which is positive. Second, if Dii + Dij
                                         e                                            d(c     d
                                                                                         i -i )
and Djj + Dji are large, then l=i,j pl     j
                                             Dli ge  is small, which implies that
                                                    l                                    dp j
                                                                                                is negative.


Impact of growth, 
Effect of i
          d(c  d
            i -i )        kT pi   e
We have     di       =   1-       i
                                   i
                                       Dii gei
                                               - 1 + Dii gi
                                                            - (1 -  T -1 )g¯i   so, if Dii is small while
                 c
                d(  d
                 i -i     )                                                       d(c      d
                                                                                       i -i )
e
¯i > 0, then        di       < 0 holds. If Dii = 1, then 1 - Dii ge   i
                                                                        = 0 and        di      > 0 since
            T - 1
g i
    - (1 -        )g¯ i > 0. By a continuity argument, this conclusion remains valid when Dii is large.




                                                     36
Effect of j , j = i
             d(c  d
               i -i )          (k+1)T pi
We have        dj         =      1-      Dji    gj
                                                   + gej
                                                         > 0.


Impact of dispersal rate, D
Effect of Dii
          d(c     d
              i -i )
                       kT                                                                                         e
We have      dDii    = 1-p
                           i
                              [g (e             ei , i )] +  T g (¯
                                   i , i ) - g (¯                 ei , i ) - 1 - Dii gei
                                                                                                                   i
                                                                                                                  Dii        . The RHS
term is the sum of two terms of opposite signs, and is thus ambiguous.

Effect of Dij
             d(c    d
                i -i )         kT pi       x e               e               kT     e
We have        dDij       =   1-        ei     i
                                              Dij        -    i
                                                             Dij    = - 1-p
                                                                           ·
                                                                            i        i
                                                                                    Dij    1 - Dii gei
                                                                                                       < 0.
                                            i



Effect of Dji
             d(c    d
                i -i )         (k+1)T pi    e
We have        dDji       =      1-
                                             j
                                            Dji Dji gej
                                                              + g (ej , j ) > 0.



                                ¯i
B. Impact on the time threshold T
              ¯i
             dT                                          e         dx         xi -ei
                                                                                    
We have      d     =    ln( )[ (¯
                                    1
                                xi -x   )+e   ¯i ]
                                             -e          
                                                          i
                                                              -     d
                                                                     i
                                                                         +    ¯i -e
                                                                              x   ¯i      dx¯i
                                                                                          d -
                                                                                                 e
                                                                                                 ¯i
                                                                                                        . Since   (0, 1) and
                                      i    i
  xi - x
 (¯            
        i ) + ei - e
                   ¯i > 0,
                  the first term in this equality is always negative. Using (25)-(26) and Table
              dx
1, we have  d   ¯i
                   -  e
                      ¯i
                   0. Notice that:
                      
                                                               
                                                              
        ei   dx  e                       x                   ej
           -  i = i (1 - Dii ge   )- i +             Dji ge       < 0 if  = {pi ; j ; Dji }
              d                 i
                                                           j
                                                             
                                                                             j =i

                                                                                            > 0 if  = {Dij }
       ¯i
      dT                                  dTi        ¯
and   d     > 0 for  = {pi ; j ; Dji } ( dD ij
                                               < 0). The sign is ambiguous for  = {pj ; i ; Dii }.

Effect of pj , j = i

                   ei            xi                   x  x   
                                                        i - ei
                                                          i el
                                                              
                                                                      ¯i e
                                                                      x    l
                         1-                -                   +                                                                  (27)
                   pj            ei                   x   
                                                       ¯i - e
                                                         el pj
                                                            ¯i        el pj
                                  l=i                            l=i
                                                                                                                             
             e                       (x   ¯ i ) - e
                                       i -x         i +e
                                                       ¯i             ej                                                e
              i (1 - Dii gei ) +                              Dji gej    +                                    Dli gel    l 
                                                                                                                                  (28)
             pj                          x¯i - e ¯i                   pj                                                pj
                                                                                                      l=i,j

                                                   ¯i increases when pj increases. Second, if Dji and
If Dij is small enough, then (36) is negative, and T
                                                                     ¯
   l=i,j Dli Dlj are small enough, then expression (36) is positive: Ti decreases when pj increases.


                                                                     37
                                                                                                 ¯i
                                                                                                dT
Indeed, this leads to a small value of the last term between brackets. Thus, the sign of        dpj   depends
                  e                                                               ¯i
                                                                                  T
only on that of   pj (1
                   i
                          - Dii gei ), which is positive. We thus conclude that   pj   is negative.

Effect of i

             ei     x   i     x      x i - ei
                                             
                                                     x  ¯i   ¯i  e
                                                             x   ¯i                        e
                                                                                           ¯i
                 1-         - i +                          +                           -                 (29)
             i       ei       i      x¯i - e¯i       i       e
                                                             ¯i i                          i
             e                                 x
                                                  - e 
              i 1 - Dii ge  - Dii g  - g ¯i
                                                i     i
                                                                                                         (30)
             i            i        i
                                               ¯i - e
                                               x    ¯i

    If Dii is small enough while e                         ¯i decreases as i increases.
                                 ¯i remains positive, then T

Effect of Dii

           ei      x   i      xi          x  i - ei
                                                   
                                                          x ¯i      x ¯i  e
                                                                          ¯i               e
                                                                                           ¯i
                1-         -        +                            +                     -
           Dii      ei       Dii          x ¯i - e
                                                 ¯i       Dii       e ¯i Dii               Dii
           ei                                   x  i - ei
                                                         
               1 - Dii ge  -  g ( e i , i ) -             g (¯
                                                             ei , i )
           Dii           i
                                                x ¯i - e
                                                       ¯i
                                                         >0

                                                                                  e
    If  is small enough while e
                              ¯i > 0 then the sign of the expression is that of   Dii ,
                                                                                   i
                                                                                           which is positive.




                                                    38
