                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       PORTFOLIOS FOR LONG-TERM INVESTORS

                                      John H. Cochrane

                                     Working Paper 28513
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28513


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                          February 2021, Revised July 2021




This paper is based on a keynote talk prepared for the NBER conference, "New Developments in
Long-Term Asset Management Spring 2021." I thank John Campbell, Alex Edmans, Gene Fama,
Jim Poterba, Luis Viceira and a referee for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are
those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by John H. Cochrane. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Portfolios for Long-Term Investors
John H. Cochrane
NBER Working Paper No. 28513
February 2021, Revised July 2021
JEL No. G11,G12

                                          ABSTRACT

How should long-term investors form portfolios in our time-varying, multi-factor and friction-
filled world? Two conceptual frameworks may help: First, look directly at the stream of payments
that a portfolio and payout policy can produce. Second, include a general equilibrium view of the
markets' economic purpose, and the nature of investors' different preferences, risk-taking ability,
and function in that equilibrium. These perspectives can rationalize some of investors' behaviors,
suggest substantial revisions to standard portfolio theory, and help us to apply portfolio theory in
a way that is practically useful.


John H. Cochrane
Hoover Institution
434 Galvez Mall
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6010
and NBER
john.cochrane@stanford.edu
1.      Theory vs. Practice
How should long-term investors form portfolios? How should they evaluate securities, port-
folios and managers? In particular, how should they adapt to the fact that our world features
time-varying expected returns, volatilities, correlations, and a plethora of factors, signals,
and strategies?
    To academics, portfolio theory seems basically to be a solved problem. Merton (1969)
gave the answer 50 years ago, building on Markowitz (1952) 70 years ago: Split the invest-
ment between the market portfolio, the risk free asset, and factors, i.e. portfolios that hedge
state variables for intertemporal opportunities.1
    The hard work lies in naming the factors, calculating the hedge portfolios, calibrating and
solving Merton models, and adapting them to the peculiarities of different investors. This
remains a productive and challenging enterprise. Campbell and Viceira (2002) summarize
and make large theoretical and practical advances over the early Merton models. But the
conceptual framework has not really changed. Even behaviorists view Merton's advice as the
right thing to do, and behaviorally biased agents should simply learn to do Merton better.
    Yet Merton's theory has almost no impact on portfolio practice. With some exceptions,
it does not well describe empirically the portfolios that households or institutions hold.2
   1
    Since Mertonian portfolio theory is standard fare in textbooks and Ph.D. classes, I do not offer a detailed
review. Cochrane (2007) is the natural reference for me to suggest. Starting p. 39, I write an investor's
objective
                                                                
                                     V (Wt , yt ) = max E          e-t u(ct )dt.
                                                            0
V is the value function, W wealth, and y a vector of state variables. Asset returns follow

                                         dRt = µ(yt )dt +  (yt )dzt
                                          dyt = µy (yt )dt + y (yt )dzt .

Wealth evolves as
                                 dWt = W  (dR - rdt) + W rdt + (e - c)dt
where  is the portfolio weight on risky assets, r is the riskfree rate, and e is an endowment process. The
optimal portfolio weights are
                                        VW                        VW y
                                 =-           -1 (µ - r) - dR,dy                                            (1)
                                       W VW W                    W VW W

where VW denotes partial derivatives of the value function,  =  = covt (dRt , dRt ) is the conditional
covariance matrix of returns, and dR,dy = -1 covt (dRt , dy ) are conditional regression coefficients of returns
on state variables. The investor holds a mean-variance efficient portfolio, plus a set of hedge portfolios for
state-variable risk. The weights depend on the derivatives of the investor's value function. Campbell (2018)
Chapter 9, Duffie (2001) Chapter 9, and Campbell and Viceira (2002) also provide excellent treatments.
   2
     Campbell (2006) has a good early summary of this burgeoning "household finance" literature. Curcuru
et al. (2010) also survey and extend both the theoretical and empirical literature. People hold very different
portfolios. Many people hold undiversified portfolios, with either no stock or one stock. Balasubramaniam
et al. (2021) is an excellent recent examination of individual portfolio holdings, with review of the current


                                                        1
    Institutions ­ endowments, family offices, insurance companies, pension funds, and the
financial management and advice industry ­ state investment practice in ways we can study
and read, beyond just examining the outcome. Their advice and practice is nearly uniform
­ and has little to do with Merton. Roughly, they start with intense attention to buckets,
defined by names rather than betas and correlations: Debt and equity; subcategories mostly
denoted by industry and other non-beta characteristics, but now also growth; value and other
academic styles; domestic, foreign; "alternatives," often just an alternative organizational
forms which repackage the same securities; real estate, private equity, venture capital, and
so forth. Having decided these buckets down to the last percentage point, these investors
allocate each bucket to separate funds or managers, evaluated by rather short-term returns
relative to a benchmark, and frequently replaced based on short-term results. As market
values change, they quickly rebalance to the benchmark allocations. As many private in-
vestors have moved to index funds, many institutions have moved in the opposite direction,
preferring illiquid assets that one cannot mark to market and layers of high-fee management.
Many such investors sell in downturns. University endowments are a case in point: Despite
proclamations about being long-term investors that would ride out temporary price fluctu-
ations, many universities sold equities and illiquid "alternatives" in a panic in 2008, during
the buying opportunity of a generation.
    Payout policy is an integral and overlooked part of portfolio theory. These investors often
stick to fixed payout rules in downturns, even as in 2008 when liquidity crises, collateral for
derivatives positions, debt roll-over problems, and short-term revenue shortfalls loomed.
Universities instituted budget cuts and hiring freezes in 2008 and again in 2020, freezing
hiring during the best buy-side markets in a generation. Endowments typically pay out a
constant fraction of wealth each period, and do not provide any liability-stream hedging
or buffer-stock value. (See Gilbert and Hrdlicka 2015 on endowment payout policies and
internal investments.)
    And this effort produces a pretty discouraging track record by standard evaluation mea-
sures, if you don't pick winners ex-post. For example, Ennis (2020) finds that "Public
pension funds underperformed passive investment by approximately 1.0% a year for the 10
years ended June 30, 2018; the shortfall of educational endowments was 1.6% a year."
literature. They construct a factor model of portfolio holdings, to usefully characterize the dimensions of
portfolio heterogeneity.
    3
      Berk and Green (2004) offer an insightful theory of the persistence of active management in the face
of a 50-year Chicago critique: A manager has alpha, but only for a limited investment. The manager thus
attracts funds until fees soak up the alpha, leaving no alpha to investors. This theory also accounts for many
apparent puzzles such as the fact that performance attracts new funds. Much work remains to be done in
this area, but this essay emphasizes all of the aspects of portfolio selection other than the chase for alpha so
I do not include the discussion it otherwise merits.



                                                       2
    The wisdom of high-fee, frequent-trading active management is another striking differ-
ence between academic empirical work and practice. A colleague estimates that Stanford
pays $800 million a year in fees on a $30 Billion endowment. Many wealthy individuals
voluntarily pay more than the Sanders-Warren wealth taxes in fees, though an immense
academic literature finds no post-fee skill in active management3 (for example, Fama and
French 2010).
    There is no visible mention of state variables or state-variable hedging in any of this
process. Multifactor state-variable thinking is also absent from finance industry. Why do
sophisticated quantitative hedge funds, whose reason for being is time-varying expected
returns, volatilities, and correlations, multiple priced factors and Merton state variables,
whose clients' horizons are long, and who have sophisticated portfolio optimizers, nonetheless
form and evaluate their portfolios on one-period means, variances alphas, and similar return
statistics?
    Universities employ a large faculty of finance professors, who actively research asset
markets. They teach undergraduates and MBAs, so become experts at communicating theory
to practitioners, and merging academic and real world perspectives via case studies and
connections to industry. Yet with a few exceptions, university endowments have essentially
no connection to all this free high-priced talent. Indeed, most endowments strongly resist
input from their finance faculty. I can't help but suspect that they know what we're going
to say and don't want to hear the answers.
    Standard fallacies abound. Hedge funds and other institutional investors lever, and try
to synthesize a free put option by selling as prices fall. "Carry," the business of trying to
synthesize the writing of put options, litters the finance industry. That's fine, so long as you
don't evaluate it by alpha-beta statistics based on short samples and normal distributions.
How many times have levered "arbitrageurs" forgotten that they may have to post additional
cash collateral if the market gets more irrational before it gets better, or that "we'll sell on
the way down" does not synthesize a free option?
    One can read with a bit of hope the spread of "factor investing" or "smart beta" as
the provision and purchase of Mertonian hedge portfolios. But which factors should one
buy? And just how are style portfolios Mertonian factors, proxies for state variable risk?
Factor-investing funds may promise alpha relative to a factor benchmark, but which factor
benchmarks should one buy? What do all these names mean? The style names are mostly
meaningless to me, a finance professor. I wonder what the average investor makes of them.
    Likewise, the standard list of "investment objectives" that one must declare on open-
ing an account includes a choice between "capital appreciation," "current income," "capital
preservation" or "speculation," in apparent contraction of the theorem that it does not mat-


                                               3
ter whether a return comes from prices or dividends. I have no idea how to translate these
concepts to moments of portfolio returns which matter to portfolio theory. Vanguard's funds
seem to follow this conceptual breakdown, offering4 "Diversified equity," "Dividend Appre-
ciation," "Dividend Growth," "Equity Income," "Growth and Income," "High Dividend
yield," "U.S. Growth," "Capital Opportunity," "Strategic." What do these mean and who
should choose which? BlackRock offers5 1,100 distinct funds. So much for the two-fund the-
orem. Some names include "Core," "Income Opportunities," "Multi-Asset Income," "Global
Allocation," "Total Return," "Innovation and Growth," "Core Moderate Allocation',' "Dy-
namic High Income," "Intl Multifactor," and "Balanced Capital." What do these mean and
how do they map to investor preferences and circumstances, or to moments of the return
distribution?
    When theory is so persistently contrary to practice at least one of the two must be wrong.
One might take the Chicago approach: What is the question to which these practices are
the optimal answer? Or one might take the Cambridge approach: Deplore how dumb people
are not to use the right answer, find "nudges" to induce model-appropriate behavior, or add
to the mass of financial regulation to force better allocations.
    I think the right answer drinks a bit of both salt and fresh water. Let us figure out why
investors aren't implementing our theory, and try to make the theory more useful so they
are more interested in using it. And let us keep our eyes open to aspects of the world in
which their decisions make some sort of sense, and modify our theory to include those more
realistic ingredients. Let us also consider agency problems of institutional investors, financial
advisers, and other intermediaries which may lead to perverse outcomes.
    Cambridge is half right. Normative theory has improved practice. The wide spread of
indexing, passive management, and alpha-beta evaluation stemmed from pure theory. It
had nothing to do with practice in the 1960s, and was widely derided by practitioners at the
time. Value vs. growth, factor investing, and behavioral anomaly harvesting sprang from
academic research. Chicago is half right too. As I survey seemingly irrational investment
practice, I find a lot that actually does make sense as ways to implement Merton ideas in a
world that is a lot less random walky than we thought 50 years ago. The world was right to
resist.
    Merton's theory is also devilishly hard to implement, which surely helps to account for
its disuse in practice. The central problem: What are the expected returns, state variables,
betas or correlations? These are really hard, nay impossible, to measure. What are the
partial derivatives of the investor's value function that guide state-variable investments?
  4
      https://investor.vanguard.com/mutual-funds/list#/mutual-funds/asset-class/month-end-returns
  5
      https://www.blackrock.com/us/individual/products/investment-funds



                                                   4
That's harder still. And portfolio maximization is very sensitive to inputs.
    I offer two basic ideas to make progress on these questions. First, we should focus on
the stream of dividends, or more generally payoffs, that an investment can produce, rather
than focus on one-period returns. Second, we should take a general equilibrium perspective.
An investor should ask: What is the economic function of markets, and what is my role in
it? If I want to buy, who is selling and why? Asking these questions can cut through knots
of algebra and statistics, and avoid many fallacies. Merton's portfolio theory corresponds to
the ICAPM view of market equilibrium. Asset pricing has advanced considerably in offering
quite different views of market equilibrium, and the portfolio implications of these new
views have not yet been deeply investigated. Putting both hats, I end up glimpsing portfolio
theories that are fundamentally different from Merton's vision, and ways of applying and
marketing portfolio analysis that is fundamentally different from the black box so rightly
distrusted by real investors.


2.    The Payoff Perspective
Payoffs, the stream of payments out of your investment account that you use to support
consumption, are the final result of the investment process. We start the statement of
any investment problem as a search for the optimal stream of payoffs. We normally then
investigate time or state-varying weights of investments in particular assets, and a time
or state-varying payout rule that produce the final payoffs. This dynamic programming
approach has been enormously productive to actually solving portfolio problems. But we
are here to state and understand portfolio problems, not necessarily to get in the weeds of
solving them. For that purpose, looking directly at the payoffs has many advantages.


2.1 The Inflation-Indexed Perpetuity
I am inspired by the brilliant Campbell and Viceira (2001) article on long-term bonds. They
show that an inflation-indexed perpetuity is the riskless asset for a long-run investor. Pay
$100, and receive, say, $2 per year, adjusted upward for inflation and downward for deflation.
(Wachter 2003 generalizes the result.)
    Their proposition is obvious if you look at the payoffs. An indexed perpetuity gives
a perfectly steady stream of real income, which can finance a steady risk-free stream of
consumption. It's the risk-free payoff stream. Their proposition is not at all obvious if
you look at it in the Merton framework. Perpetuities, like all long-term bonds, look very
risky from a one-period perspective. But when bond prices fall, bond expected returns rise.


                                              5
The indexed perpetuity's expected return happens to rise just enough that the dynamically-
optimizing consumer can construct a riskless consumption stream. Seeing that fact takes a
lot of dynamic programming.
    This verity is not at all obvious to the investing world. The idea that indexed perpe-
tuities are the riskfree asset, the foundation point on which investment should start, meets
incredulity. How many MBA investment classes yet mention this obvious fact, instead calling
money market funds the "riskless asset?" (Mine did, after 2001, but I wonder how many
of my ex-students remember the proposition, or would ever say it out loud in their jobs.)
In trying to sell my view that the Treasury should issue indexed perpetuities (Cochrane
2015), I constantly hear "there is no demand" for the product. Indeed, the world is mov-
ing away from theory. Perpetuities were common in the early history of government debt,
perhaps precisely because they never needed a troublesome roll-over of the principal. The
19th century U.K. funded an enormous government debt almost entirely with perpetuities,
which under the gold standard were essentially indexed. Perpetuities were the go-to asset
for aristocrats of 19th century novels to fund a leisurely lifestyle. Perhaps our much better
knowledge and understanding of one-period returns, one-period portfolio maximization and
market equilibrium, together with liquid markets, have blinded us to a clearer approach to
lifetime investing and long-term borrowing obvious to our ancestors.
    Well, let's try to sell some indexed perpetuities. Bring along your infinitely risk-averse
spouse who is not a finance professor, and let's set up your retirement portfolio. We'll
start, of course, with enough indexed perpetuities to keep you and your altruistically-linked
dynasty going at a minimum standard of living forever.
    The next month, the statement comes in. Interest rates have gone up and the value
of your investment has plummeted. "Hey, Mr. or Ms. brilliant finance professor," your
spouse intones, "you just lost a third of our retirement savings in your supposed risk-free
asset!" Hmm. This is going to be a long conversation, as you delve into state variables,
cross-derivatives of the value function, hedges for state-variable risk, dynamic multi-factor
models of the term structure of interest rates, and mean-reversion of fixed-income prices.
    A much better explanation is, "Honey, look, this investment pays a steady coupon forever
that we can live on. That's the point. We're not going to buy or sell those bonds, we're
going to live off the coupons. Just tear up the statements, and stop worrying about the
portfolio's mark-to-market value. They're meaningless for us."
    That bond returns are predictable from their prices or yields is equivalent to the fact that
default-free bond cash flows are not predictable from their prices or yields. However, I think
the spouse is going to understand the latter better than the former. Rather than explain
that a price decline is bad news, but the corresponding rise in expected returns means we'll


                                               6
be OK in the end, let us look at the other side of the identity: When government bond prices
decline, that fact has no news whatsoever about the cashflows one will receive.


2.2 Stocks
Now, many risky investments, including stocks, behave a lot like bonds: Lower price-dividend
or price-earnings ratios largely correspond to higher expected returns, not to lower expected
cashflow growth. (Cochrane 2011 includes a survey.) This fact analogously means that stocks
are not as risky for long-term investors as one would think looking only at their one-period
returns, as low prices are at least somewhat temporary or mean-reverting.
    How can we express that fact for an investor? We might try again to say that stocks
are natural hedges for their own intertemporal opportunity risk. Low expected returns are
bad news, but when that happens prices go up enough to make up for the bad news. Price
declines are bad news, but when that happens (are you still listening, honey?) expected
returns going forward are better, so we'll make up the losses.
    Hmm, the spouse is looking dubious again. Do we want to rehash the time you shorted
GameStop?
    Why don't we say that stocks pay a much steadier stream of dividends than their volatile
prices might suggest? The flip side of return predictability is dividend non-predictability ­
the two facts are linked by an identity.
    But it might be more believable and understandable to say that low prices without a
change in dividends do not signal lower dividends ahead, so the strategy of just holding the
stocks and eating the dividends is relatively safe, than it is to explain that low price-dividend
ratios lead to a just-compensating higher expected return.
    Explicitly, using the Campbell-Shiller linearization of return,

                          rt+1 = dt+1 - (dt+1 - pt+1 ) + (dt - pt )

regression coefficients
                                   rt+1 = br (dt - pt ) + r
                                                          t+1

etc. obey
                                       br = bd - bdp + 1                                     (2)

Thus for given bd p, bd = 0 is equivalent to br = 1 - bdp , which is about what we see in the
data. Moreover, since the shocks d , dp are essentially uncorrelated, while the shocks r , dp
are strongly negatively correlated, sampling variation and bias associated with estimation
of dividend yield autocorrelation bdp spill over into expected return estimation, but not into

                                               7
expected dividend growth estimation. Including this latter consideration, "dividend yields do
not forecast dividend growth" is a more reliable fact than "dividend yields forecast returns"
(Cochrane 2008).
    Dividends are not risk free. Stocks are not bonds, even in the long run. But think-
ing about the dividends directly gives a sense of how risky stock market investing is for a
long-term investor. Dividends are obviously driven by overall economic growth, not market
gyrations. We all have a sense of how risky that is, and when that risk might kick in. If
we're just going to eat the dividends, we don't have to worry about when stock prices might
rise or fall relative to dividends. We just have to worry about the economic events that lead
dividends to fall.
    (By "dividends," I include all cash payments to investors. True, only about 20% of
companies pay conventional dividends, though most of the large ones do so. Other cash
payments tend to be lumpy for individual companies, though smooth in the aggregate.
Investors and their managers and advisers also can create a payout series by methodically
selling, in particular when companies repurchase shares. More on that later.)


2.3 Payoffs Solve Puzzles
Much accounting and finance practice and intuition are built on the idea that prices behave
like random walks, that expected returns and variances are constant over time. But much
of what people do, which we might have formerly disparaged as irrational, makes sense
when risky assets behave somewhat like long-term bonds in this way. So, if looking at the
cashflows that result from an initial investment instantly clarifies long-term bond investing,
let us pursue the same perspective generally.
    Switching to a payoff perspective may change lots of procedures in finance. For example,
it is evidently silly to evaluate bond managers by alpha and beta, even relative to a bond
index, as if bond returns and alphas are independent over time. Like bonds themselves, any
deviation of past bond portfolio return from the index is surely in part a sign of positive
returns ahead. A long-term payoff perspective should change bond manager evaluation, and
by analogy should pull stock management evaluation away from one-period alphas and betas.
    Why do so many institutions, like our endowments, prize assets like private equity, venture
capital and real estate with no clear market values? Well, perhaps they like those assets
precisely because the assets are hard to mark to market, easy to just pay out 5% of a
made-up value, not to sell in a panic, and not fire the asset manager based on an irrelevant
price ­ or rather a price that is only relevant when combined with the state variable, which
accountants and oversight committees are no better at evaluating than our hypothetical


                                              8
spouse. (The chance to cut reported volatility in half with smoothed markings may also be
a bit of a reason for this preference. See Stafford 2017. And while highlighting one, I do not
mean to disparage all the other explanations for this preference.)
    I used to try to help my mom with her small retirement investments. She would often
complain, "Stocks don't pay much dividends anymore, so how am I to live?" She was of a
generation that believed one should never dip into "principal." I patiently explained that
there is no economic difference between dividends and capital gains, between principal and
income. It's ok to sell some stock these days. (Taxes, of course, are a different story, and I
heartily encouraged her to ignore idiotic advice of big-bank investment advisers to rebalance
out of stocks held for decades.) But in a world of time-varying expected returns, my mom
has a point. Price/dividend yields mean revert, so in the end the long-run "return" of a stock
is the stream of dividends divided by the initial price. Living on the dividends is exactly the
right strategy for the indexed perpetuity investor, and perhaps not a bad strategy for the
long-term equity investor.
    When I pointed out that stock prices were high, so she could sell, my mom would reply,
"Oh, those are only paper profits," which sounds like another classic fallacy. I explained the
conventional wisdom that the term is meaningless. Prices are prices, and you can sell at
those prices! Once again, my mom might have been right. She would be exactly right for a
long-term bond portfolio. If an indexed perpetuity price rises, that fact has zero implications
for the long-term investor. If bond prices doubled and she sold bonds, she would get a high
value, to be sure. But the present value of her consumption path doubled as well, so it would
take exactly double the wealth to maintain the same consumption path. Regarding the price
rise as "paper profits" guided my mom to the correct Merton decision.
    Why do stocks pay dividends? It's a longstanding puzzle. If you go back to the world my
mom grew up in, when you had to hold physical shares in a safe deposit box, it makes sense
to sell stocks to long-term investors like my mom, that automatically pay out the amount
that those investors wish to consume, rather than require investors to trade dynamically in
order to construct a consumption/payout stream. In turn, this observation may help us. In
principle, dynamic trading can create many "dividend streams" out of an initial set of assets.
But corporations and the finance industry have every incentive to create and market the kinds
of dividend streams people want. Why do firms pay and smooth dividends? Because my
mom liked a steady check! In a sense the definition of "long-term investor" might be one who
buys a security for the stream of cashflows, not for a hope of short-term price appreciation.
    Shiller (2014) advises people to buy stocks for the dividends. It's good advice. You can
read his famous graph, updated there, of volatile stock price on top of very smooth plot of
dividends as a plot of the very steady stream of consumption that stocks can support at any


                                              9
date by just consuming the dividends.
    Accounting conventions are to some extent to blame for a focus on one-period returns
rather than long-term payoffs. Under the early "random walk" view that expected returns
are constant and returns are uncorrelated over time, accountants wisely started more and
more marking to market. If prices are a random walk, then today's market value is the
best guess of future value, and such marking imposes a lot of discipline on accounting. But
marking to market is much more subtle if expected returns vary over time; if prices do in fact
suffer temporary declines that are to some extent predictably reversed; if long-run cashflows
are more stable than market prices. Such marking would cause less of a problem if one could
mark both assets and liabilities to market, as the same discount rate shocks would apply on
both sides of the balance sheet. But often one can only mark the assets to market, not the
liabilities. More deeply, no accountant can mark to market using state variables that say
"yes, we lost a lot on a mark-to-market basis, but these assets will gain back their value in
time." Accountants and bank regulators have resorted to tricks, like putting some assets in
"hold to maturity" buckets to avoid marking to market. Resort to tricks reveals the problem.
    Insurance companies are not required to mark to market their portfolios unless there is
"impairment," a "permanent" loss of value. They can hold assets at the booked purchase
price through maturity, and they don't need to flow into the income statement the fluctua-
tions in their market value other than impairment. They tend to care only about the income
their portfolios produce, like my mom, and seldom liquidate appreciated securities.
    Houses may be a good example halfway between stocks and bonds. House prices vary a
lot. Yet most of us do not market-time housing. Yes, the transactions costs are larger. But
the main reason is, we have to live somewhere. The house you want to buy goes up just
as much as the house you want to sell. Houses are good hedges for house-price investment-
opportunity variation. High house price/rent ratios forecast lower price growth more than
higher rent growth. Indeed one of the major benefits of buying a house is that you are
protected from rent variation, and can live there as long as you want no matter how high
rents go. A house is a housing services perpetuity. (The absence of long-term rental contracts
or rent insurance is interesting. One should be able to buy a rent swap, a financial contract
that pays, say, the index of rents in a geographic area against a constant flow.)
    This observation also says much about wealth inequality. A large amount of the increase
in measured wealth inequality is just higher prices for the same payoff streams, as the riskfree
rate has plummeted at least 4 percentage points, and risk premiums have also compressed.
It is then also just "paper wealth" inequality, as long-term consumption inequality does not
change at all.



                                              10
2.4 Payout Theory
Merton's theory is an integrated theory of dynamic portfolio allocation and consumption or
payout strategy. Along with the more famous portfolio advice (1), Merton's theory says to
take wealth out of the portfolio and consume in proportion to the marginal value of wealth,

                                      u (ct ) = VW (Wt , yt )                                (3)

where u is the utility function, c is consumption, V is the value function, W is the market
value of wealth, and yt denotes state variables.
     In an i.i.d. world, yt = constant, Merton portfolio theory says to consume in proportion
to wealth, which is the market portfolio. That means consumption growth should have a
volatility of 20% per year not 1% per year.
     People follow this consumption advice even less than they follow the portfolio advice. As
evidenced by the low volatility of consumption relative to stock returns, just about everybody
ignores "paper profits" in their consumption planning. Estimates of the effect of higher stock
values on consumption find small numbers. (For example Lettau, Ludvigson, and Steindel
2002.) By ignoring the theory's prediction that consumption should be proportional to the
market value of wealth, finance missed the equity premium puzzle for 20 years, merrily
fitting portfolios with a risk aversion of two and not wondering why consumption volatility
is a tenth of that predicted by the reigning model.
     Perhaps people are right, and our usual calibration of the Merton model is wrong. Perhaps
changes in stock market values beyond what is reflected in consumption, not just dividends,
are transitory, "paper profits" that cannot sustain additional consumption. Perhaps the
change in y just offsets the change in W . And perhaps by looking at the payoffs of the
investment strategy rather than the market value of wealth, we can see that fact more
clearly and communicate it more persuasively.
     Perhaps (likely) also the other components of wealth, such as real estate, private business,
and human capital, do not vary as much as stocks and bonds, so smooth consumption
makes more sense. But real estate values do vary, and why should the true value of private
business vary much less than that of public businesses? Moreover, if this is the case, if
consumption really does move proportionally to the volatility of true wealth, then standard
Merton/Markowitz portfolio advice is severely misapplied by ignoring what must be large
components of wealth. I return to outside income and human capital below.
     Clearly, we should generalize Campbell and Viceira's insight, from the riskless asset to the
risky portfolio that a risk-tolerant investor will choose. If looking at the stream of coupons
and the initial price makes dynamic portfolio theory for the long-term bond investor crystal


                                                11
clear, so looking at the stream of payoffs, the stream of consumption that a portfolio can
support, divided by the initial price, should make dynamic Merton theory for the long-term
risk-tolerant investor clearer.


2.5 Market Timing and Dynamic Portfolio Management
Campbell and Viceira (2002), by lucidly extending, applying, and expounding the Merton
framework, already emphasize that stocks are relatively safe for long-term investors, since
stocks are hedge portfolios for their own investment opportunities. Campbell and Viceira also
show that long-run investors may wish to market-time, investing more when the market is
low and less when the market is high. However, the hedge portfolio advice strikes me as more
interesting and robust than the market-timing advice. Market timing based on the aggregate
dividend yield is a very slow-moving strategy, as the dividend yield takes decades to mean-
revert. We don't really know where the average dividend yield is, so whether it is above ­
buy ­ or below ­ sell ­ average at a point in time is questionable. Real-time evaluations of the
market-timing strategy, including the need to estimate the relationship using only past data,
are not encouraging (Goyal and Welch 2003). Formalizing this observation with learning,
Bayesian estimation, structural shifts, and so forth, makes market timing more dubious still.
It is possible that we know returns are predictable, and dividend growth not predictable,
but that knowledge is useless for real-time market timing. Real time performance is not a
test of the unpredictability hypothesis (Cochrane 2008).
    By contrast, hedge portfolio logic only requires us to believe that the price/dividend ratio
does not predict dividend growth. How much of that failure reflects return predictability
and how much reflects dividend yield autocorrelation (see eqaution (2) is irrelevant. The
hedge portfolio logic only requires us to think dividend yields are stationary, returns are
predictable, dividend growth is relatively unpredictable, but it does not require us to know
the long-term mean dividend yield, what the predicted return is at a point in time, and how
much apparent return predictability stems from downward bias in estimated dividend yield
autocorrelation. Finally, we can't all market time, so it is advice that can only apply to
half of the investors, with the other half taking the opposite advice. While one can argue
that long-term investors can overweight equity with short-term investors underweighting,
market-timing advice applies equally to both. So, in my advice for long-term investors, I
deemphasize the market-timing part of the strategy.
    Now, the managed-portfolio theorem reminds us that firm dividends really do not matter
to the portfolio problem, and there really is no difference between dividends and capital gains.
(I abstract from tax issues.) The statistical character of returns and cashflows attaches to


                                              12
characteristics, not stock name and dividends. One can create a payout by selling stock. A
dynamic strategy can synthesize many different cashflows out of portfolios of securities. For
example, a fund could market-time, or invest in a dynamically-managed portfolio of stocks,
pay out a 5% payout rate of total value, and that payout becomes the fund's "dividends."
Of course, as before, firms may already do that. We might consider large corporations and
their dividend payout policies already as managed portfolios that provide a dividend tailored
in some way to investor's desires. But funds can potentially improve on that effort, or tailor
it to different investors.
    The managed portfolio theorem and the essential irrelevance of dividends seem to under-
mine the payout-focused idea, but I think instead they offer an insight and an advantage.
They force us to look at the long-neglected payout policy part of Merton theory. Our en-
dowments spend hundreds of millions on fees for portfolio managers to chase evanescent
zero-sum alpha, but then pay out a constant 5% of mark-to-model value, and freeze hiring
in recessions. Let us look harder at payouts, and their state-contingency!
    Payout policy transfers consumption over time, as portfolio choice transfers consumption
across states of nature. If we look at time and state of nature symmetrically, we consider
payout policy and portfolio policy together.
    There is a tendency to separate portfolio payout from consumption: Here's your 5%
payout, now you decide when to consume it. But anything not consumed today is put in a
bank account or other investment to be consumed later. Put the bank account in the overall
portfolio, now we are thinking again about payout policy as part of portfolio policy.
    Perhaps this observation reveals another tendency, to think only of certain assets as the
"portfolio" and to ignore the others. Universities in 2008 discovered that their borrowing
against construction projects exposed them to state-contingent cashflows every bit as much
as risky investments in the formal endowment portfolio. The need to roll over municipal
debt and maintain a decent rating, or to make good on swap contracts involving such debt,
provoked some of the endowment and budget panic of that year. A big piece of my larger
advice on applying portfolio theory will be to fold outside assets and liabilities, outside
business income to a private investor and professors' salaries to a university, into the concept
of the portfolio. Merton's advice applies to the whole thing, not one piece of it.
    It is inconsistent to advocate state-variable thinking in the portfolio, but to ignore state
variables as if returns are i.i.d. in this payout policy (3), and just consume in proportion to
wealth. (There are special cases in which the marginal value of wealth does not depend on
state variables, but they are special, and at least you have to think about it. More later.) For
example, suppose interest rates fall, bond prices rise, and our indexed perpetuity investor
starts selling bonds to consume a constant fraction of the now higher market value. Sooner


                                              13
or later however, he or she will have to reduce consumption below the pre-planned risk-free
value. In this example, the effect of wealth and the state variable, bond yield, exactly offset.
    The managed portfolio theorem suggests a a sensible dividing line between financial en-
gineering, portfolio selection, and marketing and tailoring a combination of funds to the
particular investor. Forming and managing the portfolio, calculating appropriate payouts,
hedging state variables, and then cleanly characterizing the available payouts as a stream of
"dividends" tailored to the individual might well belong under the hood of expert manage-
ment, and worth a fee. Management companies now sell target date funds, annuities, and
defined-benefit pensions, each of which functions in this way. The suggestion is just to offer
a much richer set of carefully tailored payouts.
    Under the hood, the manager may well wish to take a dynamic programming, state-
variable approach. A bond fund with a more complex portfolio than an indexed perpetuity,
or a more interesting set of payouts such as annuities, should definitely use yields as state
variables, and model how changes in yields are likely to affect returns and payouts going
forward. Likewise, a value fund, recognizing that book/market ratios forecast returns over
time as well as (or more strongly than) the cross-section, should include the time-variation
in book/market ratios as a state variable, and use that to forecast returns and cashflows, in
order to determine its payout policy. And educated customers need to understand and believe
in what the fund is doing. Modeling has to be part of the business ­ figuring out if prices
decline, just how much expected returns have risen, and how much expected dividends have
fallen, and figuring out what will happen if those forecasts are off. Still, I think it remains
useful to communicate, and for the final investor to contemplate and evaluate the portfolio
plus payout product, by focusing on the character of the stream of payoffs it produces rather
than the dynamic strategy under the hood.
    Options provide another good analogy. Black, Scholes and Merton showed how one can
replicate an option by dynamic trading in stocks and bonds. Suppose an investor is worried
about stock market risk ­ "I'm willing to take some risk to generate higher average returns,
but I absolutely cannot take a fall in value more than 20%." Obviously, the right investment
strategy is a stock index plus a protective put option. But it might be more efficient to
synthesize that put through dynamic trading. Now how do we explain this advice to the
investor? The protective put ­ the final payoff ­ is clear and simple. The dynamic trading
strategy is much harder to explain. Even if the portfolio manager executes the strategy
by dynamic trading, or by options trading, it's much easier to explain and to choose the
protective put by explaining the final payoff.




                                              14
2.6 Evaluation
Currently, many funds characterize their performance for investors by alpha and beta relative
to a market index such as the S&P500. Alpha and beta relative to the S&P 500 is only
interesting if your portfolio, including your outside income and liability streams, consists only
of the S&P500. A marginal investment only improves mean-variance performance if it has
alpha relative to your portfolio. Alphas and betas are only interesting if your objective is one-
period mean-variance optimization. Alphas and betas are only interesting if you are doing
alpha-beta risk management and evaluating a whole portfolio on that basis. Our investors
do not hold that portfolio and they do bucket-based not beta-based risk management.
    Alphas and betas are even less interesting in a dynamic context, for long-term investors.
In classic asset pricing theory, betas derive from the correlation of cashflow shocks. But
now we know that prices move on discount rate news, so betas are also driven by common
discount rate shocks. Then, S&P500 alphas and betas are only interesting if you care about
the discount-rate betas, but the discount rates are not a state variable to you.
    Standard alphas and betas do not include state variables. For example, a value fund with
low recent alpha currently does not estimate how much a low state variable today means
higher returns in the future.
    Alpha and beta relative to a factor index such as a value index is a little more interesting.
But only if that the deviation from the index,  + is uncorrelated over time and unfore-
castable, which it is likely not. Like bonds, if a fund's stocks fall more than the index, they
may well be better bargains. But the most important question for the long-term investor is
which of the dozens of factor indices to buy. Alphas relative to those indices are icing on the
cake. First, let's figure out how to bake the cake.
    To be concrete, let's take the hard job of a value fund manager in late 2020. It's a lot like
our beleaguered finance professor trying to explain the indexed perpetuity to an incredulous
spouse. If value stocks fall, and their dividends, earnings, etc. do not fall, value stocks are
likely an even better deal than before. (Time-series value is stronger than cross-sectional
value. Book/market variation over time predicts subsequent returns of the same portfolio
more strongly than book/market variation across portfolios predicts returns. See Cochrane
2011 Table AIII.) The same is true of funds that operate on convergence trades or long-term
arbitrage opportunities. But going to client meetings, explaining that you've just lost a
ton of mark-to-market money, but the state variables just keep getting better and better,
so if anything the client should invest more, is awfully hard! Selling momentum is a lot
easier. "Paper losses" don't have quite that much ring in a modern client meeting. And not
irrationally so. Any ambiguity or learning about the process puts weight on realized returns.
But the same learning and statistical doubt would not believe that indexed perpetuity bond

                                               15
returns mean-revert as well.
    If the conversation were about long-run payouts, about the price paid for a dividend
stream, the whole business might be a lot easier. It's still not easy ­ unlike a bond, one
needs to model the long-run payouts. But it seems a more productive way to frame the
conversation.


2.7 Risk management
Looking harder at the risks and risk-absorbing capacity of the liability stream or planned
consumption (and philanthropy) stream is a vital and overlooked component of the portfolio
process. Liability streams are not fixed, and often a choice rather than a fixed set of pay-
ments. If an institution is not going to buy indexed perpetuities, then the supported income
stream is risky, and will have to be cut back at times and states of nature dictated by the
portfolio and payout strategy. What are those times and states of nature? How costly will
it be to cut back in those events? These questions need to be asked.
    A university that invests in risky assets should be sure that the payment streams sup-
ported by the risky payouts can absorb the risk. Tenured professor salaries are, in the
current institutional framework, hard to cut in bad times. Adapting to risk by cutting back
investment in new faculty may not be the smartest way to absorb risk. Flashy new centers,
showy initiatives, larger staffs, non-revenue teaching, outreach efforts and related activities
are easier to scale up in good times and to scale back in bad times. Whatever one thinks
of such activities, universities do a lot of them. If those activities can bear risk, they are
better suited for funding from the risky payoff streams of an endowment invested in risky
assets. Indeed, the confluence of risk bearing capacity and risky endowment strategies may
explain some of the modern university's dramatic shift in the direction of such activities.
A sovereign wealth fund might think likewise about which streams of payments can bear
risk, and which can not. Funding entitlements with a risky portfolio seems more dangerous
than funding science or infrastructure, for example. Many wealthy individuals invest, on
the margin, to fund philanthropic ventures. Their preferences about such funding may well
be quite risk tolerant. That fact leads to a strong positive beta in donation flow, another
state-contingent stream that university and nonprofit endowments need to think more about
in their risk management. On the other hand, a defined benefit pension fund, an individual
with a lot of debt, for example mortgages on houses that he or she really would be pained
to sell, needs to find other consumption streams that can bear risk or reduce the risk in the
portfolio.




                                              16
2.8 Analytical approaches
This remains vision, and it is all easier said than done. In Cochrane (2014), I extended
Campbell and Viceira (2001) to risky assets. If the indexed perpetuity is the riskless asset,
then the consumption claim, that pays one unit of aggregate consumption, must be the risky
claim and held by the average investor. People must mix their portfolios between these two
claims, with more risk averse people taking more of the indexed perpetuity, and vice versa.
And all of this holds with an arbitrarily dynamic and multifactor view of the world.
    Dynamic portfolio theory and asset pricing are really about the question, how does one
extend simple one-period results to multiple periods? Conceptually, my paper suggests we
extend one-period asset pricing to multiple periods by looking at streams of payoffs, rather
than make the one-period terminal utility more complex, as the value function of a dynamic
program. Treat date and state symmetrically. Write intertemporal dynamic portfolio choice
as a choice of the final payoff or consumption streams,
                                                 
                                  max                          t  (st )u[c(st )]
                                  {c(st )}
                                             t=0         st


where st denote states of nature. In a complete market, we can write the constraint
                                         
                                W =                        t  (st )mt (st )c(st ).
                                         t=0        st


The optimal payoff c
                   ^(st ) is given simply by

                                         u [^
                                            c(st )] = m(st ).

This condition fully describes the optimal payoff over time just as it is does across states
of nature, despite arbitrary dynamics, state variables, multiple factors, and so forth. This
result is well known. ( Cochrane 2014 includes a literature review.)
    However, we do not live in a complete market. The state variables for time-varying mean
returns are not traded. The challenge is to do the same sort of analysis in an incomplete
market. To that end, I simply write the dynamic Merton problem as static Markowitz
portfolio theory, treating date and state symmetrically. Start with a set of basis payoffs x(st ),
which can be expanded by dynamic trading and payout strategies. Then the constraint is

                              c(st ) =              wi xi (st ),        wi pi = W.
                                             i                      i




                                                              17
I made the problem look even closer to the one-period problem by defining "long run"
moments that sum over date and state symmetrically,
                                             
                            ~ (x)  (1 -  )
                            E                            t  (st )x(st )                   (4)
                                             t=0   st


Likewise we can define long-run variances, covariances, betas, and so forth.
    Though the environment is arbitrarily dynamic, all the standard one-period character-
izations obtain. We can define a long-run mean / long-run variance frontier, price assets
from long-run betas, and so forth. But it all has a much different meaning. The long run
mean, variance and covariances are of dividend streams divided by initial price. We look
at asset prices, driven by the long-run covariance of dividend streams with the marginal
utility stream, in place of one-period returns. Hedging outside income streams is easy too,
discussed below.
    That long-horizon perspective can make a big difference in how we proceed. Consider
the problem of betas, central to risk management and portfolio formation. Another great
puzzle is how little we know about betas. In continuous-time diffusion theory, 10 seconds
of millisecond data is enough to measure betas with nearly infinite precision. In fact, betas
are hard to measure and unstable over time. Much of the reason, I think, is that most betas
are discount-rate betas, not cash-flow betas. (Or they are sentiment betas, if you're in a
behavioral mood.) Discount-rate betas measure how one price moves with another price,
while the dividend streams do not move at all. Most of this variation is irrelevant for our
long-term use. The payoff view focuses on long-run cashflow betas, defined by a long-run
covariance as in (4). It's a fundamentally different object.
    More generally, applied Merton portfolio theory is foundering. Campbell and Viceira,
and the related literature, have done a good job of adapting Merton theory to what we
now understand about the evolution of the market, and perhaps a few styles like value
and growth, over time. But applying Merton portfolio theory for long-term investors to
our current nuanced multifactor understanding of the cross section remains terra incognita.
Perhaps this payoff focused view will let us convincingly describe cross-sectional portfolio
theory, overcoming the instability of -1 µ.
    Alas, after (in my view) an inspiring introduction, my paper foundered a bit. The
linear marginal utility or linear-quadratic approximation that one needs to generate two-
fund separation in an incomplete market is a difficult fit to power utility and lognormal
long-term returns. So the statement that investors who differ by risk aversion split their
payoffs linearly between the indexed perpetuity and the aggregate consumption claim is
not a great global approximation to the power-lognormal environment. For example, when

                                             18
investors have power utility, the complete-market sharing rule is

                                         c-
                                          i
                                            i
                                              = c-
                                                 a
                                                   a



where i and a are individual and aggregate. Log consumption is a linear function of log
aggregate consumption, but the relationship between levels is nonlinear.
    So, my linear two-fund payoff theorem may survive as useful conceptual benchmark. But
you can see in this sharing rule that it may not be a good approximation far from the
endpoints, indexed perpetuity and market dividend claim. I leave a better formal analysis
an invitation for smarter people than I am to follow if, as I hope, I have persuaded you it's a
good idea either for calculating or for marketing consumption-portfolio advice and especially
outside-income hedging where we do not have mark-to-market values. (Cochrane 2007 and
Cochrane 2013 include many seemingly obvious paths that don't work. If you get inspired,
see here for a list of things not to do.)
    One may object that it takes a long time to evaluate whether the stream of dividends
accruing to an investment is good or not, or to calculate the long-run mean, variance, and
covariance of long-run cashflows. But it takes a lot of time to evaluate average returns too.
                    
The tyranny of / T ensures that. Measuring and evaluating payouts will have to include
some modeling, understanding how state variables like bond and dividend yield forecast
future returns or cashflows. And prices never really go away from the portfolio problem for
finite horizons and data. You can have a great stream for a while if you plunder the terminal
value.
    The long-run perspective also changes what is important. Translating returns to prices
can make a big difference if return differences are persistent. For example, at a price/dividend
ratio of 50, P/D = 1/(r - g ) gives us r - g = 2%. From that a 20 bp change in return equals
a 10% change in price. Many people don't get excited about a 20 bp change in average
return. (Especially those paying 2%+ 20% fees!) But increasing lifetime consumption by
10% is something to write home about. On the other hand, things that loom large to the
highly levered, high-speed trading and transient anomaly end of finance fade from interest,
as they make little difference to the price of long-term cashflows.
    At a simpler level, dividends are what matters for long-run returns. The price-dividend
ratio mean reverts, so all of the eventual return comes from dividends divided by initial price,
not from capital gains. All unexpected long-run return comes from unexpected dividend
growth. We can see these facts directly by rearranging the Campbell and Shiller (1988)
decomposition, in logs, to express the long run return in terms of long-run dividends and




                                              19
the initial price,
                                                     
                                     j -1
                                            rt+j =          j -1 dt+j - (pt - dt ).
                           j =1                      j =1

Even more simply, we can just write the definition of return,

                                  Pt+1 + Dt+1   Pt+1 /Dt+1 Dt+1 Dt+1
                       Rt+1 =                 =                +
                                       Pt         Pt /Dt    Dt   Pt

In the long run, the price dividend ratio reverts to its mean, P/D, so, loosely (!) a very
long-run return becomes

                          P/D Dt+1 Dt+1                               P   Dt+1    Dt+1 Dt
                 Rt+1 =             +    =                       1+            =R         .
                          Pt /Dt Dt   Pt                              D    Pt      Dt P t

Dividend growth is what matters to long-run returns. Fama and French (2002) use this
idea to measure the equity premium. The postwar period saw a large increase in the
price/dividend ratio, which will not go on forever. They argue that the lower average divi-
dend growth is a better measure of the equity premium. One may also argue that even the
postwar dividend growth was unexpected, representing decades of stronger economic growth
than the world had ever seen or was expected in the aftermath of WWII.


2.9 From one to many periods - payoffs or returns
In sum, the challenge of contemporary portfolio theory is to move from a one-period under-
standing to a multiperiod, dynamic view. This generalization is easy if the world is i.i.d. ­
just play the one period over and over. But our world is not i.i.d., so one-period tools don't
work. Merton extends the one-period world to a dynamic world by dynamic programming,
adding state variables that capture changing conditional distributions to the terminal utility,
which is the value function of the dynamic program. Now, dynamic programming often does
capture common intuition and behavior and offers a digestible way to operationalize dynamic
maximization. When someone says "I can't afford to go out to that fancy dinner," they're
trading marginal value of consumption u (ct ) against marginal utility of wealth VW (Wt , yt ).
Keeping a rough sense of the marginal value of wealth around is a much better heuristic
for decision making than trying to trade off date and state-contingent consumption ­ "I
don't want to go out to a fancy dinner tonight because I might want to buy a better class
of RV when I retire in 40 years." Dynamic programming does capture the process of much
decision-making as well as the outcome. But in the portfolio case, we don't know really what
the state variables are, the derivatives of the value function don't have such an easy interpre-


                                                            20
tation, and they depend on the environment as well as preferences. Viewing the problem as
a selection among cashflow streams may be an easier way, at least to implement and market
portfolio theory, if not directly to compute portfolios and recommended consumption.


3.    A General Equilibrium Approach
The second conceptual aid I want to offer is that researchers, investors, and advisers should
routinely state a view of the economic function of financial markets, their place in markets,
what activity or risk bearing generates a reward, and what justifies doing something different
from everybody else. In our language, portfolio theory and application should describe a
general equilibrium, and how investors are heterogenous.
    Why, you may ask? When you buy tomatoes at the grocery store, you don't need to think
about general equilibrium. If tomatoes are expensive, buy less of them. Who cares if they
are expensive because of a frost in the tomato farms or because of a behavioral bubble in the
tomato futures market? Consult your preferences, look at the price, and buy accordingly.
This is exactly the Merton approach in financial markets. Whether expected returns are low
because of a behavioral bubble or because everyone else is less risk averse or because of a
savings glut in China makes absolutely no difference to your portfolio calculation. Whether
markets are efficient, behavioral or institutional makes no difference.
    But, asset markets are different from grocery stores in one crucial respect: We don't
know the prices. We don't know the expected returns and betas that appear in Merton
portfolio theory and take the role of prices in grocery-shopping microeconomics. Expected
                                             
returns take decades to learn, thanks to / T , and then they change. The factor structure
of returns is devilishly hard to measure, and also varies over time. (Again, I suspect that
is because so much of it represents discount-rate betas. I hope that long-run cashflow betas
are more stable and sensible. But nothing in finance turns out the way you think before you
look.) Alternatively, we know asset prices, but we don't know what we get for that price.
It's as if the store says tomatoes are $5.00, but you have to take them home and wait 20
years to find out how many tomatoes you actually got for your $5.00.
    Now if you can't see the prices and have to do a lot of statistics to guess what they are,
thinking about general equilibrium can help to make a shopping decision. If you know that
tomatoes grow on farms, that they are ripe in August, and these facts drive the seasonal
behavior of tomato prices, then you know buying a lot of tomatoes in August when the
posted price is low is likely to be a good idea.
    General equilibrium thinking starts with a deep, powerful and frequently overlooked
theorem:

                                             21
   · The average investor must hold the market portfolio.

    The first implication: If you are not identifiably different than average, then you should
hold the market portfolio. You should not even rebalance. If stock prices go up, from 60/40
of total assets, to 80/20, and you rebalance to 60/40, someone else has to overweight equities.
Rebalancing is a zero-sum market-timing strategy.
    The average-investor theorem is powerful, because portfolio theory is hard. You have to
estimate or otherwise understand time-varying means and covariances of asset returns and
state variables, alphas and betas. Then you have to make a difficult computation, and do a
lot of massaging to keep it from blowing up. But if you know that you're no different than
the average ­ or if you don't really know you are different and how ­ you're done, you know
the answer. Off to the total market portfolio with you.
    Indeed, if you have ever tried to do a portfolio optimization, even at the level of MBA class
problem set, you know how essentially impossible it is. The optimization is sensitive to small
variation in mean returns and covariance matrix. If you want the maximization to come up
with anything like the market portfolio, you have to reverse-engineer that result by forcing
expected returns to equal betas times the market return. Even slight deviations cause huge
changes in portfolio weights. Starting with the market portfolio, and then isolating respects
in which you are different from average is a promising way to construct a portfolio.
    A consequence:

   · Any deviation from the market portfolio is a financial zero-sum game.

For everyone who gains, or earns an alpha, someone else must lose. I add the "financial"
qualifier because the whole point is to find deviations that make sense for everybody in
marginal utility. But that only happens if we are different from each other in some important
way.

   · Portfolio theory must be all about heterogeneity.

    So how are you different than average? Everyone thinks they're smarter than average,
or less behavioral, or better informed. Half are, by definition, wrong about that.
    Well, just hire a smart person. Sorry, the finance profession has free entry of charlatans
at all levels. (Berk and van Binsbergen 2020 offer an equilibrium model of "charlatans.")
You have to be better than average about picking managers. Half of the people are wrong
about that too. Maybe you think you deserve alpha because your social connections are
better than average. You golf with this brilliant options trader named Bernie. Half the
people are wrong about that too.


                                               22
    A good test of a portfolio theory, a portfolio maximization program, or portfolio adviser,
is that there must be a question to which the answer is "do nothing" ­ hold the market
portfolio without rebalancing. This is a vital placebo test. If the program or adviser says
"you should buy value and short growth," then ask, "and who are you telling to short value
and buy growth?" If the answer is "nobody, this is a great deal for any investor," at a
minimum the portfolio view is not fleshed out. If it's honest, then it's useless for almost
all investors ­ the vast majority of people are solving some other portfolio problem, which
gives the "buy growth" answer. Are you sure you're not one of them? Otherwise, we're
back in the town where all the children are smarter than average. At best, if it truly is good
advice for any investor, then when investors wise up and take the advice, the phenomenon
will disappear. Are you sure you're first in line? Are you sure you're not talking to someone
who is offering the portfolio advice that leads to the negative alpha that others will exploit?
In sum, any style or factor advice such as "buy value" is clearly more reliable if we know the
portfolio question whose answer is "buy growth," and the question whose answer is "hold
the market," and we can check that these are not our questions.
    The average investor theorem reassures you that by holding the market index you can at
least protect yourself from being below average! The dismal literature on active management,
constantly reminding us that there is essentially no reliable after-fee performance better than
indexing, is a powerful incentive to remember the average investor theorem. Thinking in
market microstructure terms, avoid being the "liquidity" trader who the "informed" traders
and "market makers" pick off.
    In sum, the average investor theorem suggests a few related tests for portfolio formation:

   · The placebo test.

   · The look-in-the-mirror test.

   · The dinner with lions / look around the table test.

The placebo test is, again, the test that there must be a well defined question to which the
portfolio advice spits out, hold the market.
    If you're buying, others must be selling, and they have a reason to do so. Maybe they're
more behavioral than you, or less informed, or dumber. Maybe they have some exposure to
state variables you don't. Maybe they have a "liquidity need." But first, look in the mirror.
Are you sure you're not the one who should be selling?
    When having dinner with lions, make sure you're at the table not on the menu. Someone
is. When sitting down to play poker, find the mark. Make sure it's not you.
    If you want to deviate from the market portfolio, ask first, "What are the risks of this

                                              23
security, why are others unwilling to hold that risk, and why am I the right person to do
so?"
     General equilibrium, or at least some economics, should be useful also in guiding our
thinking about asset price and return dynamics. I asserted that stocks are a lot like bonds,
that expected returns vary over time, that higher valuation ratios correspond to lower ex-
pected returns, and, equivalently, that higher valuation ratios do not correspond to higher
expected dividend or cash-flow growth. But statistical estimates of time-series predictability
and the states of nature when it goes wrong are imprecise. Faith in state-variable hedging,
marking values to market based on higher expected future returns or a rosy estimate of a
dividend stream might be excusably weak. If one states a general equilibrium view of the
causes of discount-rate variation and expected dividend growth variation, that view give one
more confidence in state variables. For example, in the fall of 2008, one could clearly see
many investors dumping securities, as they got nearer to balance sheet capacity or default
boundaries. The smell of time-varying risk aversion was in the air. Such thinking gives an
investor who does not have such constraints, or reason to become more risk averse, confi-
dence that this is a time of higher time-varying expected return. And such thinking invites
a look in the mirror to make sure our investor really does have more risk-bearing capacity
than the average.
     Moreover, being clear about whether the fundamental source of time-varying returns
comes from time-varying investor behavior, time-varying technological investment opportu-
nities, or time-varying wedges driven by financial frictions, intermediary constraints, and so
forth, can help an investor think through the right strategy at a moment in history. Portfolio
theory is not usually stated in general equilibrium terms, but it would be much more helpful
if it were to do so.


3.1 Portfolio theory and equilibrium asset pricing
The last 50 years have seen immense progress in asset pricing, both theory and empirical
work. Much of work this still awaits integration with portfolio theory. Simply throwing
every anomaly in the soup and sending it off to a Merton portfolio optimizer is obviously a
bad idea.
    Why has so much asset pricing theory and empirical work since the ICAPM not trans-
lated into parallel portfolio theory and application? In part, I think because we simply have
not asked them to do so. We have mostly used new theories, including new preferences, tech-
nology specifications, and the recent discoveries about market frictions, to ask the opposite
question ­ what asset price variation do we reverse-engineer so the portfolio theory answer


                                             24
is just to hold the market portfolio?
    That is already interesting. It reminds us that perhaps we too are not the Merton
investor, and have the same novel preferences or face the same opportunities as everyone
else, so what look like delicious trading opportunities are in fact prices that should guide us
to hold the market portfolio just like everyone else.
    But asset pricing per se does not give any portfolio advice other than that the average
investor should hold the market, no matter how zany the asset prices are. Here, I think
the brilliant insight of Lucas (1978) may have taken us too far. Before Lucas, we thought
of asset prices with the traditional general equilibrium framework: write down supply and
demand (portfolio) curves, then intersect them to solve for asset prices. The CAPM and
mean-variance theory came hand in hand; the ICAPM and Merton theory came hand in
hand. Lucas taught us to skip portfolio theory altogether, and just read asset prices from
first-order conditions in equilibrium ­ when the investor holds the market portfolio. That
was a tremendous shortcut for asset pricing, but it put portfolio theory a bit in the rear-view
mirror.
    So, let us survey quickly some of the new asset pricing theories, or views of the function of
markets, buttressed by facts. Let us think about how to introduce relevant and interesting
concepts of heterogeneity ­ how people or their circumstances differ, motivating different
investment strategies, different payoff streams. Let us think about how to complete the
equilibrium models too, as many theories don't describe a full or heterogenous set of agents,
or supply conditions. And then we can speculate how the new understanding of asset pricing
might change portfolio theory, focusing here on long-run investors.


3.2 The classic view and updates
I start with the classic view, completing Merton portfolio theory with CAPM or ICAPM
general equilibrium, to get this way of thinking going. Here, the purpose of financial markets
is to intermediate between investors who manage portfolios of wealth, with time-separable
expected utility and no job or outside income, and firms that need to issue securities to
finance investment. In the classic i.i.d. case, investors differ by risk aversion. They hold
more or less of the market portfolio and riskfree asset accordingly.
    The general equilibrium underpinnings of the CAPM and ICAPM are actually not always
clear. The most straightforward way to think of the CAPM or ICAPM in general equilibrium
is to view stocks as linear technologies, promising a fixed stochastic rate of return independent
of investment size, i.e. linear technologies. Market equilibrium changes the composition of
the market portfolio by changing the scale of its constituent firms. Market equilibrium does


                                               25
not change the price or rates of return of individual securities. Time-varying return moments
stem from time-varying technological opportunities. The CAPM can also be derived by
assuming that asset payoffs are fixed, and equilibrium determines initial prices and therefore
expected returns. Reality lies in between, and includes market frictions.
    This classic marriage of CAPM/ICAPM and Markowitz/Merton portfolio advice is al-
ready useful for practice. If investors are to answer "What's my risk aversion?" it's awfully
hard to come up with a number. Various surveys and questionnaires to elicit such a number
are only fodder for behavioral finance in their inconsistency. Like rats in a maze, we are as-if
maximizers not self-aware calculating automatons. But if investors have only to answer,
"Are you more risk averse than the average investor?" perhaps we can make progress. Of
course, beware surveys. Not everyone can be less risk averse than average either, though
many may strike that pose. And people who state low risk aversion in good times often
change their minds in the tough after-the-big-loss meetings with their asset managers. But
that fact only suggests time-varying risk aversion which we'll get to later. Still, one way
to make sense of the questionnaires that all investment advisers make us fill out, which I
made fun of above, is that they are trying to elicit this sort of relative rather than absolute
variation in preferences.
    Moreover, as before, actual portfolio maximization using average return and covariance
matrix estimates is devilishly unstable. By posing the question in this general equilibrium
form, we reduce the problem to a simple two-fund question.
    However, the CAPM and ICAPM fail as empirically relevant general equilibrium mod-
els. If everyone were Merton (separable utility, no outside income, common information)
investors, it's awfully hard to have a market that produces the kind of multifactor time-
varying opportunities we see. Why are all these opportunities there? Why didn't everyone
else take them? Whose portfolio demands are causing these apparent opportunities to emerge
in the first place? If we can't answer these questions, then we should really wonder whether
the advice is right.
    Substantial progress has been made applying and extending the basic Merton framework,
recognizing heterogeneity beyond risk aversion, and some of this progress has made its way
to practice. I'll again let Campbell and Viceira (2002) be the exemplar and summary of a
huge literature. They largely implement Merton-style theory, though with recursive utility,
in a statistical environment that captures broad newly-understood dynamic features of asset
returns and avoiding the nettlesome -1 µ step.
    In the classic i.i.d. world, portfolio allocation is independent of horizon, and academics
disparaged conventional wisdom to the contrary. Hedging demand and calibrated return
predictability from valuation ratios rescues another piece of practical-world advice. Long-


                                              26
term investors who can "wait out market downturns" should invest in stocks, just as their
risk-averse long-term investor should invest in indexed perpetuities. Stocks are like bonds,
a good hedge for their own expected-return risk. Campbell and Viceira quantify this effect.
    But people and institutions may now differ in terms of investment horizon, not just risk
aversion. A one-period investor does not care about state variables. State variables and
hedging demand are only important for investors with longer horizons. And horizon now
gives an additional dimension of heterogeneity to violate the average-investor theorem.
    The investment industry has responded to academic advice and horizon heterogeneity
on top of risk-aversion heterogeneity by implementing target-date funds, that invest more in
equity when people are younger, and then gradually move to an all-bond investment when
people retire. However, in the meantime academics have become less sure that this is the
right advice, or why it is the right advice. Yes, intertemporal hedging suggests some of this
behavior. But why should people in very long retirements not wish any equity? Even with
short horizons they are classic Merton investors who should take some risk for its return.
Most people with any money to invest are also planning to make bequests or charitable
contributions, effectively giving them a much longer horizon. The bequest can absorb risk.
    Much of the target-date strategy is also motivated by the idea that wage income is bond-
like, so people with wage income should tilt more to stocks, and people who retire should
replace the bond-like wage with bond-like investments. But it is no longer clear that wage
income is a bond-like investment (more below).
    Target-date funds' aggressive rebalancing in response to variation in stock prices also
runs afoul of the average investor theorem ­ we can't all rebalance. According to Parker,
Schoar, and Sun (2020) such rebalancing drives supply shocks of the institutional-finance
sort which affect equity prices. We end up holding the market portfolio one way or another.
Target-date funds might at least target fractions of market capitalization that vary with age,
rather than rigid portfolio weights that vary with age, to avoid such rebalancing.


3.3 Outside income risk, a giant insurance market
Consider a different vision of markets and heterogeneity: Investors also differ by outside
income risk or liability streams. The economic function of markets is a giant insurance
mechanism for spreading risk around.
    Most individual investors, especially weighted by wealth and thus market impact, own
substantial non-marketed businesses or real estate. Our universities invest to fund stochastic
liability streams such as the difference between tuition, gifts, and government subsidies less
our and burgeoning staff salaries. Pension funds and insurance companies invest to support


                                             27
liability streams. And human capital, the stream of wage and other earned income is perhaps
the largest of all sources of non-marketed income.
    Before chasing alpha, investors should hedge these outside income streams. That hedging
demand moves the typical investor away from the market portfolio. It can move prices and
expected returns away from the i.i.d. CAPM, and thus generate the multifactor and time-
varying premiums that we see in asset returns. The few lucky pure wealth investors then can
earn superior returns by selling the hedge portfolios, writing insurance to the rest. People
who are less exposed to a common factor in outside income streams sell insurance to those
who are positively exposed.
    Now, just how do you hedge an outside income stream? The advice to do it has been given
many times. People and institutions don't do much of it, which remains a puzzle. Simply
avoiding one's company or industry in a portfolio is not that hard for investors large enough
to have separately managed accounts. Yet beyond such obvious name-based strategies, even
calculating the appropriate hedge portfolio for many income streams is difficult. In particular,
labor income for many people attaches to their human capital, and not the industry in which
that capital is currently employed, so just shorting one's company or industry may not be
effective. Finance professors might want to short the finance industry which drives our
salaries, not higher education which also employs anthropologists. Academic attempts to
calculate such hedge portfolios have an awfully hard time doing it. We need to think a lot
harder about how to do it. (The literature review in Cochrane 2014 contains many valiant
efforts to calculate portfolios with outside income in incomplete markets.)
    Here too, I think this goal is more easily thought of and perhaps implemented in terms
of streams of cashflows rather than the properties of one-period returns.
    The central problem in hedging an income stream is marking it to market. Most asset
return variation is, again, due to discount-rate betas not cashflow betas. You don't see any
change in the cashflows yet all of a sudden you're supposed to cut their value in half, and
look for securities that also fall by half at the same time?
    Suppose we had only the dividend stream of the S&P 500 in hand, and could not observe
prices. None of us could come within a factor of two of the S&P 500 market price, and less
so of changes in that price. So if your labor income stream, or your private business' profit
stream were exactly equal to the S&P500 dividend stream, and you set out to mark to model,
then search for securities correlated with the resulting monthly, quarterly, or annual returns,
it would be very unlikely that you would figure out to hedge these streams by reducing
your allocation to the S&P500 index. In evaluating the portfolio strategy or a manager
who implements it, there is little chance that you and your accountants would see this as a
successful hedge a year later when the market rises 50% and you missed it. Yet if you just


                                              28
look at at the S&P500 dividends, ignoring prices, the answer would jumped out at you. So
let us look at the stream of dividends, or the cashflows from managed strategies, and find
those streams that best match the labor income stream directly, ignoring one-period returns.
    This method might produce a pretty thorough revision of the standard picture. The
income streams of well-paid people or business owners are likely a lot like S&P500 dividends,
and if anything more cyclical, and prone to disaster shocks in bad times, and correlated with
the dividend streams of their firms or industries.
    Where did we get the idea that wages are a bond-like investment? Well, because we
are not very good at marking wages to market with the nebulous but highly time-varying
discount rates that apply to marketed dividend streams. If you marked S&P500 dividends
to market using a constant discount rate, they would look pretty bond-like too.
    (Ideas to better complete markets by selling insurance for idiosyncratic wage, house price,
rent, and business income complement this vision. But here let's think just about portfolio
theory in existing markets, or at best how intermediaries in such an effort could hedge the
aggregate risks in their portfolios.)
    The long-run mean-variance concept makes this idea transparent. Let the investor have
an outside income stream h. Then the optimal portfolio x comes from solving

                              ~ [u(c)] s.t. W = E
                          max E                 ~ (mx); c = h + x.

In a complete market the optimal portfolio is

                                       u (^
                                          x + h) = m

which we can solve for
                                      ^ = u -1 (m) - h
                                      x

Sell off the hedge portfolio for outside income, then invest as before. But the purchased
portfolio x
          ^ contains both components.
    Cochrane (2014) takes up this idea in incomplete markets. You can easily construct a
hedge portfolio for income h by running a long-run regression of the stream h onto the set
of asset payoffs. The hedge portfolio is the fitted value of that regression. I also show how
market prices are affected when a mass of investors has such outside income and adds up
to a hedging demand. Again this analysis looks just like easy one-period portfolio theory,
but the symbols c, x, etc. all have date and state subscripts so we are solving the dynamic
stochastic portfolio problem.
    This is a coherent and plausible general equilibrium view. It explains why opportunities


                                              29
might be there for the lonely mean-variance investor: He or she is selling insurance to a mass
of others whose incomes vary with a state variable, such as recessions, with a component
orthogonal to the dividend stream of the market index. Fama and French (1996) offer this
view as one cohesive explanation of the value effect and factor.
     Given this view, however, it is a puzzle that finance theory and industry are so exclusively
devoted to the small number of investors who have no outside streams, can profit by selling
insurance to the others, and have not yet done so. If this is the view of the world, the
majority of investors should want to buy insurance of one sort or another. At a minimum,
for every investor we help to guide to value because his or her outside income is not correlated
with value payoff streams, there should be another investor we help to short value, despite
its attractive return (dividends/initial price), because that loss of return is a small premium
paid for valuable insurance. The absence of the latter ought to be unsettling. But maybe
that is only a failure of marketing, or a historical relic of the era before mass investing and
institutional investing.
     Moreover, in this view of the world, it is a puzzle that portfolio theory and practice does
not focus on the unpriced factors, and that the pages of our journals are so completely devoted
to finding priced factors and positive alphas. In this view, the most interesting portfolios are
not the "priced" ones useful to the last mean-variance investor, but portfolios in which there
is a lot of heterogeneity in risk exposure, and strong hedgeability, high correlations of the
portfolio stream with the income streams of a large mass of potential customers. R2 to large
factors of investor outside income, not S&P500 alpha, should be the measure of interest and
dominant statistic for getting papers published. Whether such portfolios have S&P500 alpha
is irrelevant. Indeed zero-alpha portfolios are better as they offer actuarially fair insurance.
     Industry portfolios are a prime example. These portfolios are well priced by standard
factor models, and not even badly priced by the CAPM. Helping people to short their
own industry should offer valuable utility improvement, worth a nice fee. It should be the
cornerstone of every 401(k) retirement plan, though it has no alpha to the few lucky investors
who who do not have a job or business.
     To date, this general equilibrium view of the world has not fared that well: Historically,
value did not do that badly in recessions, justifying it as a risk factor for recession-related
falls in labor or business income. However, the disastrous results of value funds in the last
two recessions may help to restore the theory, if not the fortunes of value funds in a world
where marketing is still driven by short-term alphas, the allure of being smarter than the
others rather than shouldering state-variable risk. And this empirical evaluation is still based
on one-period returns, not on cashflows. If we look at value patterns in dividends ­ which
is exactly the general pitch for value stocks; buy dividends at low prices ­ do we see that


                                               30
stream of dividends more closely correlated to the streams of incomes of many investors who
shun value stocks? The idea has a long way to go.
    Much of value investing consists of deliberately not looking under the hood. When
investors look at value stock names, companies that have fallen, companies with no news
or glamor, companies on the edge of failure that statistically come back more frequently
than not, companies just offering steady streams of dividends at low prices, those investors
often run away. Now, perhaps by forcing a quantitative selection over behavioral bias, value
strategies allow people to buy what they would not buy if they looked under the hood, and
allow all investors to buy stocks that others irrationally shun. But perhaps investors who
shun value stocks when they see the names are seeing in those names some commonality with
their own fortunes. But if it is wise not to look under the hood at company names, perhaps
not looking under the hood at high frequency returns, at least without really understanding
state variables and cross-derivatives of the value function, is also valuable discipline.
    We move on, but I first emphasize the general point, more general than my two frame-
works (payoff streams and general equilibrium). Most income is not marketed, and most
investors have outside income or outside liability streams. These streams are risky and het-
erogenous. It it likely that many such streams are hedgeable in markets. The second most
important thing a portfolio strategy should do is to hedge that risk. (The first is not to pay
taxes needlessly.) Such hedging does not depend being smarter than average, knowing some-
thing others don't know, harvesting alphas, and so forth. Unlike alpha, it is a positive-sum
game, and advice one can offer to every investor with a straight face. Yet hedging outside
streams is painfully absent in professional asset management. If anything many individual
and institutional portfolios take on more of the risk they are already exposed to. At a min-
imum, 401(k) options or defined benefit plans can avoid their own company stock, and then
their own industry. There are many heartbreaking contrary stories, for example airline pilots
who had all their 401(k) in company stock and the company goes bankrupt. Universities
with medical centers should not hold hospital stocks in their endowment portfolio. Some
universities have already taken this step.
    There is a great desire in the portfolio industry to sell individually tailored portfolios, and
   6
    A Fidelity ad that PBS viewers have been subjected to lately is a good example, at https://www.ispot.
tv/ad/ZqHs/fidelity-investments-grandparents-song-by-tears-for-fears The ad features a couple who return
to their portfolio adviser because one of them wants to start selling hobby art. Just what change in portfolio
strategy is Fidelity going to offer in response to this news?
   Foerster et al. (2017) show that investment advisers do a good deal of portfolio customization. However,
adviser fixed effects and the adviser's own asset allocation ­ one might say opinions ­ explain the majority of
portfolio variation, not risk tolerance, age, investment horizon, and financial sophistication of the investor.
Even investor fixed effects, which should pick up the many other dimensions of heterogeneity that I have
alluded to such as outside income risks, are not as important as adviser fixed effects.



                                                      31
charge a fee for that tailoring service. There is some hedging, in the form of rate of return
swaps or option positions for extremely wealthy individuals with concentrated ownership
of companies they started. But though portfolio management advertising emphasizes how
firms tailor portfolios to individual circumstances, just what that means, what circumstances
they can recognize and meet with useful advice, remains murky at best.6 And standard
investment advice one receives at typical portfolio managers is already strikingly inefficient.
Typical managers advocate frequent rebalancing, churn the portfolio, don't avoid short-term
capital gains, charge fees to allocate portfolios to dozens of different high fee funds, and
do not routinely sets up a portfolio to avoid taking any capital gains until death, instead
borrowing against shares or hedging exposures instead. We're a long way from setting up
outside income hedging.
    The heart of portfolio theory with a general equilibrium perspective is to identify relevant
heterogeneity. But when I read investment companies' required survey questions about my
investment goals ­"capital preservation," "growth," "income" and the larger list I made fun
of above ­ I, with some background in finance, have no idea what they're talking about.
Perhaps academic portfolio theory can help to make this a serious enterprise ­ and one that
can charge a nice fee in equilibrium.
    The average personal investor sits on a non-traded, highly leveraged, illiquid asset chock
full of idiosyncratic risk ­ the owner-occupied home. That government policy heavily encour-
ages such a disastrous investment, under the fallacy that homes "build wealth" (better than
stocks), is obviously partly to blame. People in many other countries rent houses, and the
first thing a consumer financial protection effort should do is to discourage such investment.
(Getting 401(k) out of company stock might be the second.) Given the policy however, it
is puzzling that intermediaries have not routinely helped people to hedge house-price risks.
Shiller (1993) argues for better financial along with many other market improvements to help
insure individual and macro risks. However, housing futures and similar contracts designed
around risk sharing have not been a big success, which remains a worthy puzzle. Below
I suggest a view that exchanges are built to facilitate information trading or speculation,
rather than useful risk sharing. Still, intermediaries and advisers could be doing a lot more
than they do with existing markets and with portfolio advice.


3.4 Cashflow betas, factors, and state variables
The long-run, cashflow perspective has also begun to change our picture of asset pricing. So
far this research has not led to much explicit portfolio theory, but it is clearly suggestive of
new directions for portfolios. This effort nicely coincides with an effort to understand the


                                              32
value-growth premium in terms of the different character of their cashflows.
    Following Campbell and Vuolteenaho (2004), the separation of beta into cashflow betas
and discount rate betas, has become more widespread. Sensibly they find that cashflow news
is more persistent and cashflow or "bad" beta generates a larger premium. Discount-rate
induced falls in prices are transitory, less important to long-term investors, and thus carry a
smaller premium.
    Cho and Polk (2020) find that a long-run CAPM focusing on cashflows describes the
cross section of prices much better than the cross-section of returns, and an interaction of
book to market and quality provides a strong second factor.
    Campbell, Polk, and Vuolteenaho (2009) find that cash flows of growth stocks are sensitive
to market discount rate changes, while cashflows of value stocks are driven by market cashflow
changes. Thus, growth stocks are good hedges against expected market equity returns. When
the market expected return declines, that's bad state variable news. Market prices go up,
and future growth-stock cashflows go up. So the market is a good hedge for its own state-
variable risk, and growth stocks are an especially good hedge for that risk. This finding
suggests that growth stocks may not be such bad investments for long-horizon investors
even without outside income or other sources of heterogeneity. And therefore, when we add
heterogeneity driven by horizon, long-term investors may want to hold hold growth stocks
while short-term investors hold value stocks.
    Growth stocks have growing, and thus delayed cashflows. Value stocks have steadier or
declining cashflows with shorter duration. A big literature accounts for the value-growth
premium in this way, see for example Gormsen and Lazarus (2019) and cited literature.
Again, premiums for near-term or delayed cashflows suggest a portfolio theory in which
horizons should also matter for the cross section.
    Betermier, Calvet, and Sodini (2017) find that individuals do obey many of the sugges-
tions we have sniffed out so far for long-run portfolios, an unusual example contradicting my
negative assessment of the theory's empirical performance. In a large panel of Swedish res-
idents, they find that "households progressively shift from growth to value as they become
older and their balance sheets improve. Furthermore, investors with high human capital
and high exposure to macroeconomic risk tilt their portfolios away from value," which is
"consistent with the portfolio implications of risk-based theories of the value premium."


3.5 Macro-finance, new preferences, state variables, rare disasters
Merton portfolio theory is based on power utility. But if investors were all like this, we would
be unlikely to see the asset market factors and dynamics that we see. (It is possible that


                                              33
return dynamics come entirely from changing technological opportunities, but the bulk of
modeling finds their source in preferences or market structure.) In the 50 years since Merton,
lots of different preferences have been brought to finance to account for those factors and
dynamics. Recursive utility (Epstein and Zin 1989), habits (Campbell and Cochrane 1999,
and precursors cited there), ambiguity aversion (Hansen and Sargent 2001 is the first of a
long series), aggregation theory bringing in cross-sectional risk to asset prices (Constantinides
and Duffie 1996), or cross-sectional preference variation (Garleanu and Panageas 2015), and
economy-wide or individual rare disasters (Reitz 1988, Barro 2006, Schmidt 2016) are just a
few. The specification of technology has gotten more interesting than endowments or linear
production technologies that look like rates of return. Gomes, Kogan, and Zhang (2003) is
an early influential example of a large literature. Ferson (2019) has an excellent treatment
of current multifactor models.
    It seems that fundamentally changing preferences or technology should change portfolio
theory. Yet these advances have not yet made a large inroad to Merton portfolio theory.
For example, Campbell and Viceira (2002) include recursive utility, yet this change per se
has not yet substantially changed Merton's basic advice. Most of Campbell and Viceira's
novelty comes from calibrating the input parameters to Merton calculations, finding ways to
easily calculate the portfolios, and making clear sense of the results.
    With log utility ­ both risk aversion and intertemporal elasticity of substitution equal to
one ­ the optimal investment is myopic, ignoring state variables, and the payout policy gives
consumption proportional to wealth. A risk aversion substantially above one while keeping
the intertemporal elasticity near one generates Mertonian portfolio advice while keeping the
constant payout rule. Since institutions pay out a constant fraction, that may seem a realistic
parameter configuration.
    It does not seem that institutions are doing much Mertonian state-variable hedging. They
don't describe portfolio allocation in such terms. They report one-year returns. They do not
report state variables, or expected returns or cashflows going forward based on state variables.
If we take their current behavior as optimal, they look pretty myopic, i.e. risk aversion near
one. But such low risk aversion implies a counterfactually large equity allocation. Perhaps
considering their large explicit debt ­ tax-free debt issued against construction ­ implicit debt
­ tenured faculty and hard-to-fire staff salaries ­ and the high beta of donations, perhaps
they are more exposed overall than it seems. Still, this view still has them holding the market
portfolio, which they manifestly do not do.
    As before, wealthy investors do not consume a fixed fraction of wealth, but seem largely
to ignore discount-rate related "paper profits." Finally, even a desire to consume a fixed
fraction of mark-to-market wealth does not make sense of university decisions to ignore


                                               34
outside income streams. In the pandemic year 2020-2021 most universities continued to to
pay a fixed amount out of endowment, while adapting to revenue losses with budget cuts
and eliminating investment, especially in new faculty. So overall, recursive utility, while a
potential advance, is not by itself the answer.
    Mostly, I think, the insights of macro-finance have not made inroads in portfolio theory
because we simply have not asked them to do so. We have mostly used these preferences
and technologies to ask the opposite, asset-pricing, equilibrium question: What asset price
variation do we reverse-engineer so the portfolio theory answer is just to hold the market
portfolio?
    Again, that observation is already interesting. It reminds us that perhaps we too are not
the lone Merton investor living in a multifactor dynamic world, and maybe we have the same
novel preferences or face the same opportunities as everyone else, so what look like delicious
trading opportunities are in fact prices that should guide us to hold the market portfolio
just like everyone else.
    Habits, for example, are a parable for time-varying risk aversion. They generate a market
in which prices have a strong temporary component and expected returns vary over time.
The representative agent sees a delicious low-price opportunity, but just before jumping on
it, notices that his or her risk aversion and precautionary saving motive has risen so much
that, despite the opportunity, he or she will just end up sitting on the market after all.
    To be useful for portfolio theory, then, we need to include interesting and empirically
plausible dimensions of heterogeneity in formal equilibrium models and informal equilibrium
thinking. Does my risk aversion vary over time less than yours? Why? Habits look a lot like
debt boundaries. Are you less indebted than average? Even if true habits, in the model John
Campbell and I wrote down, people arguably differ. Most academics seem to live well below
their means. Others are the highly-leveraged high-beta wealthy, Queens of Verisailles who
buy multiple highly-mortgaged enormous houses. Thinking in ambiguity-aversion terms, if
my "worst-case" scenarios are different from yours, we will want different portfolios. If my
idiosyncratic risk exposure varies with aggregates differently from yours, we have a reason
to trade.
    The behavior of our endowments and university budgets in 2008 and 2020 are worth
thinking about in this context. Whey did they sell in a panic in 2008? Why were there
budget cuts and hiring freezes then and in 2020, each university missing a golden chance to
snap up talent the others are ignoring?
    In 2008, universities discovered that they had liability streams and leverage. Their rise
in risk aversion looks a lot like time-varying risk aversion induced by getting closer to a
boundary, with tenured faculty salaries and municipal bonds serving as the reference point


                                             35
that induces a spike in risk aversion. One adviser to an endowment explained patiently to
me that yes, December 2008 was the buying opportunity of a lifetime, but that if stocks did
continue to slide, it would destroy the institution. The endowment could not take the risk,
so was selling anyway. Surely, however, knowing this fact, they should have set up portfolios
differently, at least for the next crisis?
    That the same budget crisis happened only 12 years later is more puzzling. OK, in March
2020, one could see a second financial crisis on the horizon. But by June that risk was clearly
over. A Powell version of Draghi's "do whatever it takes" did what it took. Well, university
cash flows were clearly disrupted by the pandemic. For many schools there remains a good
question just how long they will remain financially viable. That is not an issue for large-
endowment schools, but they still faced disruptions to their cashflow streams. Stanford, for
example7 saw a greater need for financial aid, to support PhD students in a disastrous job
market, and a drop in revenue. Still, this disruption is clearly temporary. $35 billion in
endowment should not lead to a strong sensitivity of investment (new faculty) to temporary
cashflows! So, it seems our universities again experienced a big increase in risk aversion and
precautionary savings desires. But why? And how can we better structure portfolio and
payout rules to meet the possibility of such changes in the future?
    (Campbell and Sigalov (2020) address some of these puzzles of endowment behavior, in
particular why endowments seem to react to lower interest rates by taking on more risk. They
add to the power utility investor a constraint that the investor consumes out of endowment,
and may only consume the expected return times the endowment, so that the endowment
is expected to maintain its value. When interest rates decline, such an investor would like
to consume more now and less later. Facing the spending constraint, the investor chooses a
riskier and higher expected return portfolio, consuming more now and a more volatile stream
later. )
    Rare disasters offer a different and deep challenge to portfolio theory as well as asset
pricing. Both the economy and financial markets display a non-normal distribution of shocks,
with occasional crises and then quiet good times. Rare disasters, of quantities or of marginal
utility, mean, however, that the covariances with marginal utility cov (xt , u (ct )) that drive
both one-period risk premiums and long-run payoff covariances and asset prices may have
nothing to do with the covariances we measure in normal times. All that matters is, how
does the asset do in the crash state? Is the rare disaster in outside cashflow hedged on
this, the only really important day? Not only do everyday discount rate betas not matter,
everyday cashflow betas don't matter either! Robust control or ambiguity averse preferences
give much the same flavor, isolating only a few states of nature that drive everything.
  7
      https://news.stanford.edu/2020/06/12/trustees-approve-2020-21-budget-set-endowment-payout-light-covid-19/


                                                   36
    That view is logically consistent, but discouraging if true. Quantitative portfolio man-
agement and risk analysis are hard enough when monthly betas matter. If measurable betas
are irrelevant, the problem becomes even more speculative. If rare disasters are important,
to institutional survival if nothing else, than most of what standard portfolio theory does,
evaluating annual returns and hiring and firing managers on that basis, is irrelevant. On
the other hand, if rare disasters are important, then thinking through how markets work,
what one's place is in them, and how they are likely to behave in a rare disaster state ­ the
general equilibrium + heterogeneity approach ­ is even more important relative to statistical
analysis and portfolio maximization based on such analysis.
    Disasters raise a principle that perhaps I should have stated at the beginning:

   · Portfolio formation begins with risk management

Think about the worst states. What are the states of the world in which you, or your
institution are in deep trouble? How does the portfolio and payout policy hedge those
states? Only then start getting greedy about paying a low price.
    The Fed's stress tests for banks are an interesting example of this approach, mixing some
robust control and general equilibrium thinking in risk management. Bank's risk should
be well captured by value-at-risk analysis which computes standard betas to sophisticated
statistical models of the evolution of asset returns and their correlations. That is the analogue
of our standard portfolio theory. Yet the Fed evidently does not trust this calculation, and
instead poses some simple scenarios that don't even have probabilities attached to them.
Perhaps the question to which stress tests are an answer is one more portfolio managers
should ask. (That stress tests did not think to ask "what happens in a pandemic," is
however a caution on this approach.)
    Heterogeneity is exploding in macroeconomics and finance, in part due to technical im-
provements in our ability to solve models with heterogeneity, and in part due to realizing
that heterogeneity can matter for aggregates. Portfolio theory is all about heterogeneity,
of course. In early models like Constantinides and Duffie (1996) people face uninsurable
idiosyncratic risks, uncorrelated with any asset returns. The presence of background risk
can affect overall willingness to hold stocks, but does not shift which kinds of stocks people
hold. But since marginal utility is nonlinear and the cross-sectional variance of individual
risks can vary with aggregates, their model can deliver rich patterns of asset pricing and as-
set holding. Their paper reminds us that the representative investor preferences can include
measures of heterogeneity of the individuals. Garleanu and Panageas (2015) show that when
people differ by risk aversion, the market develops time-varying expected returns. Less risk
averse people have larger equity positions, so in downturns the average investor becomes


                                               37
more risk averse. That has a direct implication for time-varying portfolios. (See Panageas
2020 for a recent, eloquent, and comprehensive survey of heterogeneity in asset pricing.)
Recent models with more kinds of heterogeneity interacted with portfolio constraints offer
portfolio advice directly. See Garleanu and Panageas 2019 for a survey.
    Campbell (2018) lays many foundations for the heterogenous-agent approach to portfolio
theory. The entire part III of the book is devoted to "heterogenous investors." Campbell
considers heterogeneity based on labor income, limited participation, undiversification, and
exposure to uninsurable individual risk. And he treats heterogeneity in beliefs, which under-
lies "information" trading, perhaps the most important divergence from passive investment
there is, summarizing a huge but still young literature.


3.6 Trading and liquidity
Perhaps however the central function of asset markets is neither saving and investment,
nor a giant insurance market, but to facilitate trading on information. If so, then long-term
investors are to some extent a side-show. But their investment strategies should take account
of this fundamental purpose of markets.
    Trading and volume are, I think, the great unsolved finance question of our time. Why is
there so much volume? The standard models we have thought about so far do not produce
a hundredth of the observed trading volume.
    Of course, we sort of know the answer: Trading volume is high because people trade on
information ­ or what they think is information. But standard theory runs smack into the
no-trade theorem, part of the average investor theorem and its dinner with lions lemma. If
someone wants to sell you a security, and you feel like buying, he or she knows something
you don't know. We can't all be more informed than average. If uninformed traders refuse
to budge off the market portfolio, as they should, then efforts to trade on information simply
move prices to reflect that information with no volume.
    Yes, we have an immense theory of information trading to try break that logic. We write
models with a signal about a terminating dividend. But most price movement is discount-rate
movement, i.e. disconnected from dividends. Are there really signals about discount-rate
movements? Trading models require exogenous "liquidity traders" or overconfident agents
to surmount the no-trade theorem. They are the suckers who do worse than average. Who
are they? Are you sure that's not you?
    Our exchanges are built and exist in order to facilitate "information" trading, or specu-
lation, if you prefer. That is their most obvious function. Share issues, retirement saving,
even outside-income hedging, do not need exchanges and instant trading. Exchanges were


                                             38
obviously not built to accommodate those demands. Those demands could all be handled
in retail markets, like houses, cars, and insurance.. Is the existence of exchanges, going back
half a millenium, really just testament to human folly? Would exchanges not exist if we all
processed information better? I think not. But that means we really don't have a complete
theory of what trading is about.
     The standard trading models clearly can be improved. Why does it take a hundred trades
for information to make its way into the market, or really for traders to merge their actual
information and to develop a consensus view? (For example, Santosh 2014.) The world is
filled with thousands of confusing signals, not the tight structure of our models. Information
is something like internet rumors that snowball, merge, and refine to success, or die out, each
tweet a trade, not a card game with exactly 52 cards and we all know which ones. Perhaps
the next generation will find a mathematical structure to model this process
     I digress a bit, because this is I think vital direction for asset pricing in the future. But
we are here to think about portfolio theory, using what we know today. In advance of such
deeper understanding, how does the evident fact that markets are built to facilitate a lot of
high frequency "information" trading affect our long-term investor?
     I'll stick to long-run investors who do not want to participate in information trading,
or even to shade their portfolios based on hunches that this or that security or industry
is the wave of the future, investors who simply do not wish to be the short end of the
average investor theorem. You might immediately say "index," but that is not necessarily
true. If trading demands push prices around, then an uninformed investor can profit by
underweighting, or even shorting, assets that trading has pushed up in value, just as the
unexposed investor can profit from by selling insurance if hedging demands are pushing
prices around.
     In the first blush of efficient markets, we thought we could separate information trading
from portfolio theory, on an empirical understanding that trading activity had no effect
on the level of prices. Since then, however, we have more and more evidence that trading
activity moves the level of prices.
     I start with one simple phenomenon: Highly traded securities have higher prices, lower
average returns, due to the convenience yield that their shares give to information traders.
The conclusion is natural: long-term investors should avoid such assets.
     At a most basic level, money pays less than bonds (or at least it used to do so). Well,
money turns over more, and is used for trading. The implication for long-term investors is
obvious: hold as little money as possible and do your investing in bonds. Don't stuff your
mattress with money.
     We now recognize sizable liquidity and trading-related spreads in government bonds.


                                               39
On-the-run vs. off-the-run spreads exist. Longstaff (2004) is particularly clean, comparing
treasury yields with Refcorp bond yields, which had explicit Treasury credit guarantees,
and finds 10-15% price discounts. Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012) document a
sizeable liquidity premium in all US Treasury debt. That premium declines when the supply
is larger, just as a "money demand" might do, and is traceable to the value of Treasury debt
in financial transactions and the immense daily turnover of Treasurys.
     As I write, the Moody's AAA yield is 2.6%. (Dec 2020.) These are bonds of more than
20 years maturity, so let's compare them to the 30 year constant-maturity Treasury rate of
1.7%. A measly 0.9 percentage point yield spread does not seem to be much to get excited
about. But look at the flows. For each $100 invested, you can get a steady $2.60 annual
coupon in AAA rather than $1.70 in Treasurys. AAA bonds are not a 0.9 percentage point
better return. They are a a 53% better return; a 53% better cashflow for the same price!
The long-term investor should buy AAA bonds not on-the-run Treasurys. (Yes, this is a bit
of an overstatement as there is presumably more default risk in AAA. A better calculation
would cover that risk with CDS. But the probability of default times recovery is certainly
not this large in the index of AAA bonds.)
     What if the AAA bonds lose value, if liquidity spreads spike as in 2008? The long-term
investor should not care. If you ask the question, look hard in the mirror. You aren't a
long-term investor.
     If a security has a high value due to its liquidity or transactions value, and you don't care
about liquidity or transactions value, don't buy it. This is a consistent general equilibrium
view. Another class of investors, evidently, does care about the liquidity and transactions
value of Treasurys, and is wiling to hold them despite low returns. Again, look hard in the
mirror ­ our endowments said they were the long run investor who does not panic in a crash,
holds for the long term, harvests liquidity premiums. And then tried to sell in a panic. It
turns out they were the ones who should have been overpaying for liquidity all along!
     An enormous amount is written about "safe asset demands," "safe asset shortage," and
so forth. Much of this has a behavioral, or yet-to-be-worked-out general equilibrium basis,
as it is not clear just why there should be so much demand for nominally default-free assets.
Still, on these stories too, if it passes the look in the mirror test, the long term investor
should not buy safe assets that other investors are driving up in value.
     I advanced this view of asset prices in Cochrane (2003). In stocks also, we see high
prices and low expected returns where turnover is high, share supply is low, and a large
amount of "information" trading (speculation if you wish) is going on. The pattern is
particularly clear when it rises to the point of apparent arbitrage opportunities. I looked
at the 3Com/Palm arbitrage brilliantly analyzed by Lamont and Thaler (2003). A small


                                               40
number of Palm shares had been carved out, and 3Com shareholders would receive the rest
in 6 months. The direct Palm shares traded at a huge price premium over the Palm shares
embedded in 3Com. The overpriced end of the arbitrage (Palm) had much higher turnover,
higher bid/ask spreads, strong short sales constraint, all indications of a strong demand to
trade on Palm "information." Who are the behavioral dummies who hold Palm rather than
the Cheaper 3Com? Nobody ­ the average Palm holding was two weeks. Palm overpricing is
a small cost of doing business if you think you have information about Palm. The overpricing
is a lower cost than bid-ask spreads if you're going to hold Palm for 2 weeks. Even to short
Palm you have to own the shares for a little while, so a symmetric divergence of opinion
drives share prices up.
    If you are a long-run investor, who wants to hold Palm for the dividends, the strategy
is simple: buy 3 Com and wait 6 months for the distribution of Palm shares. Or, actually,
stay away from the whole NASDAQ tech sector.
    The pattern is widespread, suggesting to me that a great deal of security value may lie
in the value of shares for information trading ­ and that there are broad categories of stocks
that long-term investors should avoid, substantially shading their portfolio away from the
market-weighted index.
    Price and trading volumes correlated strongly through the first internet boom and bust,
with NYSE, Nasdaq, and Nasdaq tech each having larger booms and busts in price and
volume together. And when the trading boom vanished, so did the extra value. (If there is
a reverse causality story, that would be just as interesting, but i cannot think of one. )
    The correlation between price and volume extends across individual securities. There is
a strong (Fama MacBeth t statistic over 7) cross-sectional correlation between volume and
market-to-book ratio. The "growth" stocks are where all the trading action is, where all the
information is, where all the fun is. And, as we know, growth is where the prices are highest
and returns are lowest.
    A similar and strong correlation of market value with volume occurred in in the radio,
phonograph, washing machine and automobile boom and bust of the 1920s. High valuations
coincided with high trading volumes, and the market decline correlates beautifully with a
decline in volume. House price (price/rent ratios) are high when trading volume is high and
vice versa.
    The small growth overpricing anomaly is one of the largest around, and strangely ig-
nored. In Fama and French (1996), Table 1, for example, the small growth portfolio has
the distinction of a -45bp/month three-factor alpha, with a 4.19 t statistic, twice as large as
any other portfolio. Why? Well it is suggestive that the small growth portfolio is where all
the information trading action is. For example, Davis (2001) examines fund performance by


                                              41
manager style. In the usual story of rampant underperformance, Davis finds one ray of hope
for active management, a positive 17bp/month alpha for the deepest growth funds. Active
managers, who trade on information, are able to beat the index of the most overpriced stocks
around. (It is curious that this anomaly is so overlooked. Do we just care about positive
alphas?)
    The implication of this view for a long-term investor is clear: Don't hold stocks with high
prices relative to book, dividends, earnings, etc, when those high prices are correlated with
high trading volume, low share supply, and lots of buzz in social media, lots of information
traders. To be clear, we're not (just) worrying about being on the wrong side of asymmetric
information here. We're worrying about buying stocks whose price has been driven up by
the combined demands of traders, for whom the shares are an entry ticket to betting on
information. If you're investing to get long-term relatively risk free dividends at a low price
today, stay out of Tesla, Gamestop, and bitcoin.
    The resulting portfolio is likely to differ substantially from the market index. The value-
weighted market index includes all these high-flying stocks, and in larger proportions pre-
cisely because of their inflated prices.
    Avoiding stocks with high information trading is again something professional manage-
ment can help with, for a fee. For who owns the overpriced shares? Who owns the short
end of an arbitrage? Who owns Palm rather than 3Com? Who owns the more expensive
of two identical classes of payoff-identical HSBC shares? (Maymin 2011.) Who owns Royal
Dutch rather than Shell when the latter is more expensive? (Rosenthal and Young 1990.)
Who owns shares in the all-time prize for negative alpha ­ companies that are having a
battle between short-sellers and management? (See the delightful Lamont 2012.) Who owns
Gamestop and Tesla? Well, not just the information traders. Index holders and quantitative
factor-beta funds hold all of these, and the more overpriced, the more they hold. If like me
you have some part of a low-cost total market index, you and me are on the wrong end of
these investments. If you buy one of everything, you will not notice an arbitrage opportunity,
two claims to the same dividend stream selling at different prices!
    I emphasized one story for these anomalies, the convenience yield for information-based
trading. There are many anomalies, many "overpriced" securities, and many more stories to
explain them. Lamont and Thaler chalk up the 3Com / Palm arbitrage opportunity to (p.
231) investors who are "irrational, woefully uninformed, endowed with strange preferences,
or for some other reason willing to hold over-priced assets." Such an interpretation has the
same implications for long-term investors. However, it invites a different look-in-the-mirror
test. We are all human, and everyone thinks they're less behavioral than the others. I
prefer the information-trading guide because it is more restricted. You have to look for high


                                              42
trading volume as well as "overpriced" securities. It also gives a general equilibrium story
and a description of heterogeneity in which everyone is almost rational, up to the small
problem of the no trade theorem which I think we may solve someday. Lamont and Thaler's
story only applies to those investors who are less behavioral than average. And who does
not think they are in that class?
    A liquidity premium is a different object than a convenience yield. Palm shares had
huge turnover despite large bid/ask spreads, reflecting a large demand for informed trading.
Treasury bonds have huge turnover because of low bid/ask spread, reflecting an easy supply
of liquidity for information-insensitive securities. (There is always supply vs. demand of
everything, including liquidity, and either curve can move.)
    Long-term investors should generally avoid securities whose values are boosted by "liq-
uidity" as well. Endowments offer this reason for investing in unmarked, illiquid securities
including private equity. Everyone wants to be the next David Swensen. This view is dicier
because it still lacks a complete general equilibrium foundation. Who are the buyers of liq-
uidity? Why do they not arrange their affairs so they don't need to buy and sell so much
so fast? We put "liquidity traders" in models blithely. OK, they are there, but to pass the
look in the mirror test we need to understand them and make sure we are not them.
    Many long-term investors are passive, not interested in following details of matters of
corporate control. That is especially true of well-diversified investors who hold market index
portfolios. There is currently a substantial agency problem, in the question how do large
highly diversified mutual and exchange-traded funds vote their shares. It would be natural to
see more non-voting shares. Such shares are treated exactly the same way as voting shares
for all cashflows, but do not vote. Such shares should offer the same cashflow stream at
a discount, which is exactly what many long-term investors desire. One would then see a
natural specialization in which some investors pay a premium for voting rights, which they
value, and mutual or exchange traded funds along with large passive investors harvest a
small premium for abstaining from such activity.


3.7 Institutional finance, intermediary asset pricing, slow-moving capital,
      supply and demand.
Recently, several novel views of financial markets have emerged under the banners "institu-
tional finance" (Brunnermeier, Eisenbach, and Sannikov 2013), "intermediary asset pricing"
(He and Krishnamurthy 2013) "slow-moving capital," ( Mitchell, Pedersen, and Pulvino
2007), "supply and demand" ( Gabaix and Koijen 2020, Koijen and Yogo 2020.) When
we can sign volume ­ when we can tell who initiated an order ­ prices rise when buyers


                                             43
initiate a trade and fall when sellers do so. (Evans and Lyons 2002. However, see Brandt
and Kavajecz 2004 for a cautionary note on "price pressure" vs. "price discovery.") Each
of these offers novel views of the function and operation of financial markets, opening many
expected-return spreads. Since much of what the institutions of institutional finance do
is high-frequency "information" trading, the visions are related. However, authors in this
literature express price distortions in different economic terms, so it's worth thinking about
them separately.
    Really the whole debate within asset pricing has shifted from macro-finance vs. behavioral
finance to macro-finance vs. institutional finance. The issue is not irrationality of the average
investor, but the force of agency frictions in delegated management. And the institutional-
finance debate is only about the dividing line: how frequent, pervasive, and quantitatively
important institutional frictions are, and how much time-varying investment opportunities,
preferences, outside streams, or even macro and monetary policies account for asset price
fluctuations.
    I emphasize theoretical interpretations here rather than the huge list of anomalies, consis-
tent with the theme of this section: Statistical expected return and covariance estimates are
poor inputs to portfolio optimization. Instead we are exploring plausible general-equilibrium
theories with heterogeneity to guide a portfolio view.
    We must be careful however. In many of these stories, making even conventional alpha
and beta appears to be easy. We have to constrain the models to the abject failure of active
management to earn conventional alpha. At a minimum that warning means we should
calibrate our view of the models to generate persistent price differences that do not amount
to much for one-period expected returns. But such price discounts are exactly what should
interest our long-term investor.
    In the institutional finance view, markets are dominated by traders who are highly lever-
aged and have little capital. They try to sell on the way down, but in doing so they create
"fire sales," especially as balance-sheet constraints become closer to binding. (This view
requires some reason why a firm nearing bankruptcy becomes more risk averse not less, ex-
ploiting the call option inherent in bankruptcy.) They even leave arbitrage opportunities
like uncovered interest parity sitting like proverbial $20 bills on sidewalks because they don't
have balance-sheet capacity to trade them.
    If this view is correct, then our long-run investors, deploying pools of unleveraged long-
only capital, ought to be able to improve their investment performance ­ to buy a larger
stream of payoffs at a lower price ­ by stepping in, directly or through intermediaries. At
a minimum large investors such as endowments, pension funds, family offices, sovereign
wealth funds, and super-wealthy individuals should do so. They should provide capital to


                                               44
capital-constrained trading activities, persistent arbitrages like covered interest parity, and
buy during the fire sales. To "slow-moving capital," (Mitchell, Pedersen, and Pulvino 2007,
see also Duffie 2010 for an integrative review) institutions should respond by investing in
large multi-strategy hedge funds that have the expertise to quickly deploy across markets.
The spread of securities lending by long-term investors is a small but practical and successful
deployment of these views.
    This funding does not take any special new insights, and it should trouble us that it
does not happen. If you read the pages of our academic journals, you see empirical anomaly
after anomaly and theoretical friction after friction. Based on this reading, you would expect
rivers of alpha to flow from Greenwich, if not Wall Street, and from transparent organizations
who fund easily identifiable arbitrage strategies not secret-sauce trading, and generate easy-
to-measure alpha. Yet the striking difference between the alphas reported in theory and
empirical papers and the alphas reported by studies of fund performance remains as true of
institutional or intermediary finance as it is of behavioral or other anomalies.
    Perhaps the frictions are so deep nobody can get around them, though that case is hard
to make. Perhaps the opportunities are small and fleeting. As one banker remarked a while
ago, commenting on the arbitrage opportunity of repo spikes, "sure, it's a $20 bill on the
sidewalk, but it's in Chicago, once, and it's not worth flying there to pick it up." That is a
deeper challenge to the friction-finance view for another day: Constraints bind in moments of
crisis and stress, but inequality constraints don't always bind, and if they do there is a strong
force for institutional development to make them unbind. To what extent is institutional
finance a theory of rare or even one-time crises, and to what extent is it a theory of every
day?
    Perhaps, however, the alphas to be so gained are small but persistent, and subject to
mark-to-market drawdowns. Then they are not visible in conventional return accounting,
but looking at the issue as long-run payoffs would allow long-run investors to see and fund
the opportunity.
    Nonetheless, there is a deep and robust opportunity that someone should be taking.
Whether we call the phenomena time-varying risk aversion (habits), share demand due to
trading frenzies, slow moving capital, institutional finance, or something else, there is a
robust call for someone to take the other side.
    Deeply, the proposition in finance that demand curves are flat, so price equals present
value of payoffs, does not stem from arbitrage. It stems from risk-bearing capacity, from the
willingness of a pool of investors to take risks that others are temporarily unwilling to take.
If someone sells a million dollars of Apple stock, the rest of the market has to collectively
over-weight Apple, and thereby take risk. The price goes down a little bit to generate a


                                               45
reward. Since this activity requires risk-bearing it cannot be done by pure arbitrageurs. Big
pots of money are there to do it. But by and large they do not.
    These views are also not yet fully fleshed out to describe heterogeneity, which is the
key to turning an equilibrium insight into a portfolio theory. Model that rely on external
liquidity traders, irrational agents, or artificial financial frictions make a sensible shortcut for
studying the friction at hand, but they beg the look-in-the-mirror portfolio theory question.
That's an important step.
    In particular, many institutional finance models specify that only leveraged intermediaries
hold assets such as stocks, corporate bonds, or mortgage-backed securities, so that when
they sell prices decline. But in reality people can buy stocks, they do buy stocks, and in the
intermediary finance world they would benefit from doing so.
    At least this world-view has some clear portfolio advice for long-term investors ­ don't
invest everything through leveraged intermediaries and pay a bit of attention to whether a
fire sale/buying opportunity is at hand.


4.     Concluding Comments
In sum, I opine that portfolio theory and practice for long-run investors, like all asset pricing,
is ripe for important changes. Portfolio theory is perceived as somewhat of a dead end: a 50
year old model that is so hard to calculate in practice that nobody uses it in the investment
world, or a benchmark from which it is easy to accuse even the most sophisticated people
and institutions of being behavioral morons.
    Finance has changed a lot however, and the progress opens the door to more fruitful
portfolio theory, and also for more fruitful two-way effort to unite theory to practice.
    I emphasize two conceptual steps which I believe will help to pave the way for this
project: looking directly at prices and payoffs, which are the ultimate object of interest for
the long-term investor, and looking at portfolios with a view of the general equilibrium of
financial markets and one's place in it. Both views offer heuristics for avoiding common
investment mistakes, such as the average investor theorem. Both views also make a lot of
sense of much apparently puzzling portfolio practice, and even apparent fallacies. In this
way they bridge the Cambridge-Chicago approaches to behavior that persistently deviates
from economic theory. The explosion in our general equilibrium view of the market since
the days of CAPM and ICAPM, and the explosion in our understanding of the facts (see
Cochrane 2017 for a review) have portfolio implications for long-run investors that are not
really yet explored.
    There is, I admit, a sense that I've arrived at many different questions to which some

                                                46
sort of enhanced value seems to be the is the answer ­ after hedging outside income, buy a
stream of dividends at a low price ­ along with heuristics to stay the course. But just what
constitutes value, and who this advice applies to is more subtle than it appears. My different
stories - heterogeneous outside income vs. avoiding securities caught up in a trading frenzy
- isolate different securities, and for different investors.
    The need to properly hedge outside income or liability streams looms large, and I think
it is something done poorly by our current portfolio theory and practice. That involves
thinking about payout policies as much as portfolio policies.
    Risk management ­ describe what the bad states of the world are to you the investor,
and make sure your portfolio isn't bad at just that time ­ should be the core of investing,
portfolio management and evaluation, not a small afterthought. If this century has taught us
anything, it ought to be that unexpected things will happen, they will be financially painful,
and resilience is more important than a few basis points of alpha.
    There is also a defense in here of the finance industry and modest fees, if not for what
they do now for what they could do in the future. Some of the disdain for active management
rings of the advice a colleague gave me back when personal computers were new: Why buy
a computer from Dell, when you can go down to Fry's and pick up a motherboard, power
supply, hard drive, monitor, and case and put it together yourself for 20% less? Indeed,
financial management consists of buying generic ingredients, putting them together in an
attractive package, branding and marketing them. Perhaps we should give over the training
of MBAs for asset management jobs to the marketing departments of our business schools.
But in all the visions I've outlined so far, constructing the right payoff for a long-run investor,
matching it to that investor's liability stream, then managing the portfolio, is not easy. It
demand skill, and is worth paying fees for, if not quite the astounding level of fees many
people and institutions pay now. Such fees survive the average investor theorem, as their
value comes from better matching products to individual circumstances. I long felt some
guilt working for an institution that charged a lot of tuition to teach MBAs that the industry
to which we sent them was pointless. Now, perhaps, we can send them off with a better
answer, and a bit of a business plan.
    Why don't more institutions take our portfolio advice? Are there agency frictions or
other barriers? I think first of all we must look to ourselves. We have a beautiful theory, but
we have not done enough to make it practically useful, or to listen to the concerns of actual
investors. The people I have met at endowments, asset management companies, sovereign
wealth funds, and hedge funds are really smart. They know portfolio theory inside and out.
Many are PhDs or ex-academics after all. They would like dearly, for example, to use betas
not buckets for risk analysis and diversification. But they face on a daily basis the fact that


                                                47
-1 µ simply does not work, that betas are unstable, and so forth. They understand hedge
portfolio logic, but they also know that the underlying statistical models are uncertain. And
they have to explain what they're doing to clients in simple understandable terms. Much
of what I offer here are first glimpses of how to make theory more useful, and more easily
explained. We need to do a better job.
    Second, there are as usual legal and regulatory barriers. Endowments are not free to
adjust payouts as they wish or to use the endowment as a piggy bank. IRS rules put
minimums and maximums on payouts. The terms of many gifts specify payout rates and tie
the payout to specific expenditure streams, something that can be changed but would take
a century to do.
    Third, there surely are agency frictions in many institutional investment contexts. Uni-
versity endowments are supervised by an upper level management that may make contrary
promises, but ultimately does hire and fire managers based on relatively short term (re-
ported) results. The obscurity of endowment performance is a natural result. The immense
multilayered fees paid by such institutions is a natural source of agency friction. Endowment
investment is often exceptionally opaque. Endowments do not make it easy to know how
much is invested where, how many fees were paid, and how results are calculated, even for
faculty on oversight committees. Opacity is a symptom of agency conflicts. The incentives
of university top management, or those of similar philanthropies, may be likewise distorted.
University and nonprofit boards of trustees, are typically wealthy people (alumni) who by
selection bias are often lucky investors who think themselves skillful, or the recipients of large
fees unlikely to object to the practice. At the bottom of it all, non-profit institutions are
insulated from the market for corporate control. If a university or philanthropy (or hospital)
is badly run, you can't buy up the stock, fire the management and clean it up. Yes, there is
market discipline in the need to attract donors, students, and government funds. But in a
very non-competitive market these are weak, and a competitive market for corporate control
would surely add financial discipline to non-profit institutions. As in private monopolies and
oligopolies, the first reward of a profitable non-profit is an easy life, an iron rice bowl, and a
gravy train. But agency frictions and dysfunctional institutional structures are not carved
in stone either.
    Doubting that view, many other institutions follow similar practices, including family
offices, wealth managers, and so forth, who don't have similar frictions ­ just the usual
caveat emptor we all face when dealing with technically complex services. That thought
leaves me emphasizing the first point ­ we should do a better job, before pointing too many
agency-frictions fingers at the world for not doing what we recommend. And perhaps we
should evaluate ourselves a bit more by whether anyone takes our advice.


                                               48
References
Balasubramaniam, V., Campbell, J. Y., Ramadorai, T., and Ranish B. (2021): Who owns
  what? A factor model for direct stockholding, Manuscript, https://dx.doi.org/10.2139/
  ssrn.3795521.

Barro, R. J. (2006): Rare disasters and asset markets in the twentieth century, The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 121, 823­866.

Berk, J. B., and Green, R. C. (2004): Mutual fund flows and performance in rational
  markets, Journal of Political Economy 112, 1269­1295.

Berk, J. B., and van Binsbergen J. H. (2020): Regulation of charlatans in high-skill profes-
  sions, Manuscript, https://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2979134.

Betermier, S., Calvet, L. E., and Sodini, P. (2017): Who are the value and growth investors?
  The Journal of Finance 72, 5­46.

Brandt, M. W., and Kavajecz, K. A., (2004): Price discovery in the U.S. treasury market:
  The impact of orderflow and liquidity on the yield curve, The Journal of Finance 59,
  2623­2654.

Brunnermeier, M. K., Eisenbach, T. M., and Sannikov, Y. (2013): Macroeconomics with
  financial frictions: A survey, In Advances in Economics and Econometrics, Tenth World
  Congress of the Econometric Society Vol II, edited by Acemoglu, D., Arellano, M., and
  Dekel, E., New York: Cambridge University Press, 4­94.

Campbell, J. Y. (2006): Household finance, The Journal of Finance 61, 1553­1604.

Campbell, J. Y. (2018): Financial decisions and markets: A course in asset pricing, Prince-
  ton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.

Campbell, J. Y., and Cochrane, J. H. (1999): By force of habit: A consumption-based
  explanation of aggregate stock market behavior, Journal of Political Economy 107, 205­
  251.

Campbell, J. Y., Polk, C. , and Vuolteenaho, T. (2009): Growth or glamour? Fundamentals
  and systematic risk in stock returns, The Review of Financial Studies 23, 305­344.

Campbell, J. Y., and Shiller, R. J. (1988): The dividend-price ratio and expectations of
  future dividends and discount factors, The Review of Financial Studies 1, 195­228.


                                             49
Campbell, J. Y., and Sigalov, R. (2020): Portfolio choice with sustainable spending: A
  model of reaching for yield, Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Campbell, J. Y., and Viceira, L. M. (2001): Who should buy long-term bonds? American
  Economic Review 91, 99­127.

Campbell, J. Y., and Viceira, L. M. (2002): Strategic asset allocation: Portfolio choice for
  long-term investors, Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Campbell, J. Y., and Vuolteenaho, T. (2004): Bad beta, good beta, The American Economic
  Review 94, 1249­1275.

Cho, T., and Polk, C. (2020): Putting the price in asset pricing, Manuscript, https://
 personal.lse.ac.uk/polk/research/PuttingThePriceInAP.pdf.

Cochrane, J. H. (2003): Stocks as money: Convenience yield and the tech-stock bubble, In
  Asset Price Bubbles, edited by Kaufman , G. G., Hunter, W. C., and Pomerleano, M.,
  Cambridge MA: MIT Press.

Cochrane, J. H. (2007): Portfolio theory, Manuscript, https://www.johnhcochrane.com/
  research-all/portfolio-theorynbsp.

Cochrane, J. H. (2008): The dog that did not bark: A defense of return predictability, The
  Review of Financial Studies 21, 1533­1575.

Cochrane, J. H. (2011): Discount rates: American finance association presidential address,
  The Journal of Finance 66, 1047­1108.

Cochrane, J. H. (2013):           Long-run mean-variance analysis in a diffusion
  environment,         Manuscript,       https://www.johnhcochrane.com/research-all/
  a-mean-variance-benchmark-for-intertemporal-portfolio-theory.

Cochrane, J. H. (2014): A mean-variance benchmark for intertemporal portfolio theory, The
  Journal of Finance 69, 1­49.

Cochrane, J. H. (2015): A new structure for U. S. federal debt, In The $13 trillion question:
  Managing the U.S. government's debt, edited by Wessel, D., Washington DC: Brookings
  Institution Press, 91­146.

Cochrane, J. H. (2017): Macro-finance, Review of Finance 21, 945­985.

Constantinides, G. M., and Duffie, D. (1996): Asset pricing with heterogeneous consumers,
  Journal of Political Economy 104, 219­240.

                                             50
Curcuru, S., Heaton, J., Lucas, D., and Moore, D. (2010): Heterogeneity and portfolio
 choice: Theory and evidence, Ch. 6 in Handbook of Financial Econometrics: Tools and
 Techniques, Handbooks in Finance, vol. 1, edited by A¨
                                                      it-Sahalia, Y., and Hansen, L. P.,
 North-Holland, 337­382.

Davis, J. L. (2001): Mutual fund performance and manager style, Financial Analysts Journal
  57, 19­27.

Duffie, D. (2001): Dynamic asset pricing theory: Third edition, Princeton N. J.: Princeton
 University Press.

Duffie, D. (2010): Presidential address: Asset price dynamics with slow-moving capital, The
 Journal of Finance 65, 1237­1267.

Ennis, R. M. (2020): Institutional investment strategy and manager choice: A critique, The
  Journal of Portfolio Management, https://jpm.pm-research.com/content/early/2020/02/
  28/jpm.2020.1.141.

Epstein, L. G., and Zin, S. E. (1989): Substitution, risk aversion, and the temporal behavior
  of consumption and asset returns: A theoretical framework, Econometrica 57, 937­969.

Evans, M. D., and Lyons, R. K. (2002): Order flow and exchange rate dynamics, Journal
  of Political Economy 110, 170­180.

Fama, E. F., and French, K. R. (1996): Multifactor explanations of asset pricing anomalies,
  The Journal of Finance 51, 55­84.

Fama, E. F., and French, K. R. (2002): The equity premium, The Journal of Finance
  57 (2):637­659.

Fama, E. F., and French, K. R. (2010): Luck versus skill in the cross-section of mutual fund
  returns, The Journal of Finance 65, 1915­1947.

Ferson, W. (2019): Empirical asset pricing: Models and methods, Cambridge, MA: The
  MIT Press.

Foerster, S. R., Linnainmaa, J. T., Melzer, B., and Previtero, A. (2017): Retail financial
  advice: Does one size fit all? The Journal of Finance 72, 1441­1482.

Gabaix, X., and Koijen, R. (2020): In search of the origins of financial fluctuations: The
 inelastic markets hypothesis, Manuscript, https://ssrn.com/abstract=3686935.


                                             51
Garleanu, N., and Panageas, S. (2015): Young, old, conservative and bold. The implications
 of finite lives and heterogeneity for asset pricing, Journal of Political Economy 123, 670­
 685.

Garleanu, N., and Panageas, S. (2019): Heterogeneity and asset prices: A different approach,
 Manuscript, https://www.nber.org/papers/w26607.

Gilbert, T., and Hrdlicka, C. (2015): Why are university endowments large and risky? The
  Review of Financial Studies 28, 2643­2686.

Gomes, J., Kogan, L., and Zhang L. (2003): Equilibrium cross-section of returns, Journal
 of Political Economy 111, 693­732.

Gormsen, N. J., and Lazarus, E. (2019):      Duration-driven returns, Manuscript, https:
 //ssrn.com/abstract=3359027.

Goyal, A., and Welch I. (2003): Predicting the equity premium with dividend ratios, Man-
 agement Science 49, 639­654.

Hansen, L. P., and Sargent, T. J. (2001): Robust control and model uncertainty, American
  Economic Review 91, 60­66.

He, Z., and Krishnamurthy, A. (2013): Intermediary asset pricing, American Economic
  Review 103, 732­770.

Koijen, R. S., and Yogo, M. (2020): Exchange rates and asset prices in a global demand
 system, Manuscript, https://ssrn.com/abstract=3383677.

Krishnamurthy, A., and Vissing-Jorgensen, A. (2012): The aggregate demand for treasury
  debt, Journal of Political Economy 120, 233­267.

Lamont, O. A. (2012): Go down fighting: Short sellers vs. firms, The Review of Asset
  Pricing Studies 2, 1­30.

Lamont, O. A., and Thaler, R. H. (2003): Can the market add and subtract? Mispricing in
  tech stock carve-outs, Journal of Political Economy 111, 227­266.

Lettau, M., Ludvigson, S., and Steindel, C. (2002): Monetary policy transmission through
  the consumption-wealth channel, Economic Policy Review 8, 117­134.

Longstaff, F. A. (2004): The flight-to-liquidity premium in U.S. treasury bond prices, The
  Journal of Business 77, 511­526.

                                            52
Lucas, R. E. Jr. (1978): Asset prices in an exchange economy, Econometrica 46, 1429­1445.

Markowitz, H. (1952): Portfolio selection, The Journal of Finance 7, 77­91.

Maymin, P. Z. (2011): Self-imposed limits to arbitrage, Journal of Applied Finance 21,
 88­105.

Merton, R. C. (1969): Lifetime portfolio selection under uncertainty: The continuous-time
 case, The Review of Economics and Statistics 51, 247­257.

Mitchell, M., Pedersen, L. H., and Pulvino, T. (2007): Slow moving capital, American
 Economic Review 97, 215­220.

Panageas, S. (2020): The implications of heterogeneity and inequality for asset pricing,
  Foundations and Trends in Finance, forthcoming.

Parker, J. A., Schoar, A., and Sun, Y. (2020): Retail financial innovation and stock market
  dynamics: The case of target date funds, Manuscript, https://mitmgmtfaculty.mit.edu/
  japarker/research/.

Reitz, T. (1988): The equity risk premium: A solution, Journal of Monetary Economics 22,
  117­131.

Rosenthal, L., and Young, C. (1990): The seemingly anomalous price behavior of Royal
  Dutch/Shell and Unilever N.V./PLC, Journal of Financial Economics 26, 123­141.

Santosh, S. (2014): The path of price discovery: Trade time vs. clock time, Manuscript,
  https://ssrn.com/abstract=2567486.

Schmidt, L. (2016): Climbing and falling off the ladder: Asset pricing implications of labor
  market event risk, Manuscript, https://ssrn.com/abstract=2471342.

Shiller, R. J. (1993): Macro markets: Creating institutions for managing society's largest
  economic risks, Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Shiller, R. J. (2014): Speculative asset prices, American Economic Review 104, 1486­1517.

Stafford, E. (2017): Replicating private equity with value investing, homemade leverage,
  and hold-to-maturity accounting, Manuscript, https://ssrn.com/abstract=2720479.

Wachter, J. A. (2003): Risk aversion and allocation to long-term bonds, Journal of Economic
 Theory 112, 325­333.


                                            53
