                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           CAN AUTOMATIC GOVERNMENT SPENDING BE PROCYCLICAL?

                                       Luciana Galeano
                                      Alejandro Izquierdo
                                         Jorge P. Puig
                                        Carlos A. Vegh
                                      Guillermo Vuletin

                                      Working Paper 28521
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28521


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2021




The authors are grateful to Martin Ardanaz, Daniel Artana, Ricardo Bebczuk, Fernando Blanco,
Jessica Bracco, Antonio David, Hamid Davoodi, Luciano Di Gresia, Guillermo Falcone, Antonio
Fatas, Santiago Garganta, Leonardo Gasparini, Shafaat Khan, Norman Loayza, Nicolas Magud,
Fernando Navajas, Jorge Neyro, Steven Pennings, Carola Pessino, Francisco Pizzi, Luca Ricci,
Daniel Riera-Crichton, Diego Rojas, Adolfo Sturzenegger, and seminar participants at the World
Bank, International Monetary Fund, and Universidad Nacional de La Plata (Argentina) for
helpful comments and suggestions. We are also grateful to Maria Teresa Balestrini, Jose Andree
Camarena, Guillermo Falcone, Sabrina Lozano, Jorge Miranda, Luis Morano, and Lucila Venturi
for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Luciana Galeano, Alejandro Izquierdo, Jorge P. Puig, Carlos A. Vegh, and Guillermo
Vuletin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Can Automatic Government Spending Be Procyclical?
Luciana Galeano, Alejandro Izquierdo, Jorge P. Puig, Carlos A. Vegh, and Guillermo Vuletin
NBER Working Paper No. 28521
March 2021
JEL No. E02,E32,E62,H53,H55

                                           ABSTRACT

It is well-known by now that government spending has typically been countercyclical in
industrial countries and procyclical in developing economies. Most of this literature has focused
on analyzing aggregate government spending or discretionary spending categories such as
government consumption and government investment. Little is known, however, about the
cyclical behavior of automatic government spending, which comprises unemployment insurance,
family programs, and social security transfers. Automatic government spending follows from
laws, or even constitutional clauses, that benefit individuals who meet certain eligibility criteria.
In principle, the main categories of automatic government spending are expected to be either
countercyclical (especially unemployment insurance and other shock absorber programs) or
acyclical (particularly social security and other structural programs).

We find that while automatic government spending is, as expected, countercyclical in industrial
countries, it is, surprisingly, procyclical in the developing world. We track the source of this
puzzling procyclical behavior to (i) the effective lack of automatic stabilizers like unemployment
insurance and (ii) more intriguingly, the existence of perverse automatic de-stabilizing
mechanisms in social security spending (in particular in the absence of indexation mechanisms).
We also show that the presence and nature of these two social programs are crucial new
determinants of aggregate government spending cyclicality as well as macroeconomic volatility,
even after controlling for other well-known determinants and addressing potential endogeneity
concerns.

Luciana Galeano                                   Carlos A. Vegh
University of Michigan                            School of Advanced International Studies (SAIS)
611 Tappan Ave                                    Johns Hopkins University
Ann Arbor, MI 48109                               1717 Massachusetts Avenue, NW
United States                                     Washington, DC 20036
lgaleano@umich.edu                                and NBER
                                                  cvegh1@jhu.edu
Alejandro Izquierdo
Inter-American Development Bank                   Guillermo Vuletin
1300 New York Ave, N. W.                          The World Bank
Washington, D. C., 20577                          1818 H Street NW
alejandroi@iadb.org                               Washington, DC 20433
                                                  gvuletin@worldbank.org
Jorge P. Puig
FCE-Universidad Nacional de La Plata
Calle 6 #777
La Plata, 1900
Argentina
jorge.puig@econo.unlp.edu.ar
1        Introduction
Contrary to economists'prescriptions and the typical behavior in the industrial world, government
spending in developing countries has been, by and large, procyclical (e.g., Gavin and Perotti, 1997;
Kaminsky, Reinhart, and Vegh, 2004; Alesina, Campante, and Tabellini, 2008; Frankel, Vegh, and
Vuletin, 2013).1 Procyclical ...scal policies that increase spending in good times and cut it in bad
times tend to amplify output uctuations, leading to large social costs, especially for the most
vulnerable (e.g., Fatas and Mihov, 2003, 2012; Vegh and Vuletin, 2014a, 2014b). The opposite is
true in the case of countercyclical policies, which help to smooth out output uctuations and, thus,
protect social gains (e.g., Loayza et al., 2007; Camarena et al. 2019).
        Figure 1 ­an updated version of Frankel, Vegh, and Vuletin (2013) ­illustrates this phenomenon
by plotting the correlation between the cyclical components of real GDP and real government
spending (primary spending, to be precise) for 131 countries during the period 1980-2018. Yellow
bars stand for developing countries while black bars indicate industrial economies. The visual
impression is striking: while a majority of black bars lie to the left of the ...gure, indicating a
negative correlation and hence countercyclical spending in industrial economies, the majority of
yellow bars lie to the right, indicating a positive correlation and hence procyclical spending in
developing economies.2           In fact, the correlation is 0.35 for developing countries and -0.08 for
industrial countries, in both cases statistically signi...cant (see also "primary spending"box in Figure
2).
                                                   1   2

        Several hypothesis have been put forth in the literature to explain procyclical government spend-
ing, ranging from limited access to international credit markets (e.g., Riascos and Vegh, 2003;
Cuadra, Sanchez, and Sapriza, 2010; Bianchi, Ottonello, Presno, 2019) to political economy distor-
tions, institutional weaknesses, and over-optimism (e.g., Tornell and Lane, 1999; Talvi and Vegh,
2005; Woo, 2009; Frankel, 2011; Frankel, Vegh, and Vuletin, 2013; Avellan and Vuletin, 2015) which,
in turn, generate "excessive"public spending during boom periods and "force"policymakers to cut
spending in bad times.
        By and large, the literature on the behavior of government spending over the business cycle has
focused on aggregate government spending. Aggregate in the sense of having in mind some homoge-
neous good on the theoretical front and relying on measures such as primary government spending
on the empirical front. Studies on the cyclical properties of speci...c government spending categories
have mainly focused on government consumption and government investment (e.g., Kaminsky, Rein-
    1
     On the taxation side (i.e., using tax rate data), Vegh and Vuletin (2015) also ...nd that procyclicality has been the
norm in the developing world.
   2
     Needless to say, correlations do not tell us anything about causality which, in principle, could go in either direction.
However, Ilzetzki and Vegh (2008) and Frankel, Vegh, and Vuletin (2013) show that, even when properly instrumented,
output   uctuations cause government spending changes, as emphasized by the ...scal procyclicality literature.



                                                             2
hart, and Vegh, 2004; Talvi and Vegh, 2005; Ilzetzki and Vegh, 2008; Ardanaz and Izquierdo, 2017;
Izquierdo, Pessino, and Vuletin, 2018). In terms of government consumption (which includes mainly
wages and salaries and goods and services), the evidence indicates acyclicality in industrial countries
and procyclicality in developing economies.3              As to government investment, the ...ndings support
countercyclicality in industrial economies and procyclicality in developing countries.4 Interestingly,
both government consumption and government investment are discretionary in nature, in the sense
that they are the direct result of policymakers'deliberate spending decisions when approving the
budget.
       In contrast, little is known, particularly in the developing world, about the cyclical behavior of
automatic spending, de...ned as spending not directly related to policymakers'deliberate/discretionary
decisions. Automatic spending, in most cases cash transfers to individuals or households, involves
the disbursement of public funds resulting from laws (and, even, constitutional mandates), bene-
...ting individuals who meet certain eligibility criteria. The speci...c nature/type of social programs
is, naturally, shaped by countries'most pressing social challenges. The most important automatic
spending categories include (i) unemployment insurance (transfers to unemployed individuals), (ii)
family programs and bene...ts, which include conditional cash transfers mainly to the poor and most
vulnerable households, and (iii) social security (mainly transfers to individuals after retirement).5
       Interestingly, while unemployment insurance and other shock absorbing programs are rightly
expected to be countercyclical, the cyclicality of social security and other structural social programs
is much less obvious. In fact, recent work on the e¤ects of ...scal spending (especially of automatic
nature) on macroeconomic volatility in the U.S. and Europe has focused on automatic stabilizers
such as unemployment insurance, explicitly excluding social security from the analysis (e.g., McKay
and Reis, 2016; Di Maggio and Kermani, 2016; Krueger, Mitman, Perri, 2016).                             Arguably, the
reason is that, unlike unemployment insurance and other shock absorbing social programs, social
   3
      Since, by and large, wages and salaries and goods and services spending lie behind the provision of key public
goods such as education, health, police, and defense, it is not surprising to ...nd acyclicality in industrial countries.
After all, it is not obvious why governments would change, for example, the number of teachers, doctors, policeman,
or military personnel over the business cycle. In principle such decisions should be related to social preferences and
the speci...c properties of public goods production. In contrast, it is quite common in developing countries for public
wages and public workers to increase in good times, re       ecting the cyclical abundance of public resources and fall in
bad times as part of needed ...scal adjustments. See, for example, Freeman (1987), Kraay and van Rijckeghem (1995)
and Eckardt and Mills (2014) for more details on this cyclical aspect of spending.
    4
      Countercyclical government investment in the industrial world is consistent with standard Keynesian arguments.
In fact, Keynes felt so strongly about the stabilizing role of government investment that he was of the view that budget
policy should have an "ordinary budget" and a "capital budget" (Brown-Collier and Collier, 1995). The procyclical
pro...le found in the developing world responds mainly to (i) the convenience of ...scally adjusting in bad times by
cutting pubic investment (Ardanaz and Izquierdo, 2017) and (ii) the low levels of trust and lack of commitment to
long-term projects in the developing world, which generates a bias against government investment (Izquierdo, Pessino,
and Vuletin, 2018).
    5
      Social security also comprises transfers to disabled individuals, and families of retired, disabled, or deceased
workers. However, old age spending represents, by and large, the most important sub-category of spending. For
example, and based on data for 39 countries (20 developing and 19 industrial), the share of old age expenditure
represents 72.4 percent of total social security spending (76 percent for developing countries and 70 percent for
industrial countries).



                                                            3
security transfers are not expected to be systematically related to business cycle uctuations since
the underlying criterion for those transfers is determined by slow-moving demographic trends (i.e.,
one would expect a zero correlation between short-term changes in social security spending and
output uctuations). Actually, most of the attention in academic and policy circles regarding ...scal
aspects of social security systems has been dominated by how the intrinsically structural/rigid nature
of these entitlement programs coupled with falling birth rates and population aging, especially in
pay-as-you-go systems, poses unique and growing ...scal sustainability challenges for social security
systems around the world (e.g., Fichtner, 2018; Izquierdo, Pessino, and Vuletin, 2018; Chomik,
Piggott, and Yan, 2019).
       This paper focuses on the nature of government primary spending over the business cycle by
distinguishing between discretionary and automatic spending. The analysis unveils structural de...-
ciencies in the developing world, not only in discretionary spending (which is procyclical), but, more
novel and intriguing, in automatic spending. Naturally, we are not the ...rst ones to explore, with
varying degrees of explicitness, the cyclical properties of non-discretionary components of govern-
ment spending (e.g., Kaminsky, Reinhart, and Vegh, 2004; Ilzetzki and Vegh, 2008; Michaud and
Rothert, 2018).6      However, none of these papers focuses on the cyclicality of automatic spending
per se and/or look into the cyclicality of di¤erent components of automatic spending.
       We ...nd that, indeed, while countercyclical in industrial countries, automatic spending is pro-
cyclical in the developing world. This procyclical behavior constitutes a puzzle because most im-
portant automatic spending categories should (i.e., in theory) be either countercyclical (especially
unemployment insurance and other shock absorbing social programs) or acyclical (especially so-
cial security and other structural social programs).              Therefore, automatic spending should (i.e.,
in theory) never be procyclical! The observed procyclicality in automatic spending in the devel-
oping world, however, compromises the ability of automatic spending policies to e¤ectively act as
stabilizers. In fact, they act as de-stabilizers!          Put di¤erently, the procyclical behavior of auto-
matic spending severely limits the ability to protect the most vulnerable and reduce macroeconomic
volatility.
       Using o¤-the-shelf macro-spending and novel micro-spending data, we trace the roots of this
automatic spending procyclical puzzle in developing countries. We ...nd that it emerges as the
result of (i) lack of automatic stabilizers (due mainly to the absence, or negligible coverage, of
shock absorbers like unemployment insurance) and (ii) more intriguingly, the existence of perverse
automatic de-stabilizing mechanisms, particularly due to the way in which individual social security
bene...t payments uctuate over time in the developing world. When formula-based indexation
mechanisms (typically linked to changes in cost of living like prices or nominal wages) lie behind
   6
     In particular, and based on 30 countries, Michaud and Rothert (2018) show that social transfers are countercyclical
in industrial countries and procyclical in developing ones and then turn to the quantitative implications on consumption
volatility in emerging markets.




                                                           4
social security payments, social security spending is indeed acyclical. However, when such decisions
rely on policymakers'ad-hoc/discretionary criteria, individual social security bene...t payments tend
to be linked, in practice, to the revenue capacity of the social security system which, by its very
nature, comoves positively with output. Since the lack of formula-based indexation mechanisms is
much more pervasive in developing economies, the procyclical bias behind the automatic spending
procyclical puzzle is due to the behavior of social security spending in the developing world.
   The identi...cation and understanding of this automatic spending procyclical puzzle is extremely
relevant for several reasons. First, it allows for a better understanding of the macroeconomic e¤ects
of automatic spending policy on macroeconomic volatility, not only through the favorable lenses
of automatic stabilizers such as unemployment insurance schemes (e.g., Spilimbergo et al., 2010;
Blanchard, Dell'Ariccia, and Mauro, 2010), but also through the lenses of de-stabilizing spending
forces of automatic nature. Second, this automatic spending procyclical puzzle should be helpful in
contextualizing and reshaping the discussion on the merits of discretionary versus automatic ...scal
policy (Fatas and Mihov, 2001, 2003; Blanchard, 2006). In other words, our new evidence suggests
that de-stabilizing forces, especially in the developing world, may come from both discretionary
spending (e.g., procyclical wage bill or government investment) and automatic spending (via social
security spending). Third, it is worth recalling that social security is a mayor spending item.
Figure 3 shows the importance of each spending category in industrial and developing countries as
percentage of primary government spending. Social security represents (i) 43 percent of primary
spending in industrial countries and 32.5 percent in developing economies (see "social security"
box in Figure 3), (ii) 75 percent of automatic spending in the industrial world and 80 percent
in developing countries (comparing values of "social security" and "automatic spending" boxes in
Figure 3), and (iii) almost as much as public consumption (comparing values of "social security"
and "government consumption" boxes in Figure 3). Moreover, given falling birth rates and aging
population, it is expected (in absence of social security reforms) that social security spending could
grow between 2 and 5-fold in the next 40 years (e.g., Bongaarts, 2004; Nerlich and Schroth, 2018;
Panadeiros and Pessino, 2018).
                                               3

   The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 ...rst presents basic empirical stylized facts on the
cyclical properties of discretionary and automatic spending for industrial and developing countries.
We then turn to a detailed analysis of the cyclical considerations of the most important auto-
matic spending categories. Section 3 shows that, as expected, unemployment insurance spending
is overwhelmingly countercyclical both in industrial and developing countries (mainly due to large
short-term uctuations in the number of bene...ciaries). However, this type of program is uncommon
in the developing world. Only 40 percent of developing countries currently have it and, even when
present, its coverage is negligible. This shortcoming helps to explain the lack of countercyclicality



                                                  5
observed in automatic spending in the developing world. Section 4 shows that family programs are
very structural/rigid in nature and, as expected, overwhelmingly acyclical both in industrial and
developing countries. Section 5 shows that the procyclical force behind the automatic spending pro-
cyclical puzzle originates in the behavior of social security spending and, in particular,s in the lack
of formula-based indexation mechanisms and the reliance upon policymakers'ad-hoc/discretionary
criteria to adjust individual social security bene...t payments.              After this detailed analysis of the
most important automatic spending categories, Section 6 shows that the presence of automatic
spending of stabilizing (or de-stabilizing!) nature like unemployment insurance and social secu-
rity formula-based indexation mechanisms are, indeed, important new determinants of aggregate
government spending cyclicality (primary spending, to be precise), even after controlling for other
well-known determinants and addressing potential endogeneity concerns.                       Section 7 revisits the
merits of government spending as a macroeconomic stabilizer.                     It ...nds that the importance of
government size, especially of its automatic government spending component, as a stabilizing force
found in previous studies (e.g., Fatas and Mihov, 2001, 2003) mainly depends on the presence of
unemployment insurance and social security formula-based indexation mechanisms. Concluding
remarks can be found in Section 8.


2        Cyclicality of discretionary and automatic spending: Basic styl-
         ized facts
Using o¤-the-shelf macro-spending data, we now analyze the cyclicality of discretionary spending
(which comprises government consumption and government investment) and automatic spending
(proxied by transfers to individuals and households that mainly include unemployment insurance,
family programs, and social security).
        Figure 4 shows, like Figure 1, the degree of cyclicality in government spending, this time focusing
solely on discretionary spending.          Industrial countries follow an acyclical pro...le and developing
economies behave procyclically (see also "discretionary spending" box in Figure 2). This evidence
is in line with previous studies focusing on government consumption and government investment
(e.g., Kaminsky, Reinhart, and Vegh, 2004; Talvi and Vegh, 2005; Ilzetzki and Vegh, 2008; Ardanaz
and Izquierdo, 2017; Izquierdo, Pessino, and Vuletin, 2018).7

                                                       4
    7
     For brevity' s sake, and since they are not the focus of our analysis, we do not show country-based cyclicality
correlation ...gures for public investment and public consumption. Having said that, it is worth noting that, in
line with previous studies, we also ...nd that (i) government investment is countercyclical in industrial countries and
procyclical in developing countries and (ii) government consumption is acyclical in industrial countries and procyclical
in developing countries (see "government investment" and "government consumption" boxes in Figure 2).




                                                           6
        We now turn our attention to automatic spending. Figure 5 shows, like Figure 1, the degree of
cyclicality in spending, this time focusing solely on automatic spending.                   Much like in Figure 1,
automatic spending is countercyclical in industrial countries (with a statistically signi...cant corre-
lation of -0.27) and procyclical in the developing world (with a statistically signi...cant correlation
of 0.19). (See also "automatic spending" box in Figure 2.) Hence, while there is countercyclical
behavior in industrial countries (driven by automatic spending), the developing world exhibits a
procyclical pro...le (driven by both discretionary and automatic spending).

                                                       5

As discussed in the Introduction, it is truly a puzzle how automatic spending could be procycli-
cal, when most important automatic spending categories should, in theory, be either acyclical or
countercyclical. We now turn to a detailed analysis of the cyclical considerations behind the most
important automatic spending categories.


3        Unemployment insurance: A poster child of countercyclicality
         that is rare in the developing world
Unemployment insurance is, by design, the poster child of automatic stabilizers. In other words, it
is the textbook example of a countercyclical spending policy that, by construction, o¤sets output
movements.        In countries with unemployment insurance, workers that lose their jobs during a
recession receive transfers to compensate for the loss of income.                  As the economy recovers, the
unemployed return to work and stop receiving these              transfers.8
        Using a novel micro-spending dataset for Latin America and the Caribbean and existing data
from OECD countries, we put together a database on unemployment insurance spending for 25
countries (10 developing and 15 industrial) for the period 1980-2015.                   Moreover, for 20 of these
countries, we could also break down such spending into (i) the number of bene...ciaries and (ii) the
average spending per bene...ciary.9 This micro-spending data tells us that unemployment insurance
spending represents about 7 percent of automatic spending and 4 percent of primary spending in
the industrial world, but a mere 1 percent and 0.5 percent, respectively, in developing countries (see
also "unemployment insurance" box in Figure 3).
        Figure 6 shows the cyclicality of unemployment insurance spending. Unlike Figures 1, 4, and
5, unemployment insurance spending is overwhelmingly countercyclical both in the industrial and
    8
      Naturally, the speci...cs of the unemployment insurance program, including the type of unemployed workers entitled
to bene...ts, the maximum time they are allowed to receive bene...ts, the source of funding, and the conditions under
which these bene...ts are to be maintained vary across countries (e.g., Ribe, Robalino, and Walker, 2012; Cerutti et
al., 2014; Asenjo and Pignatti, 2019).
    9
      See Appendix 3 for details.




                                                           7
developing world. The correlation is -0.55 for developing economies and -0.51 for industrial countries
(in both cases statistically signi...cant). (See also "unemployment insurance" box in Figure 2.) In
fact, we cannot reject the null hypothesis that both correlations are statistically the same. Further,
and based on individual country correlations and statistical signi...cance, all industrial and developing
countries follow countercyclical unemployment insurance spending.

                                                 6

    To better understand the mechanism at work, we decompose unemployment insurance spending
into "q versus p,"so to speak, where "q"represents the number of unemployment insurance bene...-
ciaries and "p"the average real spending per bene...ciary. Panel A in Figure 7 shows the cyclicality
of the number of unemployment insurance bene...ciaries and Panel B the equivalent ...gure for the
average real spending per bene...ciary.    Much like Figure 6, Panel A in Figure 7 shows that the
cyclicality of the number of unemployment insurance bene...ciaries is overwhelmingly countercycli-
cal, both in the industrial and developing world. The correlation is -0.59 for developing economies
and -0.72 for industrial countries (in both cases statistically signi...cant).    In fact, we cannot re-
ject the null hypothesis that both correlations are statistically the same.        Moreover, and based
on individual country correlations and statistical signi...cance, about 90 percent of industrial and
developing countries follow a countercyclical behavior in the number of unemployment insurance
bene...ciaries.
    In contrast, the evidence from Panel B in Figure 7 shows that the average real spending per
bene...ciary is, by and large, acyclical. The correlation is 0.08 for developing economies and -0.14
for industrial countries (and in both cases not statistically signi...cant).     Moreover, and based on
individual country correlations and statistical signi...cance, about 80 percent of industrial and 90
percent of developing countries follow an acyclical behavior regarding the average real spending per
bene...ciary.
                                                 7

    It is also interesting to note that, when performing a simple univariate variance decomposition
analysis, on average, about 83 percent of the variance of unemployment insurance real spending can
be explained by its cyclical component and only 17 percent is driven by its trend. As a reference,
for real primary spending, these proportions are virtually reversed. This shows the highly short-
term uctuating nature of unemployment insurance real spending. When focusing on the equivalent
...gures for the number of unemployment insurance bene...ciaries and the average real spending per
bene...ciary, we ...nd, on average, that the share explained by their respective cyclical components
are 78 percent and 22 percent, respectively.
    Hence, the analysis shows that the large short-term uctuations in unemployment insurance real
spending (of a countercyclical nature) are driven by large changes in the number of unemployment


                                                   8
insurance bene...ciaries (of a countercyclical nature) and not by the more structural/rigid pro...le ex-
hibited by the average real spending per bene...ciary (which is overwhelmingly acyclical). In other
words, unemployment insurance programs work in practice as would be predicted by theoretical
considerations both in developing and industrial countries; that is, in a stabilizing (i.e., counter-
cyclical) fashion mainly due to cyclical changes in the number of unemployed workers claiming
those bene...ts.


3.1       Unemployment insurance is rare in the developing world

In contrast to the developing world'
                                   s long history of social protection in terms of social security and
the most recent wave of family programs, particularly conditional cash transfers, unemployment
insurance programs are rather uncommon in developing countries. Typically, they simply do not
exist or, if they do, have negligible coverage. More speci...cally:

         Existence of unemployment insurance mechanisms. Based on information collected mainly
         from the International Labour Organization (ILO) and the United States Social Security
         Administration, Figure 8 shows whether unemployment insurance mechanisms are present
         (red color) or absent (white color) in every country in the world.       All industrial countries
         have unemployment insurances typically dating back to the Great Depression of 1929.            In
         contrast, only 40 percent (or 43 out of 109) of developing countries currently have some sort
         of unemployment insurance mechanism.10

                                                      8


         E¤ective unemployment insurance mechanism coverage. Using information from (i) ILO, re-
         garding the ratio of unemployed individuals covered by the unemployment insurance program
         (i.e., extensive margin) and from (ii) Aleksynska and Schindler (2011) regarding the unem-
         ployment insurance gross replacement rate, which is de...ned as the ratio of unemployment
         insurance bene...ts a worker receives relative to the worker's last gross earning (i.e., intensive
         margin), we create a measure of e¤ective unemployment insurance mechanism coverage de-
         ...ned as the product of the extensive and intensive margins. This e¤ective measure ranges
         between 0 (no income replacement for any unemployed workers) and 100 (all unemployed
         workers receive a bene...t equal to their last income). This new measure is presented in Figure
         9 for countries with some unemployment insurance mechanism. In the developing world, the
         e¤ective unemployment insurance mechanism coverage is 7 percent, statistically signi...cantly
         lower than that of the industrial world, which is about 4 times larger (27 percent). In other
         words, while about 40 percent of developing countries do have some unemployment insurance
  10
       See Appendix 3 for details.


                                                      9
         programs, their e¤ective coverage is (unlike the industrial world) negligible.

                                                        9


       The critical question is thus:   why does the developing world lag behind on the provision of
such an important shock absorber like unemployment insurance? This is particularly relevant for
developing countries given that they are inherently more volatile than their industrial counterparts.
While several explanations come to mind, a prime and perennial suspect is the presence of a large in-
formal economy (Bosch and Esteban-Pretel, 2015; Duval and Loungani, 2019; Asenjo and Pignatti;
2019). In e¤ect, a large informal share of workers makes unemployment insurance impractical due
to moral hazard considerations, as the unemployed may work in the informal sector while receiv-
ing unemployment insurance bene...ts (Hopenhayn and Nicolini, 1997; Alvarez-Parra and Sanchez,
2009).      Speci...cally, if workers can accept jobs in the informal sector while continuing to receive
unemployment insurance bene...ts without being detected by the government, a more generous un-
employment insurance system would reduce the incentive to search for a formal job and induce
workers to accept informal jobs (Gonzalez-Rozada and Ru¤o, 2016). Indeed, Figure 10 shows, us-
ing cross-sectional data for 41 countries with some type of unemployment insurance program, that
higher informality is strongly associated with lower e¤ective unemployment insurance coverage.11
Interestingly, and in line with the proposed logic, the degree of informality in countries not having
any type of unemployment insurance mechanism is much larger than that observed in countries
with unemployment insurance (even for those in the developing world). For example, using data
circa 2010, countries without unemployment insurance have an informal sector twice as large as
that in economies with some sort of unemployment insurance mechanism (36 percent compared to
18 percent, with the di¤erence being statistically signi...cant).

                                                    10

       In sum, while unemployment insurance programs work in practice as predicted by theory (i.e.,
countercyclically) both in developing and industrial countries, the absence, or negligible coverage,
of such programs in developing countries helps to explain the lack of countercyclicality observed
in automatic spending in the developing world (recall Figure 5 from Section 2 and the "automatic
spending" box in Figure 2).
  11
    Figure 10 covers 41 countries. Strictly speaking, we use the concept of shadow economy (from Medina and
Schneider, 2018) because labor market informality measures are only available for a much smaller set of countries.
For example, if we used data from ILO focusing on labor informality, only six countries would be available. Having
said that, the relationship between such a measure and e¤ective unemployment insurance coverage is also strongly
negative with an 2 of 043.




                                                       10
4         Family programs and bene...ts: As structural as it can get
Family programs comprise a myriad of social programs typically targeting structural and deep-
rooted social problems that are expected to change slowly over time and should, in principle,
not be related to the business cycle.       A large fraction of these programs include, particularly in
the developing world, conditional cash transfers. These transfers target poor households and are
conditional on investing in childrens'human capital and health, or other desired policy target. For
example, in Brazil, the Bolsa Familia social program provides ...nancial aid to poor Brazilian families
and, if they have children, families must ensure that the children attend school and are vaccinated.
Moreover, if social vulnerability (broadly de...ned) tended to increase in bad times, then these type
of transfers could even become countercyclical (but should certainly never be procyclical!).
         For the purpose of our cyclicality analysis, and using micro-...scal data from the Economic
Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC), we put together a database for 35
countries (20 developing and 15 industrial) on family programs and bene...ts spending.12          These
programs and bene...ts represent about 20 percent of automatic spending in the developing world
and about 19 percent in industrial countries. In terms of the relevance of family programs spending
as percent of primary spending, it represents 11 percent and 8 percent in industrial and developing
countries, respectively (see also "family programs" box in Figure 3). It is worth noting that this
gap is much smaller than that for unemployment insurance spending.              For 13 countries from
Latin America and the Caribbean, we could also decompose such real spending into the number of
bene...ciaries and the average real spending per bene...ciary.
         Figure 11 shows the cyclicality of family programs spending. Given that this type of spending
targets structural and deep-rooted social problems that are expected to change slowly over time,
family programs spending is largely acyciclical, both in industrial and developing countries. The
correlation is -0.02 both in developing and industrial economies (in both cases not statistically
signi...cant). Naturally, we cannot reject the null hypothesis that both correlations are statistically
the same (see also "family programs"box in Figure 2). Moreover, and based on individual country
correlations and statistical signi...cance, all industrial and 88 percent of developing countries exhibit
acyclical family programs spending. Panels A and B in Figure 12 show that, by and large, the same
pro...le, unrelated to the business cycle, is present when looking at family programs bene...ciaries and
spending per bene...ciary in 13 LAC countries.

                                            11   12

Moreover, when performing a simple univariate variance decomposition analysis, on average, about
15 percent of the variance of family programs and bene...ts real spending can be explained by
    12
         See Appendix 4 for details.




                                                    11
its cyclical component and 85 percent is driven by its trend.            This is virtually the opposite of
unemployment insurance real spending, where 83 percent was explained by its cyclical component
and only 17 percent by its trend. When focusing on the equivalent ...gures for the number of family
programs bene...ciaries and the average real spending per bene...ciary, we ...nd, on average, that the
share explained by their respective trend components are 74 percent and 60 percent, respectively.
         In sum, family programs spending and the number of bene...ciaries are acyclical across the board
and largely driven by long-term considerations. In other words, they work in practice as predicted
by theory both in developing and industrial countries, trying to address structural and deep-rooted
social problems that are expected to change slowly over time and are unrelated to the business
cycle.


5         Social security: Source of the procyclical anomaly
So far, the evidence shown in Section 3 regarding the absence or negligible coverage of unemploy-
ment insurance in the developing world helps to explain the lack of countercyclicality observed
in automatic spending in the developing world.             However, neither this type of automatic spend-
ing, nor family programs (given their acyclical nature discussed in Section 4) can help to explain
the procyclical nature of automatic spending encountered in large parts of the developing world.
This section shows that the source of this procyclical anomaly of automatic spending in developing
countries is based on the behavior of social security spending.          As already noted, social security
spending represents, by and large, the largest component of automatic spending in the industrial
and developing world. Speci...cally, social security spending represents almost 75 percent of auto-
matic spending in the industrial world and 80 percent in developing countries. As a percentage of
primary spending, social security accounts for 43 percent and 32.5 percent in industrial and devel-
oping countries, respectively (see also "social security" box in Figure 3). It is worth noting that
this gap is much smaller than that for unemployment insurance spending.
         Using some o¤-the-shelf macro-spending and based on social security agencies websites, we put
together a database for 45 countries (27 developing and 18 industrial) for the period 1980-2018 on
social security spending. For 25 of these countries (18 industrial and 7 developing), we were also
able to decompose such spending into the number of social security bene...ciaries and the average
spending per bene...ciary. As will become clear below, we also collected social security revenue data
from social security agencies'websites.13
         Before turning to cyclicality considerations, it is worth noting that when performing a simple
univariate variance decomposition analysis, on average, about 12 percent of the variance of social
security real spending can be explained by its cyclical component and 88 percent is driven by its
trend. These ...gures are very close to those obtained for family programs real spending. Interest-
    13
         See Appendix 5 for details.


                                                      12
ingly, when focusing on social security bene...ciaries, the share explained by its trend increases to 95
percent. This latter fact holds for both industrial and developing countries (96 and 94 percent, re-
spectively). To help put things into perspective, recall that even for the number of family programs
and bene...ts bene...ciaries (Section 4), the share explained by its trend is "only"74 percent. The fact
that uctuations in social security bene...ciaries is virtually explained solely by its trend reects the
intrinsically structural/rigid nature of bene...ciaries entitled to this program, which is mainly driven
by slowly-moving demographic considerations. It also indicates that cyclical uctuations in social
security real spending (our main object of interest in this section) are mainly driven by cyclical
uctuations in average social security spending per bene...ciary as opposed to cyclical movements
in the number of social security bene...ciaries (which are virtually non-existent). In fact, the share
of social security real spending per bene...ciary explained by its trend is 85 percent, which is quite
similar to that of real primary spending.
   We now turn to the cyclical properties of social security spending. Figure 13 shows the cyclicality
of social security spending. The correlation is -0.09 (and statistically barely signi...cant) in industrial
countries and 0.13 (and statistically signi...cant) in the developing world (see also "social security"
box in Figure 3). Moreover, and based on individual country correlations and statistical signi...cance,
we ...nd, in line with these group ...ndings, that (i) only 28 percent of industrial countries follow
countercyclical policies (the rest exhibits an acyclical pro...le) and (ii) about 45 percent of developing
economies follow procyclical policies (the rest show an acyclical pro...le).

                                                 13

   Figure 14 shows that, in the industrial world, the barely countercyclical spending behavior ob-
served in Figure 13 is mainly driven by the countercyclical pro...le of the number of bene...ciaries
in some countries (Panel A in Figure 14), as opposed to the behavior observed in the spending
per bene...ciary, which is virtually acyclical across the board (Panel B in Figure 14).         Moreover,
as discussed in World Bank (2009), "the number of [social security] bene...ciaries typically increases
during a crisis, as people look to early retirement and disability as a means to cope with unem-
ployment." In fact, if one excluded the years 2009, 2010, and 2011 from the analysis, the number
of bene...ciaries would become acyclical (i.e., statistically not signi...cant) in each industrial country
but Japan. Interestingly, and in spite of having information about the number of social security
bene...ciaries for few developing countries, Figure 14 indicates that the procyclical spending behavior
observed in Figure 13 in developing economies is mainly driven by the procyclical pro...le of spending
per bene...ciary (Panel B in Figure 14), as opposed to the number of bene...ciaries, which is acyclical
(Panel A in Figure 14).
                                                 14

   In sum ­ and in spite of the intrinsically structural/rigid nature of this entitlement program


                                                    13
(especially regarding the number of bene...ciaries which is driven by slowly-moving demographic
considerations) ­while the industrial world shows, by and large, an acyclical social security spending
policy pro...le (i.e., social security systems work in practice as predicted by the theory), many
developing countries show a procyclical social security spending behavior (essentially driven by
uctuations in individual social security bene...t payments), which is at odds with the theoretical
expectation.


5.1       Relevance of formulas (or lack thereof) for social security procyclicality

As will become clear in the remainder of this section, a key aspect a¤ecting the cyclicality of social
security spending in practice is whether adjustments over time of individual social security bene...t
payments depend upon ...xed-formulas or, instead, rely more on ad-hoc/discretionary decisions by
policymakers.14       As illustrated in Figure 15, by and large, industrial countries have historically
adjusted individual social security bene...t payments following automatic indexation mechanisms,
typically linked to changes in cost of living like prices or wages, with the purpose of maintaining
constant retirees' purchasing power over time (hereafter, we use the term automatic price-based
formula indexation mechanism).15  16 On the other hand, as also shown in Figure 15, less than half
of the developing world has followed automatic price-based formula indexation mechanisms and
has instead relied on policymakers'ad-hoc/discretionary criteria to adjust individual social security
bene...t payments. Figure 16 shows, for the most up-to-date data, whether individual countries in
the world rely on automatic price-based formula indexation mechanisms (red color) or not (white
color).
                                               15   16

       We now analyze whether formulas (or lack thereof) a¤ect, from an empirical point on view,
social security procyclicality.      Figure 17 shows that having (or not) some automatic price-based
formula indexation mechanism indeed matters for social security cyclicality. Panel A shows that
when countries have automatic price-based formula indexation mechanisms, social security spend-
ing is acyclical; the correlation is 0.02 (and statistically not signi...cant). Even for the developing
world, the correlation is 0.06 (and not statistically signi...cant); with no country showing procyclical
  14
      This distinction is relevant to the prevalent pervasive pay-as-you-go social security system'  s funding method
(OECD, 2019; Demarco, 2019; Holzmann et al., 2020) and, naturally, does not apply to pre-funded retirement
programs (where the money is saved in advance so that it will be available to be paid out to today'      s workers when
they retire). Therefore, the remainder of this section will exclude pre-funded retirement programs (or their component)
from the analysis.
   15
      While other criteria have been used for formula indexation mechanisms, including those based on revenues and
GDP growth, these cases are quite uncommon, representing less than 5 percent of sample.
   16
      The ...rst automatic price-based formula indexation mechanism dates back to 1922 when Denmark amended
its pension law by linking general pensions to changes in the salaries of government employees, with semiannual
adjustments. This early provision was repealed in 1927, to be replaced in the Danish national insurance act of 1933
by automatic adjustments based on changes in the national price index. Based on the Danish initiative, Iceland and
Luxembourg followed in 1946 and France in 1948, respectively (SSA, 1960).



                                                          14
behavior. In contrast, Panel B shows that when countries do not have automatic price-based for-
mula indexation mechanisms and rely instead on ad-hoc/discretionary criteria to adjust individual
social security bene...t payments, social security spending is procyclical (the correlation is 0.17 and
statistically signi...cant), with 63 percent of developing countries following procyclical social security
spending.
                                                      17

       Half of the countries are shown both in Panel A and in Panel B of Figure 17 because the
available social security spending data covers both periods with automatic price-based formula
indexation mechanisms and periods relying on ad-hoc/discretionary criteria. For example, during
1993-2003, the Slovak Republic resorted to ad-hoc/discretionary decisions by the parliament to
adjust individual social security bene...t payments. In 2003, the country approved the ...rst phase
of its pension reform, to be implemented in 2004, linking the annual adjustment of bene...ts to the
changes in prices and in average nominal wages (SSA, 2003).17 Interestingly, and in line with our
previous general ...ndings, the social security spending cyclicality observed in the Slovak Republic
when its social security system relied on ad-hoc/discretionary criteria was procyclical, while it was
acyclical once the automatic price-based formula indexation mechanism was introduced (0.76 in
Panel B versus -0.13 in Panel A). The Slovak Republic is far from being a special case: in all
countries present both in Panel A and in Panel B of Figure 17, the cyclicality of social security
spending illustrated in Panel B is larger than in Panel A.
       Figure 18 conveys, in a di¤erent way, the same message based on a cross-sectional cut of the same
underlying data: the lower the percentage of years a country relied on automatic price-based formula
indexation (i.e., the more a country has relied on ad-hoc/discretionary decisions by policymakers),
the more procyclical is social security spending.

                                                      18

       In sum, when individual social security bene...t payments are adjusted based on automatic price-
based formula indexation mechanisms, social security spending is acyclical. The reasons are two-
fold. First, a slowly-moving and intrinsically structural/rigid number of social security bene...ciaries
entitled to this program (independently of the nature of the adjustment mechanism, as it is driven
by demographic considerations). Secondly, and more crucially, the automatic price-based formula
indexation mechanism itself which, by design, aims to maintaining retirees'purchasing power (and
thus the social security spending per bene...ciary) constant over time. In other words, under au-
  17
    This 2003 pension reform triggered a sequence of further pension reforms a¤ecting the weights used for changes
in prices and changes in average nominal wages. For the period 2004-2013, the weights were 50 percent due to price
changes and 50 percent to changes in average nominal wages. These weights further changed in favor of changes in
prices to 60 percent in 2014, 70 percent in 2015, 80 percent in 2016, 90 percent in 2017, and 100 percent in 2018 (ILO,
2017).



                                                          15
tomatic price-based formula indexation mechanisms, social security spending works in practice as
expected theoretically, with slow changes over time that are unrelated to the business cycle. In con-
trast, when individual social security bene...t payments are adjusted based on ad-hoc/discretionary
decisions by policymakers, social security spending is procyclical.18


5.2     Why does lacking a formula make social security spending procyclical?

In principle, the lack of a price-based formula indexation mechanism and reliance instead on pol-
icymakers'ad-hoc/discretionary decisions does not necessarily imply that social security spending
will be procyclical (i.e., bene...t payments increase in good times and fall in bad times).
    Interestingly, in practice, countries relying on ad-hoc/discretionary decisions by policymakers for
social security spending purposes tend to have (i) more sovereign defaults on external debt (Figure
19) and (ii) social security systems with lower net ...nancial worth (Figure 20). These facts imply
that countries relying on ad-hoc/discretionary decisions by policymakers for social security spending
purposes have (vis-à-vis countries with automatic price-based formula indexation mechanisms) less
readily available social security funds in the social security system co¤ers and no access to capital
markets (or, alternatively, very high borrowing costs.

                                                 19   20

    The slow-moving and intrinsically structural/rigid nature of social security bene...ciaries enti-
tled to social security bene...ts coupled with more severe ...nancial constraints observed in countries
relying on ad-hoc/discretionary decisions by policymakers for social security spending purposes nat-
urally increases the dependence of individual social security bene...t payments adjustment over time
to the availability of current social security revenues. Social security revenues comove positively, in
a "mechanic" fashion, with economic activity because employment and income, which are the key
underlying inputs behind social security revenues, track economic activity very closely.19                         There-
fore, the inability/di¢ culty to borrow and limited existence of readily available funds "force"social
security spending to reect the behavior of social security revenues (and consequently of economic
activity). Naturally, this implies that social security spending will be, in practice, procyclical. In
fact, Figure 21 shows that having (or not) some automatic price-based formula indexation mecha-
nism indeed matters for the relationship between the cyclical components of social security spending
  18
     Interestingly, in practice, when countries (either industrial or developing) rely on automatic price-based formula
indexation mechanisms, the share of the variance of social security real spending explained by its trend reaches 95
percent. In contrast, when relying on policymakers' ad-hoc/discretionary criteria to adjust social security bene...t
payments, the share of the variance of social security real spending explained by its trend is 80 percent (and statistically
lower than that of 95 percent observed when automatic price-based formula indexation mechanisms are present). In
other words, automatic price-based formula indexation mechanisms do indeed provide, as one may have expected,
more rigid spending than more ad-hoc/discretionary systems.
  19
     These largely positive correlations across the board are also in line with Vegh and Vuletin (2015) when analyzing
general government revenues. Results are not shown for brevity'      s sake.


                                                            16
and revenues. Panel A shows that when countries have automatic price-based formula indexation
mechanisms, social security spending is acyclical; the correlation is 0.12 (and statistically not signif-
icant). In contrast, Panel B shows that when countries do not have automatic price-based formula
indexation mechanism and, instead, rely on ad-hoc/discretionary criteria to adjust individual so-
cial security bene...t payments, social security spending and revenues comove positively (with a
correlation of 0.37, and statistically signi...cant).

                                                  21

    To sum up, while, in principle, adjustments of individual social security bene...t payments based
on ad-hoc/discretionary criteria do not necessarily imply procyclicality, in practice, the lack of an
automatic price-based formula indexation mechanism reects underlying borrowing constraints and
the inability to save.    This, in turn, makes social security spending procyclical because it ends
up being determined by social security revenues (which are positively associated with economic
activity).   Common illustrations of social security procyclicality include ad-hoc/discretionary (i)
increases in individual bene...t payments during good times (e.g., increases of nominal individual
bene...t payments beyond ination between 2003-2006 in Argentina), (ii) nominal pension cuts during
bad times linked to ...scal adjustments (e.g., cuts to the highest pensions in 2012 in Greece), and
(iii) nominal pension freeze in the context of moderate to high ination (e.g., Argentina in 1976).
In other words, the procyclicality of automatic spending observed in the developing world reects
the behavior of social security spending, in particular the reliance on ad-hoc/discretionary decisions
by policymakers.     This occurs, precisely, because the lack of commitment to a formula reects
underlying borrowing constraints and the inability to save.


6    How important are automatic stabilizers (and de-stabilizers) in
     determining the degree of cyclicality of total spending?
After focusing in previous sections on the cyclical behavior of the most important automatic spend-
ing categories, we now analyze the extent to which these aforementioned automatic stabilizers (or
de-stabilizers) arguments actually matter in determining the degree of cyclicality of total spending
(primary spending, to be precise).       As will become clear below, even after controlling for other
well-known determinants and addressing potential endogeneity concerns, unemployment insurance
and automatic price-based formula indexation mechanisms are found to be important and robust
determinants of the cyclicality of total spending.
    Given the di¢ culty of ...nding time-varying instrumental variables for unemployment insurance
and automatic price-based formula indexation mechanisms, we follow Lane (2003) and Frankel,




                                                        17
Vegh, and Vuletin (2013) and rely on cross-country regressions.20                 Table 1 shows the results of
cross-country regressions where the dependent variable is the country correlation between the cycli-
cal components of real primary spending and real GDP for the period 1980-2018 (i.e., the values
from Figure 1). Explanatory variables (evaluated at the average for each country) include novel
arguments such as the e¤ective unemployment insurance mechanism coverage and the percentage of
years without automatic price-based formula indexation mechanisms, discussed above in the text,
as well as common determinants such as institutional quality, ...nancial integration, and checks and
balances.21
       To address potential endogeneity concerns, we use well-known instruments for institutional qual-
ity, ...nancial integration, and checks and balances, and propose novel ones for e¤ective unemploy-
ment insurance mechanism coverage and percentage of years without automatic price-based formula
indexation mechanisms. We instrument institutional quality using the latitude (in absolute value)
of the country's capital city (Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson, 2001), ...nancial integration using
legal origin (La Porta et al., 1997), and checks and balances using constraints on the executive and
democracy in 1900 (La Porta et al., 1997). As an instrument for e¤ective unemployment insurance
mechanism coverage, and in light of our discussion in Section 3.1 and the evidence shown in Figure
10 where informality is typically identi...ed as the main reason for the lack of unemployment insur-
ance mechanisms, we propose using the share of agriculture in GDP circa 1950. This is because of
the positive association between the size of the agricultural sector and informality (e.g., Saracoglu,
2008; Vuletin, 2008). Considering our discussion in Section 5.2 and evidence shown in Figure 19,
we propose using the percentage of years with sovereign default on external debt during the pe-
riod 1960-1975 as an instrument for the percentage of years without automatic price-based formula
indexation mechanisms.
       Panel A in Table 1 shows the results of cross-country regressions without using instruments.
Columns 1 to 5 show our ...ndings when using one determinant at a time. Column 1 shows that,
indeed, larger e¤ective unemployment insurance mechanism coverage is associated with less total
spending procyclicality. Column 2 indicates that the lower the prevalence of automatic price-based
formula indexation mechanisms, the higher the procyclicality.                Columns 3 to 5 show, much like
in the existing literature, that better institutions, more ...nancial integration, and more checks and
balances (all variables introduced one at a time) also lead to less total spending procyclicality. Col-
umn 6 includes all determinants, except for unemployment insurance mechanism coverage; column
7 includes all determinants, except for automatic price-based formula indexation mechanisms; and
column 8 includes all determinants.          All in all, the evidence indicates that these two new deter-
  20
     Based on analogous considerations, for example, it is also standard in the literature on institutions to rely on
cross-country regressions for instrumentation purposes (e.g., Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson, 2001; Easterly and
Levine, 2003; Glaeser, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer, 2004; Rodrik, Subramanian, and Trebbi, 2004; La
Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes and Shleifer, 2008).
  21
     See Frankel, Vegh, and Vuletin (2013) for a more detailed discussion and Appendix 1 for de...nition of variables
and sources of data.


                                                         18
minants linked to automatic stabilizers (or de-stabilizers) are very important in determining the
degree of cyclicality of total spending, even after controlling for other well-known determinants.
    We now control for possible endogeneity using instrumental variables. Table 2 shows that the
proposed instruments relate in the expected manner with all ...ve cyclicality regressors. Panel B in
Table 1 shows the cross-country regressions using instrumental variables. In all cases, we cannot
reject the overidenti...cation tests. The instruments are valid (i.e., uncorrelated with the error term)
and the excluded instruments are correctly excluded from the estimated equation. Moreover, weak
identi...cation tests con...rm that the excluded instruments are not weak instruments (i.e., they
are strongly correlated with the endogenous regressors).       As expected when using instrumental
variables, the statistical signi...cance of some regressors weakens.   Yet, all in all, and despite the
reduction in the number of countries, the relevance of the two newly identi...ed determinants linked to
automatic stabilizers (or de-stabilizers!) arguments remains very important in explaining the degree
of cyclicality of total spending, even after controlling for other well-known factors and addressing
potential endogeneity concerns.
                                           1   2

    To sum up, much like well-known determinants of cyclicality of spending policy such as institu-
tional quality, ...nancial integration, and checks and balances, these new ...ndings support the idea
that unemployment insurance and, more interestingly and subtly, the presence of social security au-
tomatic price-based formula indexation mechanisms are, indeed, important and robust determinants
of the cyclicality of total government spending.


7    Revisiting the merits of government spending as a macroeco-
     nomic stabilizer
There is a general consensus in the literature that more government spending, especially automatic
government spending, acts as a macroeconomic stabilizer (e.g., Gali, 1994; Fatas and Mihov, 2001,
2003; McKay and Reis, 2016). Panel A in Table 3 shows the results of cross-country regressions
where the dependent variable is output volatility measured by the standard deviation of annual real
GDP growth for the period 1980-2018. Column 1 shows that larger government spending reduces
output volatility.   Moreover, column 2 shows that such stabilizing force is mainly driven by its
automatic spending component as opposed to the discretionary one. These ...ndings are well in line
with the existing literature such as Fatas and Mihov (2001 and 2003) in that what truly matters
for macroeconomic stabilization is the size of automatic government spending.
    We now revisit these ...ndings through the lenses of the new insights of our paper.       Columns
3 to 5 condition the impact of automatic government spending on the presence of unemployment
insurance and social security formula-based indexation mechanisms. Columns 3 to 5 keep showing


                                                   19
the irrelevance of discretionary spending size on output volatility. However, more interestingly, it
also shows (in line with our previous ...ndings) that not all automatic government spending is alike in
terms of its stabilizing properties. Only when more automatic government spending is conducted in
the presence of unemployment insurance and social security formula-based indexation mechanisms,
does it act as a stabilizing force. While the importance of unemployment insurance in this regard is
well known by now (e.g., McKay and Reis, 2016; Di Maggio and Kermani, 2016; Krueger, Mitman,
Perri, 2016), the practical relevance of having a social security formula-based indexation mechanism
has not, to the best of our knowledge, been previously identi...ed . Columns 6 to 10 in Panel A in
Table 3 are equivalent to columns 1 to 5, yet also control for a well-known determinant of output
volatility: terms of trade volatility. Our previous ...ndings remain unchanged.
   Panel B in Table 3 is equivalent to Panel A, yet uses instrumental variables to address endo-
geneity concerns. Following the strategy of the existing ...scal literature, we instrument the size of
government spending (primary spending, to be precise) using the nature of the political system:
presidential versus parliamentary. Persson and Tabellini (1999) argue that the direct accountability
of politicians in presidential systems increases the competition both among politicians and voters
and this implies less spending on every budget item and smaller governments. Panel A in Table 4
empirically supports this argument (i.e., that presidential systems induce less government spend-
ing). To account for the share of government spending allocated to discretionary and automatic
spending, we use the old-age dependency ratio (de...ned as the ratio of people older than 64 to the
working-age population aged 15 to 64). Several studies have found that a higher old-age depen-
dency ratio increases spending, especially social security for the population over 65 (e.g., Sanz and
Velazquez, 2007; Sorensen, 2013). In fact, Panel B in Table 4 empirically supports the argument
that a higher old-age dependency ratio is associated with a larger share of automatic government
spending. Naturally, to instrument for discretionary and automatic spending, one also needs to in-
teract the political system variable with this demographic-based one. We also address endogeneity
concerns about the recent presence of unemployment insurance and social security formula-based
indexation mechanisms for the period 1980-2018 by using their presence circa 1970 and at the be-
ginning of each country's sample, respectively (see panels C and D in Table 4 4). When using this
set of instruments, we naturally use all required interactions. Panel B in Table 3 shows that even
after addressing endogeneity considerations, the main ...ndings remain unchanged. Naturally in all
cases, the coe¢ cients observed in Panel A in Table 3 (without using instruments) tend to be more
signi...cant than in Panel B in Table 3 (using instruments).

                                          3   4

   To sum up, unemployment insurance and, more interestingly and subtly, the presence of social
security automatic price-based formula indexation mechanisms are, indeed, important and robust


                                                  20
factors a¤ecting the inuence of automatic government spending on macroeconomic volatility. In
other words, automatic government spending per se is not su¢ cient to reduce macroeconomic
instability, as the presence of transfer programs, such as unemployment insurance and social security,
prove to be essential.


8    Final thoughts
We have shown that while automatic government spending is (as expected) countercyclical in in-
dustrial countries, it is surprisingly procyclical in the developing world. We track this puzzling
procyclical behavior to (i) the e¤ective lack of automatic stabilizers like unemployment insurance
and (ii) more intriguing, to the existence of perverse automatic de-stabilizing mechanisms in social
security spending (especially when lacking formula indexation mechanisms). We also show that
the presence and nature of these two social programs are crucial new determinants of countries'
government spending cyclicality as well as macroeconomic volatility. These new insights, particu-
larly that of the critical relevance of social security formula indexation mechanisms, and its possible
de-stabilizing e¤ect when such formulas tend not to be present, is of great concern considering the
current size of social security spending (about 80 percent of automatic government spending and 40
percent of primary government spending) and its expected persistent growth (could grow between
2 and 5-fold in the next 40 years).


References
Acemoglu, D., Johnson, S., Robinson, J.A., 2001. The colonial origins of comparative development:
An empirical investigation. American Economic Review 91 (5), 1369-1401.
    Aleksynska, M., Schindler, M., 2011. Labor market regulations in low-, middle- and high-income
countries: A new panel database. IMF Working Paper No. 11/154.
    Alesina, A., Campante, F., Tabellini, G., 2008. Why is ...scal policy often procyclical? Journal
of the European Economic Association 6 (5), 1006-1036.
    Alvarez-Parra, F., Sanchez, J.M., 2009. Unemployment insurance with a hidden labor market.
Journal of Monetary Economics 56 (7), 954-967.
    Ardanaz, M., Izquierdo, A., 2017. Current expenditure upswings in good times and capital
expenditure downswings in bad times? New evidence from developing countries. IDB Working
Paper No. 838.
    Asenjo, A., Pignatti, C., 2019. Unemployment insurance schemes around the world: Evidence
and policy options. ILO Research Department Working Paper No. 49.
    Avellan, L., Vuletin, G., 2015. Fiscal procyclicality and output forecast errors. Journal of
International Money and Finance 55, 193-204.
    Bianchi, J., Ottonello, P., Presno, I., 2019. Fiscal stimulus under sovereign risk. NBER Working
Paper No. 26307.
    Blanchard, O., 2006. Comments on "The case against the case against discretionary ...scal
policy", in R.W. Kopcke, G.M.B. Tootell, and R. Triest (eds.), The macroeconomics of ...scal policy.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 62-67.


                                                  21
     Blanchard, O., Dell' Ariccia, G., Mauro, P., 2010. Rethinking macroeconomic policy. Journal of
Money, Credit and Banking 42 (S1), 199-215.
     Bongaarts, J., 2004. Population aging and the rising cost of public pensions. Population and
Development Review, 30 (1), 1-23.
     Bosch, M., Esteban-Pretel, J., 2015. The labor market e¤ects of introducing unemployment
bene...ts in an economy with high informality. European Economic Review 75 (C), 1-17.
     Brown-Collier, E.K., Collier, B.E., 1995. What Keynes really said about de...cit spending. Jour-
nal of Post Keynesian Economics 17 (3), 341-355.
     Camarena, J.A., Galeano, L., Morano, L., Puig, J., Riera-Crichton, D., Vegh, C., Venturi, L.,
Vuletin, G., 2019. Fooled by the cycle: Permanent versus cyclical improvements in social indicators.
NBER Working Paper No. 26199.
     Cerutti, P., Fruttero, A., Grosh, M., Kostenbaum, S., Oliveri, M.L., Rodriguez-Alas, C., Strokova,
V., 2014. Social assistance and labor market programs in Latin America: Methodology and key
...ndings from the social protection database. Social Protection & Labor Discussion Paper No. 1401.
     Cespedes, L., Velasco, A., 2014. Was this time di¤erent? Fiscal policy in commodity republics.
Journal of Development Economics 106, 92-106.
     Chomik, R., Piggott, J., Yan, S., 2019. Aging, ...scal sustainability and adequacy of social
security systems. Think 20 Policy Brief No. 12, Task Force 10.
     Cuadra, G., Sanchez, J.M., Sapriza, H., 2010. Fiscal policy and default risk in emerging markets.
Review of Economic Dynamics 13 (2), 452-469.
     Demarco, G., 2019. Global pension policies: Past and present. Social Protection and Jobs 2019
Core Courses. The World Bank, Washington, DC.
     Di Maggio, M.D., Kermani, A., 2016. The importance of unemployment insurance as an auto-
matic stabilizer. NBER Working Paper No. 22625.
     Duval, R.A., Loungani, P., 2019. Designing labor market institutions in emerging and developing
economies: Evidence and policy options. IMF Sta¤ Discussion Note No. 19/04.
     Easterly, W., Levine, R., 2003. Tropics, germs, and crops: How endowments in      uence economic
development. Journal of Monetary Economics 50 (1), 3-39.
     Eckardt, S., Mills, Z., 2014. What goes up must come down: cyclicality in public wage bill
spending. Policy Research Working Paper No. 6760.
     Fatas, A., Mihov, I., 2001. Government size and automatic stabilizers: International and intra-
national evidence. Journal of International Economics 55 (1), 3-28.
     Fatas, A., Mihov, I., 2003. The case for restricting ...scal policy discretion. The Quarterly
Journal of Economics 118 (4), 1419-1447.
     Fatas, A., Mihov, I., 2012. Fiscal policy as a stabilization tool. The BE Journal of Macroeco-
nomics 12 (3).
     Fichtner, J., 2018. Global aging and public ...nance. Business Economics 53, 72-78.
     Frankel, J., 2011. Over-optimism in forecasts by o¢ cial budget agencies and its implications.
Oxford Review of Economic Policy 27 (4), 536-562.
     Frankel, J., Vegh, C.A, Vuletin, G., 2013. On graduation from ...scal procyclicality. Journal of
Development Economics 100 (1), 32-47.
     Freeman, R., 1987. How do public sector wages and employment respond to economic condi-
tions? in David Wise (ed.), Public sector payrolls. University of Chicago Press, 183-216.
     Gali, J., 1994. Government size and macroeconomic stability. European Economic Review 38
(1), 117-132.
     Gavin, M., Perotti, R., 1997. Fiscal policy in Latin America. NBER Macroeconomics Annual
12, 11-61.



                                                 22
     Glaeser, E.L., La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., 2004. Do institutions cause
growth? Journal of Economic Growth 9 (3), 271-303.
     Gonzalez-Rozada, M., Ru¤o, H., 2016. Optimal unemployment bene...ts in the presence of
informal labor markets. Labour Economics 41(C), 204-227.
     Holzmann, R., Palmer, E., Palacios, R., Sacchi, S., 2020. Progress and challenges of non...nancial
de...ned contribution pension schemes, Volume 1: Addressing marginalization, polarization, and the
labor market. The World Bank, Washington, DC.
     Hopenhayn, H.A., Nicolini, J.P., 1997. Optimal unemployment insurance. Journal of Political
Economy 105 (2), 412-438.
     International Labour O¢ ce, 2017. World social protection report 2017­        19: Universal social
protection to achieve the sustainable development goals. International Labour O¢ ce, Geneva.
     Ilzetzki, E., Vegh, C., 2008. Procyclical ...scal policy in developing countries: Truth or ...ction?
NBER Working Paper No. 14191.
     Izquierdo, A., Pessino, C., Vuletin, G., 2018. Better spending for better lives: How Latin
America and the Caribbean can do more with less. DIA (Development in the Americas) Flagship,
Inter-American Development Bank, Washington, DC.
     Kaminsky, G., Reinhart, C., Vegh, C., 2004. When it rains, it pours: Procyclical capital         ows
and macroeconomic policies. NBER Macroeconomics Annual 19, 11-82.
     Kraay, A., Van Rijckeghem, C., 1995. Employment and wages in the public sector: A cross-
country study. IMF Working Paper 70.
     Krueger, D., Mitman, K., Perri, F., 2016. On the distribution of the welfare losses of large
recessions. NBER Working Paper No. 22458.
     La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., 2008. The economic consequences of legal
origins. Journal of Economic Literature 46 (2), 285-332.
     La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R.W., 1997. Legal determinants of
external ...nance. Journal of Finance 52 (3), 1131-1150.
     Lane, P.R., 2003. The cyclical behaviour of ...scal policy: Evidence from the OECD. Journal of
Public Economics 87, 2661-2675.
     Loayza, N.V., Ranciere, R., Servén, L., Ventura, J., 2007. Macroeconomic volatility and welfare
in developing countries: an introduction. The World Bank Economic Review 21 (3), 343-357.
     McKay, A., Reis, R., 2016. The role of automatic stabilizers in the US business cycle. Econo-
metrica 84 (1), 141-194.
     Medina, L., Schneider, F., 2018. Shadow economies around the world: What did we learn over
the last 20 years? IMF Working Paper No. 18/17.
     Michaud, A., Rothert, J., 2018. Redistributive ...scal policies and business cycles in emerging
economies. Journal of International Economics 112 (C), 123-133.
     Nerlich, C.,Schroth, J., 2018. The economic impact of population ageing and pension reforms.
Economic Bulletin Articles, European Central Bank, Vol. 2.
     OECD, 2019. Pensions at a glance 2019: OECD and G20 indicators. OECD Publishing, Paris.
     Panadeiros, M., Pessino, C., 2018. Consecuencias ...scales del envejecimiento poblacional: proyec-
ciones agregadas del gasto en salud para 10 países de América Latina. IDB Discussion Document
No. 601.
     Persson, T., Tabellini, G., 1999. The size and scope of government: Comparative politics with
rational politicians. European Economic Review 43 (4-6), 699-735.
     Riascos, A., Vegh, C., 2003. Procyclical government spending in developing countries: The role
of capital market imperfections. Mimeo, UCLA and Banco República, Colombia.
     Ribe, H.G., Robalino, D.A., Walker, D.I., 2012. From right to reality: Incentives, labor markets,
and the challenge of universal social protection in Latin America and the Caribbean. Latin American

                                                   23
Development Forum, World Bank Group, Washington, DC.
   Rodrik, D., Trebbi, F., Subramanian, A., 2004. Institutions rule: The primacy of institutions
over integration and geography in economic development. Journal of Economic Growth 9 (2),
131-165.
   Sanz, I., Velazquez, F., 2007. The role of ageing in the growth of government and social welfare
spending in the OECD. European Journal of Political Economy 23, 917-931.
   Saracoglu, D.S., 2008. The informal sector and tax on employment: A dynamic general equilib-
rium investigation. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 32 (2), 529-549.
   Social Security Administration, 1960. Automatic cost-of-living adjustment of pensions in foreign
countries. Social Security Bulletin, US Social Security Administration, Woodlawn, Maryland.
   Social Security Administration, 2003. International update: Recent developments in foreign
public and private pensions. SSA Publication No. 13-11712. O¢ ce of Policy, US Social Security
Administration, Washington, DC.
   Sorensen, R., 2013. Does aging a¤ect preferences for welfare spending? A study of peoples'
spending preferences in 22 countries, 1985-2006. European Journal of Political Economy 29, 259-
271.
   Spilimbergo, A., Symansky, S., Blanchard, O., Cottarelli, C., 2010 Fiscal policy for the crisis, in
R. W. Kolb (ed.), Lessons from the ...nancial crisis. New York: Wiley, 587-594.
   Talvi, E., Vegh, C., 2005. Tax base variability and procyclicality of ...scal policy. Journal of
Development Economics 78 (1), 156­    190.
   Tornell, A., Lane, P.R., 1999. The voracity e¤ect. American Economic Review 89 (1), 22-46.
   Uribe, M., Yue, V.Z., 2006. Country spreads and emerging countries: Who drives whom?
Journal of international Economics 69 (1), 6-36.
   Vegh, C, Vuletin, G., 2014a. Social implications of ...scal policy responses during crises. NBER
Working Paper No. 20675.
   Vegh, C, Vuletin, G., 2014b. The road to redemption: Policy response to crises in Latin America.
IMF Economic Review 62, 526-568.
   Vegh, C, Vuletin, G., 2015. How is tax policy conducted over the business cycle? American
Economic Journal: Economic Policy 7, 327-370.
   Vuletin, G., 2008. Measuring the informal economy in Latin America and the Caribbean. Money
A¤ airs 21, 161-191.
   Woo, J., 2009. Why do more polarized countries run more pro-cyclical ...scal policy? Review of
Economics and Statistics 91 (4), 850-870.
   World Bank, 2009. Pensions in crisis: Europe and Central Asia regional policy note. World
Bank, Washington, DC.




                                                 24
                                                          Figure 1.  Country correlations between the cyclical components  
                                                                        of real primary spending and real GDP 




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
                          Notes:  Black (yellow) bars denote industrial (developing) countries.   The cyclical components have been estimated using the HodrickPrescott filter.  A positive (negative) correlation 
                          indicates  procyclical  (countercyclical)  spending  policy.   Correlations  refer  to  pooled  across  countries  correlations.   Real  primary  spending  is  defined  as  general  government  total 
                          expenditure net of interest payments, deflated by the GDP deflator.  See Appendix 2 for correlation values for each country.  , *, ** and *** indicate statistical significance at the 
                          15%, 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively. 
                          Sources:  Authors' calculations based on World Economic Outlook and International Financial Statistics (IMF).  See Appendix 1 for details.  131 countries for period 19802018.
 
 
 
 

        Figure 2.  Correlations between the cyclical components of real primary spending (and its main categories) and real 
                                GDP in industrial (in italic font) and developing (in normal font) countries 
                                                                         
                                                                                        Government investment 
                                                                         
                                               Discretionary spending                       ( 0.05* , 0.15** ) 

                                                  ( 0.01 , 0.36*** )   
                                                                                       Government consumption 
                                                                                             ( 0.02 , 0.16*** ) 
              Primary spending                                           
                                                                         
            ( 0.08** , 0.35*** )                                         
                                                                                        Unemployment insurance 
                                                                         
                                                                                         ( 0.51*** , 0.55*** ) 
                                                                         
                                                 Automatic spending                          Family programs 
                                                                         
                                                ( 0.27*** , 0.19*** )                          ( 0.02 , 0.02 ) 
                                                                         
                                                                                               Social security 
                                                                         
                                                                                           ( 0.09* , 0.13*** ) 
                                                                         
     
    Notes:  Numbers and statistical significance in italic font are for industrial countries and in normal font for developing countries. The cyclical components have been estimated using the HodrickPrescott filter. A positive 
    (negative) correlation indicates procyclical (countercyclical) spending policy.  Correlations refer to pooled across countries correlations.  Primary spending is defined as general government total expenditure net of interest 
    payments; discretionary spending is defined as the sum of general government public consumption and capital spending; automatic spending is defined as transfers in cash or in kind to protect the entire population (or 
    specific segments) against certain social risks, and includes unemployment insurance, family programs and benefits, and social security.  Nominal spending and GDP are deflated by the GDP deflator.  See Appendix 2 for 
    correlation values for each country.  , *, ** and *** indicate statistical significance at the 15%, 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively. 
    Sources:   Authors'  calculations based  on  World  Economic  Outlook  (IMF),  International  Financial  Statistics  (IMF),  OECD,  ECLAC,  European  System  of integrated  Social Protection  Statistics  (EuroStat), Red de  Centros  (IDB), 
    and national sources.  See Appendices 1, 3, 4, and 5 for details.  131 countries using available data for the period 19802018. 
 

                           Figure 3.  Importance of spending categories (as percentage of primary spending) in  
                                    Industrial (in italic font) and developing (in normal font) countries 
                                                                         
                                                                                        Government investment 
                                                                         
                                                 Discretionary spending                        ( 3% , 19% ) 

                                                      ( 42% , 59% )      
                                                                                       Government consumption 
                                                                                              ( 39% , 40% ) 
               Primary spending                                          
                                                                         
                ( 100% , 100% )                                          
                                                                                       Unemployment insurance 
                                                                         
                                                                                              ( 4% , 0.5% ) 
                                                                         
                                                  Automatic spending                        Family programs 
                                                                         
                                                      ( 58% , 41% )                             ( 11% , 8% ) 
                                                                         
                                                                         
                                                                                             Social security 
                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                            ( 43% , 32.5% ) 
     
     
    Notes:   Numbers  and  statistical  significance  in  italic  font  are  for  industrial  countries  and  in  normal  font  for  developing  countries.   Primary  spending  is  defined  as  general  government  total  expenditure  net  of  interest 
    payments; discretionary spending is defined as the sum of general government public consumption and capital spending; automatic spending is defined as transfers in cash or in kind to protect the entire population (or 
    specific segments) against certain social risks, and includes unemployment insurance, family programs and benefits, and social security.  Nominal spending and GDP are deflated by the GDP deflator.  
    Sources:   Authors'  calculations based  on  World  Economic  Outlook  (IMF),  International  Financial  Statistics  (IMF),  OECD,  ECLAC,  European  System  of integrated  Social Protection  Statistics  (EuroStat), Red de  Centros  (IDB), 
    and national sources.  See Appendices 1, 3, 4, and 5 for details.  131 countries using available data for the period 19802018. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

                                                           Figure 4.  Country correlations between the cyclical components 
                                                                       of real discretionary spending and real GDP 




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                              Notes:   Black  (yellow)  bars  denote  industrial  (developing)  countries.   The  cyclical  components  have  been  estimated  using  the  HodrickPrescott  filter.   A  positive  (negative) 
                              correlation  indicates  procyclical  (countercyclical)  discretionary  spending  policy.    Correlations  refer  to  pooled  across  countries  correlation.    Real  discretionary  spending  is 
                              defined as the sum of general government public consumption and capital spending deflated by the GDP deflator.  See Appendix 2 for correlation values for each country.   
                              , *, ** and *** indicate statistical significance at the 15%, 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively. 
                              Source:  Authors' calculations based on World Economic Outlook and International Financial Statistics (IMF).  See Appendix 1 for details.  108 countries for period 19802018. 
 
 
 

                                   Figure 5.  Country correlations between the cyclical components 
                                                of real automatic spending and real GDP 




                                                                                                                                                                                                   
    Notes:   Black  (yellow)  bars  denote  industrial  (developing)  countries.   The  cyclical  components  have  been  estimated  using  the  HodrickPrescott  filter.  A  positive  (negative) 
    correlation  indicates  procyclical  (countercyclical)  automatic  spending  policy.   Correlations  refer  to  pooled  across  countries correlations.   Real  automatic  spending  is  defined 
    as  transfers  in  cash  or  in  kind  to  protect  the  entire  population  (or  specific  segments)  against  certain  social  risks,  deflated  by  the  GDP  deflator.  These  transfers  are  classified 
    according  to the type  of arrangement  governing their  payment,  and  consist of  social  security, family  programs  and benefits,  and  unemployment  insurance.   See  Appendix  2 
    for correlation values for each country.  , *, ** and *** indicate statistical significance at the 15%, 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively. 
    Sources:  Authors' calculations based on World Economic Outlook and International Financial Statistics (IMF).  See Appendix 1 for details.  77 countries for period 19802018.
 
 
 
 
 
 

                                   Figure 6.  Country correlations between the cyclical components  
                                       of real GDP and real unemployment insurance spending                                                                              




                                                                                                                                                                                                   
    Notes:   Black  (yellow)  bars  denote  industrial  (developing)  countries.   The  cyclical  components  have  been  estimated  using  the  HodrickPrescott  filter.   A  positive  (negative) 
    correlation indicates procyclical (countercyclical) unemployment insurance spending.  Correlations refer to pooled across countries correlations.  Real unemployment insurance 
    spending  is  defined  as  unemployment  insurance  spending,  deflated  by  the  GDP  deflator.   See  Appendix  2  for  correlation  values  for  each  country.   ,  *,  **  and  ***  indicate 
    statistical significance at the 15%, 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively. 
    Source: Authors' calculations based on Red de Centros (IDB) for Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Costa Rica, and Uruguay, and OECD for the rest of countries.  See Appendix 3 for 
    details.  25 countries for period 19802015.         
 
 

                            Figure 7.  Country correlations between the cyclical components  
                            of real GDP and unemployment insurance beneficiaries (Panel A),  
                                    and average real spending per beneficiary (Panel B) 
                                                                                            

                               Panel A.  Cyclicality of unemployment insurance beneficiaries 




                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                  
                                    Panel B.  Cyclicality of unemployment insurance average 
                                                   real spending per beneficiary 




                                                                                                                                                                        
    Notes:  Black (yellow) bars denote industrial (developing) countries.  The cyclical components have been estimated using the HodrickPrescott filter.  A positive (negative) 
    correlation indicates that unemployment insurance beneficiaries in Panel A, or unemployment insurance average spending per beneficiary in Panel B, commoves positively 
    (or negatively) with the business cycle.  Industrial and developing countries correlations refer to pooled across countries correlation.  , *, ** and *** indicate statistical 
    significance at the 15%, 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively. 
    Sources:  Authors' calculations based on Red de Centros (IDB) for Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Costa Rica, and Uruguay, and OECD for the rest of countries.  See Appendix 3 
    for details.  20 countries for period 19802015. 

 
 

 

 

                                  Figure 8.  Presence of unemployment insurance mechanisms in the world circa 2019                                                                               




    Notes:  Countries in white do not have unemployment insurance mechanisms.  Countries in red have some type of unemployment insurance mechanism.  
    Sources:  Authors' identification based on International Labor Organization and United States Social Security Administration.  See Appendix 3 for details. 

 

 

 

                                                   Figure 9.  Effective unemployment insurance mechanism coverage                                                              




                                                                                                                                                                                             
                                      Notes:  Black (yellow) bars denote industrial (developing) countries.  Out of the 65 countries with some unemployment insurance mechanism, the 
                                      authors found information on the effective unemployment insurance mechanism coverage for 43 countries.  
                                      Sources:  Authors' calculations based on International Labor Organization and Aleksynska and Schindler (2011) circa 2010.  See Appendix 3 for each 
                                      country details. 

 

 
 

       Figure 10.  Relationship between effective unemployment insurance coverage and informality                                                                                                       




                                                                                                                                                                                        
    Sources:  Effective unemployment insurance coverage computed by the authors based on International Labor Organization and Aleksynska and Schindler (2011) circa 2010. 
    Informality is taken from Medina and Schneider (2018) circa 2010.  Countries with no unemployment insurance mechanism are not included in this regression analysis.  The data is 
    for 41 countries.  See Appendix 3 for details.  

 

 

                                    Figure 11.  Country correlations between the cyclical components  
                                             of real GDP and real family programs spending                                                             




                                                                                                                                                                                        
    Notes:  Black (yellow) bars denote industrial (developing) countries. The cyclical components have been estimated using the HodrickPrescott filter.  A positive (negative) correlation 
    indicates procyclical  (countercyclical)  family  programs  and benefits  spending.   Correlations  refer to  pooled  across  countries correlation.   Real family programs  spending  is  defined  as 
    family programs spending, deflated by the GDP deflator.  See Appendix 2 for correlation values for each country.  , *, ** and *** indicate sta s cal significance at the 15%, 10%, 5% 
    and 1% levels, respectively. 
    Source:  Authors' calculations based on ECLAC and OECD.  ECLAC for Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Mexico, Panama, Paraguay, 
    Peru, Trinidad and Tobago, and Uruguay.  OECD for the rest of countries.  See Appendix 4 for details.  35 countries for period 19802017. 

 
 

                            Figure 12.  Country correlations between the cyclical components  
                                 of real GDP and family programs beneficiaries (Panel A),  
                                    and average real spending per beneficiary (Panel B) 
                                                                                                 

                                          Panel A.  Cyclicality of family programs beneficiaries 




                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                         
                Panel B.  Cyclicality of family programs average real spending per beneficiary 




                                                                                                                                                                                   
    Notes:  Black (yellow) bars denote industrial (developing) countries.  The cyclical components have been estimated using the HodrickPrescott Filter.  A positive (negative) 
    correlation  indicates that  family  programs  beneficiaries  in  Panel  A,  or family  programs  average  spending per  beneficiary  in Panel  B,  comoves  positively  (or  negatively) 
    with the business cycle.  , *, ** and *** indicate statistical significance at the 15%, 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively. 
    Source:   Authors'  calculations  based  on  ECLAC.   ECLAC  for  Argentina,  Bolivia,  Brazil,  Colombia,  Costa  Rica,  Dominican  Republic,  Ecuador,  Mexico,  Panama,  Paraguay, 
    Peru, Trinidad and Tobago, and Uruguay.  See Appendix 4 for details.  14 countries for period 20022017  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                            Figure 13.  Country correlations between the cyclical components  
                                       of real GDP and real social security spending                                                      




                                                                                                                                                                            
    Notes:  Black (yellow) bars denote industrial (developing) countries.  The cyclical components have been estimated using the HodrickPrescott filter.  A positive (negative) 
    correlation indicates procyclical (countercyclical) social security spending.  Real social security spending is defined as social security spending, deflated by the GDP deflator. 
    Correlations refer to pooled across countries correlation.  See Appendix 2 for correlation values for each country.  , *, ** and *** indicate statistical significance at the 
    15%, 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively. 
    Sources:  Authors' calculations based on European System of integrated Social Protection Statistics (EuroStat), OECD, World Economic Outlook (IMF), and national 
    sources. See Appendix 5 for details.  45 countries for period 19802018.  
 
 
                            Figure 14.  Country correlations between the cyclical components  
                                  of real GDP and social security beneficiaries (Panel A),  
                                   and average real spending per beneficiary (Panel B) 
                                                                                              
                                                                                              

                                           Panel A.  Cyclicality of social security beneficiaries 




                                                                                                                                                                            
 
 
                    Figure 14 (cont.).  Country correlations between the cyclical components  
                             of real GDP and social security beneficiaries (Panel A),  
                               and average real spending per beneficiary (Panel B) 
                                                                                               
                                                                                               

                  Panel B.  Cyclicality of social security average real spending per beneficiary 




                                                                                                                                                                              
    Notes:  Black (yellow) bars denote industrial (developing) countries.  The cyclical components have been estimated using the HodrickPrescott filter.  A positive (negative) 
    correlation indicates that social security beneficiaries in Panel A, or social security average spending per beneficiary in Panel B, comoves positively (or negatively) with 
    the business cycle.  , *, ** and *** indicate statistical significance at the 15%, 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively. 
    Sources:    Authors'  calculations  based  on  European  System  of  integrated  Social  Protection  Statistics  (EuroStat),  OECD,  World  Economic  Outlook  (IMF),  and  national 
    sources.  See Appendix 5 for details.  25 countries for period 19802018. 
 
 
                              Figure 15.  Percentage of countries with automatic pricebased  
                                              formula indexation mechanisms 
                                                                                               




                                                                                                                                                                              
                         
              Sources: Authors'  calculations  based  on  International  Social  Security  Association,  OECD,  Social  Security  Programs  Throughout  the  World  data  by 
              U.S. Social Security Administration, and World Bank Pensions Data.  See Appendix 5 for details.  143 countries. 
 
 
 
 
                 Figure 16.  Existence of automatic pricebased formula indexation mechanisms in the world circa 2019                                                                                          




    Notes:  Countries in white do not have automatic pricebased formula indexation mechanism.  Countries in red rely on automatic pricebased formula indexation mechanism.  
    Sources:  Based on International Social Security Association, OECD (2019), Social Security Programs Throughout the World data by U.S. Social Security Administration, and World Bank Pensions Data.  See Appendix 5 for 
    details. 
 
 
 
 
                  Figure 17.  Country correlations between the cyclical components of real GDP and real social security 
                 spending when there is an automatic pricebased formula indexation mechanism (Panel A), and when 
                                         countries rely on adhoc/discretionary criteria (Panel B) 
                                                                                                                

                    Panel A.  Country correlations between the cyclical components of real GDP and real social security 
                             spending when there is an automatic pricebased formula indexation mechanism 




                                                                                                                                                                                    
 
 
 
 
 
 
       Figure 17 (cont.).  Country correlations between the cyclical components of real GDP and real social 
     security spending when there is an automatic pricebased formula indexation mechanism (Panel A), and 
                              countries rely on adhoc/discretionary criteria (Panel B) 
                                                                                                                 

          Panel B.  Country correlations between the cyclical components of real GDP and real social security 
                             spending when countries rely on adhoc/discretionary criteria 




                                                                                                                                                                                             
    Notes:  Black (yellow) bars denote industrial (developing) countries.  The cyclical components have been estimated using the HodrickPrescott filter.  A positive (negative) correlation indicates procyclical 
    (countercyclical) social security spending.  , *, ** and *** indicate statistical significance at the 15%, 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.  
    Sources:  Authors' calculations based on (i) European System of integrated Social Protection Statistics (EuroStat), OECD, World Economic Outlook (IMF), and national sources for social security spending 
    and (ii) International Social Security Association, OECD, Social Security Programs Throughout the World data by U.S. Social Security Administration, and World Bank Pensions Data for individual social 
    security payment adjustment mechanisms.  See Appendix 5 for details.  31 countries for period 19802018 in Panel A and 24 countries for period 19822018 in Panel B.    

 
                      Figure 18.  Relationship between country correlation between the cyclical components 
                               of real GDP and real social security spending and percentage of years  
                                    with automatic pricebased formula indexation mechanisms 




                                                                                                                                                                                                 
         Notes: The cyclical components have been estimated using the HodrickPrescott filter. A positive (negative) correlation indicates procyclical (countercyclical) social security spending.  Real 
         social security spending is defined as social security spending deflated by the GDP deflator.  The percentage of years with automatic pricebased formula indexation mechanisms indicates 
         the percentage of years where, according to available social security spending data, the country has had an automatic pricebased formula indexation mechanism.  , *, ** and *** indicate 
         statistical significance at the 15%, 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively. 
         Sources:   Authors'  calculations  based  on  (i)  European  System  of  integrated  Social  Protection  Statistics  (EuroStat),  OECD,  World  Economic  Outlook  (IMF),  and  national  sources  for  social 
         security  spending  and  (ii)  International  Social  Security  Association,  OECD,  Social  Security  Programs  Throughout  the  World  data  by  U.S.  Social  Security  Administration,  and  World  Bank 
         Pensions Data for individual social security payment adjustment mechanisms.  See Appendix 5 details.  45 countries for period 19802018. 
 
 
      Figure 19.  Relationship between country percentage of years with automatic pricebased formula 
           indexation mechanisms and percentage of years with sovereign default on external debt                                                                                                                 




                                                                                                                                                                                                     
    Notes:  The percentage of years with automatic pricebased formula indexation mechanisms indicates the percentage of years where, according to available social security spending data, 
    the  country  has  had  an  automatic  pricebased  formula  indexation  mechanism.   The  figure  only  includes  country  observations  for  which  we  also  have  the  correlation  between  the  cyclical 
    components of real GDP and real social security spending.  Results do not change if all countries are considered; this exercise is, in fact, conducted later in Section 6.  , *, ** and *** indicate 
    statistical significance at the 15%, 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively. 
    Sources:   Authors'  calculations  based  on  International  Social  Security  Association,  OECD,  Social  Security  Programs  Throughout  the  World  data  by  U.S.  Social  Security  Administration,  and 
    World Bank Pensions Data for individual social security payment adjustment mechanisms.  See Appendices 2 and 5 for details.  28 countries for period 19802018. 

 
 
               Figure 20.  Relationship between country percentage of years with automatic pricebased 
                 formula indexation mechanisms and net financial worth from social security funds (as 
                                         percentage of social security spending).                                                                           




                                                                                                                                                                                                         
        Notes:  The percentage of years with automatic pricebased formula indexation mechanism indicates the percentage of years where, according to available social security spending 
        data,  the  country has had  an  automatic pricebased formula  indexation  mechanism. The  figure  only  includes  country  observations  for  which  we  also  have  the  correlation between 
        the  cyclical  components of  real  GDP  and  real  social  security  spending.   Results do not  change  if  all  countries  are  considered.   , *,  **  and  ***  indicate  statistical  significance  at the 
        15%, 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively. 
        Sources:  Authors' calculations based on International Social Security Association, OECD, Social Security Programs Throughout the World data by U.S. Social Security Administration, 
        and World Bank Pensions Data for individual social security payment adjustment mechanisms.  See Appendices 2 and 5 for details.  19 countries for period 19802018. 

 
     Figure 21.  Country correlations between the cyclical components of real social security spending and 
     real social security revenues when there is an automatic pricebased formula indexation mechanism 
                  (Panel A), and when countries rely on adhoc/discretionary criteria (Panel B) 
                                                                                                     

          Panel A.  Country correlations between the cyclical components of real social security spending  
           and real social security revenues when there is an automatic pricebased formula indexation 
                                                   mechanism 




                                                                                                   
                                                          
          Panel B.  Country correlations between the cyclical components of real social security spending  
              and real social security revenues when countries rely on adhoc/discretionary criteria 




                                                                                                                                                                               
    Notes:  Black (yellow) bars denote industrial (developing) countries.  The cyclical components have been estimated using the HodrickPrescott filter.  A positive (negative) correlation indicates 
    procyclical (countercyclical) social security spending.  , *, ** and *** indicate statistical significance at the 15%, 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively. 
    Sources:  Authors' calculations based on European System of integrated Social Protection Statistics (EuroStat), OECD, World Economic Outlook (IMF), and national sources.  See Appendix 5 for 
    details.  28 and 16 countries in Panels A and B, respectively, for period 19802018.  

 
      Table 1.  Crosscountry regressions. Dependent variable is the correlation between the cyclical components of real 
                                              primary spending and real GDP 
                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                  

                                                                                          Panel A.  Without using instruments 




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                    Panel B.  Using instruments 




    Notes:  See Appendices 1, 3, and 5 for definition and source of variables.  Unemployment insurance and automatic indexation de jure laws and de facto characteristics/attributes may also be implicitly linked to some of 
    the  institutional  factors  behind  the  proposed  institutional  quality  variable.    In  fact,  the  correlation  between  institutional  quality  and  effective  unemployment  insurance  mechanism  coverage  is  0.74  (and  statistically 
    significant).  In the same vein, the correlation between institutional quality and percentage of years with automatic pricebased formula indexation mechanism is 0.59 (and statistically significant).  For this reason, strictly 
    speaking,  we  use  as  the  institutional  quality  variable  the  residuals  of  crosssection  regressions  between  institutional  quality  and  effective  unemployment  insurance  mechanism  coverage,  or  percentage  of  years  with 
    automatic  pricebased  formula  indexation  mechanisms,  or  both,  depending  on  the  particular  specification.   Robust  tstatistics  are  in  square  brackets.   The  weakidentification  test  is  the  firststage  F  test  of  excluded 
    instruments;  the null hypothesis  is  that the  model  is  weakly  identified  (i.e.,  the excluded  instruments  have  a  nonzero  correlation  with the  endogenous  regressors).   The  overidentification  test  is Hansen's  J  statistic; the 
    null  hypothesis  is  that  the  instruments  are  exogenous  (i.e.,  uncorrelated  with  the  error  term).   Constant  term  not  reported.  ,  ,  *,  **  and  ***  indicate  statistical  significance  at  the  20%,  15%,  10%,  5%  and  1%  levels, 
    respectively.  
 
          Table 2.  Crosscountry regressions. Dependent variables are effective unemployment insurance 
                        mechanism coverage, percentage of years with automatic pricebased  
                    formula indexation mechanism, financial integration, and checks and balances 




    Notes:  See Appendices 1, 3, and 5 for definitions and sources of variables.  Robust tstatistics are in square brackets.  Constant term not reported.   , , *, ** and *** indicate statistical significance 
    at the 20%, 15%, 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.  

                                                    
                               Table 3.  Crosscountry regressions. Dependent variable is macroeconomic  
                                volatility measured by the standard deviation of annual real GDP growth 
                                                                                                        
                                                                                                        

                                                                    Panel A.  Without using instruments 




    Notes:  See Appendices 1, 3, and 5 for definition and source of variables.  Robust tstatistics are in square brackets. Constant term not reported.  , , *, ** and *** indicate statistical significance 
    at the 20%, 15%, 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

                           Table 3 (cont.).  Crosscountry regressions. Dependent variable is macroeconomic  
                               volatility measured by the standard deviation of annual real GDP growth 
                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                   

                                                                                    Panel B.  Using instruments 




    Notes:  See Appendices 1, 3, and 5 for definition and source of variables.  Robust tstatistics are in square brackets. The weakidentification test is the firststage F test of excluded instruments; 
    the  null  hypothesis  is  that  the  model  is  weakly  identified  (i.e.,  the  excluded  instruments  have  a  nonzero  correlation  with  the  endogenous  regressors).   The  overidentification  test  is  Hansen's  J 
    statistic; the null hypothesis is that the instruments are exogenous (i.e., uncorrelated with the error term).  Constant term not reported.  , , *, ** and *** indicate statistical significance at the 
    20%, 15%, 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
                           Table 3 (cont.).  Crosscountry regressions. Dependent variable is macroeconomic  
                               volatility measured by the standard deviation of annual real GDP growth 
                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                   

                                                                             Panel B (cont.).  Using instruments 




    Notes:  See Appendices 1, 3, and 5 for definition and source of variables. Robust tstatistics are in square brackets.  The weakidentification test is the firststage F test of excluded instruments; 
    the  null  hypothesis  is  that  the  model  is  weakly  identified  (i.e.,  the  excluded  instruments  have  a  nonzero  correlation  with  the  endogenous  regressors).   The  overidentification  test  is  Hansen's  J 
    statistic; the null hypothesis is that the instruments are exogenous (i.e., uncorrelated with the error term).  Constant term not reported.  , , *, ** and *** indicate statistical significance at the 
    20%, 15%, 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.  

                                                        
 

         Table 4.  Crosscountry regressions.  Dependent variables are primary 
          spending/GDP, discretionary spending/(discretionary spending plus 
      automatic spending), unemployment insurance dummy in recent times, and 
         automatic pricebased formula indexation mechanism in recent times 
                                            




    Notes:  See Appendices 1, 3, and 5 for definition and source of variables.  Robust tstatistics are in square brackets.  Constant term not reported. , 
    , *, ** and *** indicate statistical significance at the 20%, 15%, 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
