                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                     VOICE AT WORK

                                        Jarkko Harju
                                        Simon Jäger
                                      Benjamin Schoefer

                                     Working Paper 28522
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28522


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2021




We thank Nikhil Basavappa, Raymond Han, Ida Kankaanranta, Nelson Mesker, Shakked Noy,
Patrick Schwarz, and Dalton Zhang for excellent research assistance. We thank seminar and
conference participants at the Bank of Italy/CEPR/EIEF Conference on Ownership, Governance,
Management and Firm Performance, Bank of Italy-CEPR Labour Workshop, CESifo, Labor and
Finance Group Conference, LSE/IFS Public Seminar, MIT IWER, NBER Public Economics
Program Meeting, NBER Labor Studies Program Meeting, OECD, Princeton University,
Stanford University, UC Berkeley, UC San Diego, the University of Toronto, VATT, and
the Washington Center for Equitable Growth grantee conference. We thank Petri
Böckerman, Arin Dube, Viktar Fedaseyeu, Egle Karmaziene, Tomi Kyyrä, and Roope Uusitalo
for valuable feedback. We also thank five anonymous worker representatives for in-depth
interviews about their role as a worker representative. We thank Harri Hietala and Maria
Jauhiainen for valuable discussions about the institutional details. Finally, we thank Merja
Jutila Roon and Maria Jauhiainen for help in designing and conducting the survey of worker
representatives.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Jarkko Harju, Simon Jäger, and Benjamin Schoefer. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Voice at Work
Jarkko Harju, Simon Jäger, and Benjamin Schoefer
NBER Working Paper No. 28522
March 2021
JEL No. G3,J3,J5,J63,L22

                                          ABSTRACT

We estimate the effects of worker voice on job quality and separations. We leverage the 1991
introduction of worker representation on boards of Finnish firms with at least 150 employees. In
contrast to exit-voice theory, our difference-in-differences design reveals no effects on voluntary
job separations, and at most small positive effects on other measures of job quality (job security,
health, subjective job quality, and wages). Worker voice slightly raised firm survival,
productivity, and capital intensity. A 2008 introduction of shop-floor representation had similarly
limited effects. Interviews and surveys indicate that worker representation facilitates information
sharing rather than boosting labor's power.

Jarkko Harju                                     Benjamin Schoefer
VATT Institute for Economic Research             Department of Economics
Arkadiankatu 7                                   University of California at Berkeley
P.O.Box 1279                                     530 Evans Hall #3880
00101, Helsinki                                  Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
Finland                                          schoefer@berkeley.edu
jarkko.harju@vatt.fi

Simon Jäger
Department of Economics, E52-454
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and IZA
and also NBER
sjaeger@mit.edu
1    Introduction
Workers can influence the decision-making of their employer either through exit--by quitting,
or via the external labor market more generally--or through voice--giving feedback and even
participating directly in the firm's decision-making. Worker voice has been hypothesized to
reduce turnover, boost job quality, and increase productivity by improving information flows
(Hirschman, 1970; Freeman, 1980; Freeman and Medoff, 1985) and by fostering cooperation
and coordination between the workforce and management (Malcomson, 1983; Freeman and
Lazear, 1995). In many countries, the law grants workers rights, or establishes mandates, for
formal voice institutions in firms. For instance, in many European countries, workers are given
the right to elect representatives to corporate boards, or establish works councils. In contrast,
countries without such mandates often feature an adversarial industrial relations system. In
the United States, for example, unions are legally the only formal worker voice institution, and
are narrowly focused on collective bargaining and largely barred from corporate decision-
making (see, e.g., DiNardo and Lee, 2004; Lee and Mas, 2012; Farber et al., 2018, for effects of
US unions). Nonetheless, US workers express substantial demand for more voice (Bryson and
Freeman, 2013; Kochan et al., 2019).
    We estimate the causal effect of the 1991 introduction of formal worker voice through
board representation in Finland. Finland was a late arrival to this form of worker voice
among peer countries, providing a unique quasi-experiment that we can study using modern
administrative worker and firm data. This right was introduced in firms with 150 or
more workers; no such right exists in smaller firms. By law, workers have a right to elect
representatives from the workforce that take 20% of the seats on the board of directors, the
board of supervisors, or the management body--with the specific body selected by the firm,
and worker-elected members having the same rights as shareholder-appointed ones (except for
wage negotiations, labor disputes, and the appointment or dismissal of senior management).
Alternative forms of worker representation can be negotiated between the firm and workforce
if both parties agree. Overall, the Finnish form of board-level representation is closer to an
information-sharing institution than in other settings: oftentimes, agreements between firms
and workers lead to the election of board representatives without formal voting rights, or
the establishment of advisory councils instead of direct board membership for workers. This
feature likely minimizes potential negative side effects from agency problems and hold-up
resulting from a boost to workers' formal authority and bargaining power (an influential
    For example, Norway and Sweden introduced board-level codetermination in 1975 and 1980, respectively,
well before the advent of administrative data collection for research purposes. Svejnar (1981) studies the
introduction of parity codetermination in 1951 in the iron, steel and mining sector using industry-level data
in Germany. Analyzing a natural experiment, Jäger, Schoefer, and Heining (forthcoming) study the abolition
of board-level representation in certain newly established firms in Germany in 1994, rather than a change in
mandates among incumbent firms, with a focus on wage effects and without observing full panel data for firms
around the reform.

                                                     1
hypothesis going back to Jensen and Meckling, 1979).
    We analyze the introduction in a difference-in-differences research design. We compare
the outcomes of firms with pre-reform employment above or below the policy cutoff of 150
workers, before and after the reform. Pre-reform outcomes evolve in parallel, supporting our
identification assumption, which we additionally support with a variety of robustness checks
such as varying the bandwidth of employment around the policy cutoff.
    We start by studying voluntary separations, putting Hirschman's (1970) exit-voice theory
to the test in the labor market: through voice, workers can affect job quality by means other
than quitting, meaning that access to voice should theoretically reduce separations. Voluntary
job separations are also a revealed-preference measure of the overall attractiveness of an
employer (see, e.g., Krueger and Summers, 1988, for a canonical study of separations as a
measure of industry rents). We find small, if any, reductions in annual job-to-job transitions of
about 0.7 percentage points in our preferred specification. Hence, from the vantage point of
voluntary turnover, there is not strong evidence that the worker voice institution substantially
increases job quality, although our estimates leave room for small gains. Similarly, we find
no clear effects on a revealed-preference ranking of firm quality (Sorkin, 2018). As proxies
for non-wage amenities hypothesized to be prioritized by worker representatives (see, e.g.,
Freeman and Medoff, 1985), we also study worker health and workplace safety as outcomes,
drawing on administrative data on sickness spells. We find precisely estimated effects around
zero, and we can reject that sickness incidence falls by more than 10%.
    As a complementary measure of overall job quality from the perspective of workers, we
study survey-based subjective job quality in a unique Finnish Quality of Work Life Survey,
which we merge onto our data set. We find positive point estimates corresponding to an
increase of about 0.15 (SE 0.09) to 0.18 (SE 0.08) control-group standard deviations, consistent
with a moderate increase in perceived job quality.
    Turning to a proxy for involuntary turnover, we find a small reduction in the annual
separation rate of workers moving into nonemployment of about two percentage points, or
14%, in our preferred specification. Hence, worker representatives may have a small positive
impact on entrenchment of workers (Pagano and Volpin, 2005) or on job security as predicted
by implicit contract models (Malcomson, 1983; Kim, Maug, and Schneider, 2018). The pattern
we document is also consistent with testimony from worker representatives that preventing
redundancies and layoffs is among their key objectives.
    We then turn to wages, a key determinant of job quality from the perspective of workers
besides non-wage amenities. On the one hand, compensating differentials could lower wages
and thereby offset any potential increase in non-wage amenities due to the reform (worker
voice itself or the amenities it brings), as would be expected in a competitive labor market.
On the other hand, workers may use their voice to push for higher wages, especially if the


                                               2
institution raised their bargaining power. In the data, we find an increase of around two to
three percent in raw firm-level mean log wages. The effect size drops by a third and is only
marginally significant once we control for worker composition by studying firm wage fixed
effects as outcomes (following Abowd, Kramarz, and Margolis, 1999). The point estimate
in our preferred specification is 1.6 percent and confidence intervals permit us to rule out
shifts in firms' wage policies above 3.2 percent (consistent with Jäger, Schoefer, and Heining,
forthcoming, in Germany). We find some evidence consistent with pay compression, with
small wage gains concentrated among lower earners within the firm. We detect only small
increases in rent sharing and can reject increases in the labor share above 0.5 percentage points
(with negative point estimates).
    While we therefore find limited effects of worker voice on job quality from the workers'
perspective, and limited increases in worker rents, an important strand of the literature predicts
positive effects on the employer side of job quality, firm performance. Worker voice may
improve information flows (Freeman and Medoff, 1985), or foster cooperation and coordination
between the workforce and management (Freeman and Lazear, 1995). A parallel literature
cautions that worker voice, to the extent that it has bite, may instead have negative effects,
e.g., by exacerbating agency conflicts or discouraging capital formation (Jensen and Meckling,
1979; Grout, 1984). Using our administrative data on firms' financials, we find moderately
positive but statistically insignificant effects on firm survival, total factor productivity, and
the capital-labor ratio. Log value added per worker increases by 0.067 (SE 0.031) in our
preferred specification (although the effects are smaller and not statistically significant in other
specifications). We find precisely estimated zero effects on the profit margin. The overall
absence of negative effects on firm performance may reflect the fact that Finnish firms can
negotiate the specific form of codetermination with the workers. The absence of large positive
effects is also broadly consistent with the argument that if worker voice did substantially raise
productivity, firms would emulate the mandated forms even absent mandates (see, e.g., Jensen
and Meckling, 1979; Romano, 1993; Enriques, Hansmann, and Kraakman, 2017).
    A potential explanation of the limited effects we document is that the board-level rep-
resentation induced by the reform may duplicate functions already fulfilled by another
codetermination institution: as in many other countries with formal worker voice institu-
tions, the Finnish system additionally features a lower level of codetermination at the shop
floor. Shop-floor representatives hold information, procedural, and consultation rights, and
resemble works councils in, e.g., the Austrian or German contexts (though Finnish shop-floor
representatives lack veto powers). To assess whether shop-floor representation may by itself
affect our outcomes (and leave little room for board-level codetermination), we leverage a
second reform in 2008 that lowered the size threshold for mandatory shop-floor representation.
Our analysis sample is among firms too small to have board-level representation rights (10-39


                                                 3
employees) and we compare firms with employment in the size category affected by the law to
ones slightly smaller or larger. We find very similar--i.e., limited--effects of the introduction
of shop-floor representation on worker and firm outcomes. Hence, our main finding extends
to shop-floor representation, and the limited effects of board-level representation are unlikely
to reflect the presence of shop-floor representatives.
    We close our paper with qualitative evidence from participants in the institution, drawing
on existing surveys as well as our own survey and interviews of Finnish shop-floor and
board-level representatives. According to representatives, their main objectives are securing
good working conditions and employment stability, and preventing redundancies, layoffs,
and outsourcing. However, most representatives do not believe their role comes with direct
power in corporate decision making; instead, they view their role as being about improving
communication and information sharing, and fostering cooperation. In terms of actual
influence, a large minority of worker representatives believe they can improve cooperation,
welfare, and working conditions, but virtually no representatives believe they can affect
wages, investment, outsourcing, or other strategic decisions. Turning to firms' perspectives
on worker involvement, we find that Finnish firms have a high baseline level of informal or
direct involvement of workers even without being subject to the board-level (or shop-floor)
representation rights, which may explain the limited effects we estimate.

Related Literature Our paper relates to several strands of literature in labor economics,
corporate governance, and industrial relations, which have studied the impacts of worker voice
and shared governance on firm and worker outcomes (see Conchon, 2011, for an overview
of studies of board representation in Europe, Addison, 2009 for studies of codetermination
in Germany, and Keskinen, 2017, for an analysis of shop-floor representation in Finland). In
nearly all countries, codetermination rules are dependent on firm size (employment), and most
codetermination laws were introduced decades ago, before the advent of high-quality firm
and worker data. As a result, the literature has largely relied on propensity score matching,
regression discontinuity designs using contemporaneous employment as a running variable,
or studying firms moving across employment thresholds. By contrast, our identification
strategy is a reform-based difference-in-differences design, relying on pre-reform employment
as an instrument for codetermination status. Our strategy resolves the identification challenges
faced by prior studies: for example, that employment may be endogenous (see, e.g., Garicano,
Lelarge, and Van Reenen, 2016, on distortions from size-based regulations), and that treatment
status is anticipated, transitory, or has lagged or leading effects.
    The paper closest to ours is a second reform-based difference-in-differences analysis of
the effects of codetermination across firms, studying a 1994 repeal of shared governance in
shareholder corporations in Germany (Jäger, Schoefer, and Heining, forthcoming). Like our
paper, that paper exploits a reform to overcome the aforementioned identification challenges.

                                               4
Compared to Jäger, Schoefer, and Heining (forthcoming), our paper breaks new ground with
respect to its substantive focus, nature of the variation, institutional context, and methodology.
Substantively, our focus is on testing the exit-voice hypothesis (Hirschman, 1970; Freeman,
1980), implementing a comprehensive analysis of direct and indirect measures of job quality
and margins of separations, as well as specific amenities such as job security and worker health.
By contrast, Jäger, Schoefer, and Heining (forthcoming) ask whether shared governance affects
wage setting and interpret results through a bargaining and hold-up framework. In terms of
the variation, we study a reform more germane to the policy discussions in many countries
today: an introduction of codetermination rights (in 1991 and 2008) imposed broadly on
incumbent firms of any legal form larger than 150, making up half of the Finnish labor market;
Jäger, Schoefer, and Heining (forthcoming) study a repeal of shared (board-level) governance in
new cohorts of certain firm types, specifically in new stock corporations in Germany. In terms of
institutional differences, Finnish boards are predominantly unitary (Lekvall et al., 2014; Ringe,
2016), closer to, e.g., the US system, whereas German boards are dual, with codetermination
on the supervisory board mandated by law where applicable (rather than formulated as a
right as in Finland). Methodologically, the administrative firm data yield substantially higher
precision for the effects on firm performance outcomes, and permit us to study the early years
of the reform for all outcomes (whereas Jäger, Schoefer, and Heining, forthcoming, can do so
mainly for wage outcomes, with other outcomes measured years after the repeal). Besides our
comprehensive measure of job quality, we also analyze some overlapping outcomes, namely
wages and firm performance, for which we find similarly limited or small positive effects.
    Our results are also broadly consistent with a large and important body of research that uses
cross-sectional or panel variation of firms located on different sides of or moving across the
codetermination size thresholds--most prominently, regression-discontinuity (RD) regression
estimates. (We implement such an RD design in the Finnish context as a complement to our
main difference-in-differences design). In the German context, several papers have studied the
wage effects of quasi-parity codetermination, comparing firms with fewer or more than 2000
employees, and have found small negative (Kim, Maug, and Schneider, 2018), zero (Gorton
and Schmid, 2004), or small positive effects (Redeker, 2019). Similarly, studying the Norwegian
context (with board structures being more similar to the Finnish context), Blandhol et al.
(2020) find no wage effects of board-level representation in Norway and no effects on rent
sharing (pass-through of shocks into wages), e.g., by comparing firms above and below the
    While the German law specifies which of the two boards (supervisory rather than executive) must be
codetermined and imposes a mandate rather than a right to have worker representatives making up 33% (up
to quasi-parity, i.e. 50% of seats with shareholders retaining the tie-breaking vote), Finnish law leaves the
implementation of codetermination to negotiation, imposing only a default statutory right. In practice, Finnish
board-level representation is largely implemented in the form of information sharing platforms rather than
conveying formal authority, compared to the full voting rights at the highest (supervisory board) level in
Germany.



                                                      5
size threshold of 30 employees as well as workers switching across firms with and without
worker representation. By contrast, Strøm (2007) finds some evidence for moderate wage
increases in a comparison of Norwegian firms with and without employee directors, along
with negative effects on firm performance (see also Bøhren and Strøm, 2010).
    By studying separations, a core focus of our paper is on revealed-preference measures of job
quality. While a long-standing theoretical body of work has posited that worker representation
ought to decrease separations (Hirschman, 1970; Malcomson, 1983), the empirical evidence
is more ambiguous. In the context of US unions, Freeman (1980) documents a negative
relationship between collective bargaining and turnover (see also Hammer and Avgar, 2005,
for an overview). For parity representation, Kim, Maug, and Schneider (2018) find that
skilled workers in German firms with quasi-parity codetermination (as opposed to one-third
representation) are more insulated from layoffs, consistent with our results suggesting a
small reduction in nonemployment separations. The evidence on the relationship between
separations and the presence of a works council is more mixed (see, e.g., Kraft, 1986; Addison,
Schnabel, and Wagner, 2001; Pfeifer, 2011; Hirsch, Schank, and Schnabel, 2010). We add to
this long-standing debate by presenting a reform-based difference-in-differences design and
by bringing a larger set of separation effects into focus, importantly job-to-job transitions as a
measure of job quality and voluntary worker exit, along with additional direct measures of
job quality from the perspective of workers.

Outline In Section 2, we describe the reform and the Finnish codetermination and wage
setting institutions. Section 3 presents the research design and the data. We present the results
on separations and job quality in Section 4. Section 5 contains our results on wages and the
wage structure. Next, Section 6 analyses the effects on firm performance. Section 7 reports the
results of our analysis of the 2008 reform of shop-floor representation. Section 8 wraps up
by reflecting on potential explanations of the results we estimate, and discussing qualitative
evidence from our survey of worker representatives.


2    Institutional Context and Reform
We provide an overview of corporate governance in Finland and describe the 1991 reform
introducing a worker right to shared governance. We then describe additional institutions of
worker voice and wage setting in Finland.
   See also Adhvaryu, Molina, and Nyshadham (2019), who study a field experiment giving workers in a
garment factory the opportunity to give feedback, and find a reduction in turnover.




                                                 6
2.1      Corporate Governance in Finland
Finnish companies follow the Nordic board model and overwhelmingly feature a single-tier
board structure, with a board of directors elected by the general meeting of the shareholders
(see, Lekvall et al., 2014, Appendix B, for a detailed overview of corporate governance in
Finland). Figure 1 Panel (a) illustrates this board structure, without shared governance. The
board of directors determines corporate strategy and appoints, dismisses, oversees, and sets
the compensation for the managing director, who runs the firm on a day-to-day basis. The
Finnish Corporate Governance Code advises that the majority of directors be independent.
In practice, most boards are exclusively comprised of non-executive directors; in 2013, only
15% of listed firms had their managing director on the board of directors (Lekvall et al., 2014).
Executives must follow and implement instructions from the board of directors (Ringe, 2016).
The general meeting of the shareholders sets the compensation for directors.


2.2      The 1991 Introduction of Worker Representation in Large Firms
1991 Reform Until the 1991 reform, the law did not grant workers formal voice channels in
firm-level decision-making at the board level, although workers in most firms had shop-floor
representatives with some information and consultation rights. A 1991 reform introduced
board-level representation in firms with at least 150 employees. The law (725/1990) was
passed in 1990 by a coalition government between the center-right party (KOK) and the Social
Democratic Party and two smaller parties. The law was the result of a political compromise,
with employer associations opposing it, while Social Democrats called for a lower threshold
of 30 employees (Marttila, 2016, p. 224). The law allowed for shared governance by mutual
agreement starting on January 1, 1991, and then installed the statutory right to participation
in board-level governance starting with the first general meeting held after July 1, 1992. The
law has been in place without major changes since it was first passed.
    As a consequence of the 1991 reform, workers in firms with at least 150 employees have a
right to participate in the governance of their firms and to be involved in business and financial
decisions through board-level representation. The typical form of representation is through
an agreement between the firm and worker representatives of at least two employee groups
(manual, non-manual, and managerial workers) representing a majority of employees. If no
agreement is reached but at least two of the employee groups still demand representation,
workers have a statutory right to appoint representatives to the board of directors (or the
supervisory board, in the less common dual board structure) or the management group,
with the firm choosing between these two options. We illustrate representation on the board
of directors as well as in the management group in Figure 1 Panel (b). Statutorily, workers
      Firms can, but rarely do, choose a two-tier structure with a supervisory board, as in, e.g., Germany.



                                                         7
make up 20% of the respective body (although, by agreement rather than default, firms could
expand this share voluntarily). By law, worker representatives must be employees of the firm
(rather than being outside union representatives), and have the same rights and duties as other
non-worker representatives. Exceptions are the selection and dismissal of, and compensation
setting for management, workforce wage setting, and other employment-related matters such
as strikes.

De Facto Implementation Following 1991 Reform The law explicitly permits a large degree
of flexibility in organizing the form and scope of representation, besides the statutory default
of 20% representation on boards, unlike in other countries such as Germany.
     Overall, our review of four surveys paints a picture of worker representation primarily
operating through agreements, with worker representatives not having the same rights as
the other members of the respective board, with the institutional implementation pointing
towards a boost in advisory, consultation, and information rights rather than formal authority,
e.g., voting power. Our evidence is consistent with findings that formal worker board
representation with the same rights as shareholders is rare, e.g., among listed firms (Lekvall
et al., 2014; Thomsen, Rose, and Kronborg, 2016), although observers note that this decline
might have occurred during the late 2000s.
     To characterize the actually prevailing types of worker voice, we draw on three existing
surveys and one we designed, all four of which cover worker representatives, such as shop-floor
representatives or board-level representatives (see Table 1 for a summary). The earliest one is
a 2001 survey among 203 shop-floor representatives conducted by the Finnish Metalworkers'
Union (Sairo, 2001). In firms meeting the 150 employee threshold, 60% had formalized
worker representation following the 1991 law. In 60% of these cases, workers had some
representation on the management board, while 26% included representation on the board of
directors. 51% noted that the worker representative had the same rights as other members
of the relevant body. We find qualitatively similar results analyzing 2017 and 2019 surveys
among representatives conducted by the trade union federation for industrial employees
TP (Teollisuuden Palkansaajat, 2017, 2019). In these surveys, 51% (2017) and 47% (2019) of
representatives in firms with at least 150 employees reported having formal forms of shared
governance following the 1991 law. Among those, 26% and 25%, respectively, followed the
statutory provisions rather than organizing representation by agreement, with 32% and
37% having worker representatives on the management team, 23% and 24% on the board
of directors, and 17% and 8% on the supervisory board. Other forms of representation
included advisory boards and regular meetings between top-level management and worker
representatives. We also conducted our own survey in collaboration with the same federation
in the fall of 2020, surveying 111 worker representatives. We find that 63% of respondents in
firms with at least 150 employees had worker representation following the 1991 law, roughly

                                               8
equally split between the board of directors (32%), management board (28%), and elsewhere
(31%, including the supervisory board). In a majority of cases (54%), the basis is by agreement,
with 31% following the statutory provisions.
    Our results are based on surveying worker representatives, and may therefore skew
towards firms with worker representation. Additionally, we have run a December 2020 phone
survey of firm representatives, human resources managers, by calling a random sample of
firms drawn from the Finnish Bureau van Dk register, and overall confirmed the above
patterns. We are not aware of any additional empirical quantification of the scope and forms
of de facto Finnish codetermination following the 1991 law.


2.3   Other Worker Voice and Shared Governance Institutions
Several additional channels for worker voice exist in Finnish workplaces (Eurofound, 2020).
First, oftentimes sectoral collective bargaining agreements provide for the election of shop-
floor representatives at the establishment or company level. Besides company-level collective
bargaining, shop-floor representatives have a variety of information and procedural rights, for
example regarding the financial state of the firm or reorganization of tasks or personnel. These
rights entail the power to delay implementation, but employers retain ultimate decision-making
power. In companies with at least 20 employees where no collective bargaining agreement
provides for the election of a shop-floor representative, the Act on Co-operation Within
Undertakings mandates the election of a "cooperation representative" with the same rights
as a shop-floor representative (except for the ability to engage in collective bargaining). A
2008 amendment to the Act lowered the size threshold from 30 employees to 20; we leverage
this reform in Section 7. Shop-floor representatives often sit on works councils that are
established to facilitate cooperation and negotiation between management representatives
and the different employee groups. Additionally, establishments with at least 10 employees
must elect a health and safety representative or committee.
    Coverage of these formal institutions is high, especially in companies large enough to
be covered by the 1991 reform. According to the 2009 European Company Survey (authors'
own tabulations), 99% of Finnish establishments above 150 employees have a shop-floor
representative and 100% have a health and safety representative or committee.
    In addition to these formal channels for worker voice, in Section 8 we discuss informal
channels through which workers can express their voice, and suggest that the existence of
these channels helps rationalize our findings.




                                               9
2.4   Wage Setting in Finland
While collective bargaining coverage is high in Finland, it leaves substantial room for firm-
specific wage setting. Unions and employer associations negotiate collective agreements that
mandate wage floors at the occupation and job level. The wage floors are rarely directly
binding as most employees receive pay premia above the floors (Uusitalo and Vartiainen,
2009). Firms can deviate from wage increases negotiated in a collective agreement, and can
even negotiate pay cuts with consent of the local bargaining parties. At the individual level,
Dickens et al. (2007) report relatively low downward nominal but high real wage rigidity
in Finland in an international comparison. Firm-specific pay policies, with profit-sharing
arrangements and links between wages and productivity, have become increasingly common
since the 1990s (Uusitalo and Vartiainen, 2009). More than half of white-collar and about
a third of blue-collar workers received some form of performance pay in 2000 (Snellman,
Uusitalo, and Vartiainen, 2003). Consistent with such firm-specific wage flexibility, in Section
5, we directly estimate the elasticity of wages to value added per worker (rent sharing) at the
firm level, estimating 0.06 to 0.08 in our sample (somewhat lower than the average elasticity of
0.10, as surveyed in Card et al., 2018; Jäger et al., 2020). In addition, depicted in Appendix
Figure A.2, we find that firms differentiate wage policies substantially, with firm fixed effects
(following Abowd, Kramarz, and Margolis, 1999, with our construction presented in Section
5) accounting for about half of the overall worker-level variation in wages in most years (a
slightly lower, by about a quarter, share compared to Germany during the same sampling
period, see Card, Heining, and Kline, 2013).


2.5   The 1990s Recession
Between 1990 and 1993, Finland experienced a deep recession, and the Finnish currency
underwent a devaluation. In the prior decades, Finland had become increasingly dependent on
bilateral trade with the Soviet Union. The dissolution of the Soviet Union led to a reduction in
Finnish exports among the industries most exposed to Soviet trade (Gorodnichenko, Mendoza,
and Tesar, 2012), and raised energy prices. Finland also experienced a credit crunch in 1992
(Gulan, Haavio, and Kilponen, 2014). Finland's recovery in the mid-1990s was accompanied
by a sectoral reallocation of employment, with manufacturing employment mostly recovering,
retail and construction remaining depressed, and an expansion of the service sector (Koskela
and Uusitalo, 2003).
    Our empirical design, described in Section 3, compares firms with slightly different sizes,
so that aggregate shocks are netted out with year fixed effects; we will also vary bandwidths
(firm size cutoffs) to probe for potentially heterogeneous effect by firm size, and we will
include industry-year fixed effects to account for the sectoral dynamics of the recession. We


                                               10
discuss these robustness checks below.


3          Research Design and Data
Difference-in-Differences Design We study the consequences of the 1991 introduction of
board-level worker voice rights in firms with at least 150 employees using a difference-in-
differences (DiD) design. We group firms into a treatment and control group based on whether
their employment in 1988 (the earliest pre-reform year for which data is available) is above or
below the 150 employee threshold. Our most basic specification plots outcomes of these two
groups over time from 1988 through the 1991 introduction of the right to shared governance
and beyond.
    Formally, we estimate the following model for outcome y it of firm i (equally weighted) in
year t :

                 1997                                                    1997
    y it    +            Treated
                         k
                                   · 1[Empi ,1988  150] × 1[ t   k] +             k · 1[t   k ] + X it  +   it .   (1)
                k 1988                                                  k 1988


The coefficients of interests are  Treated
                                   k
                                           for k  1991, which capture the effect of the right to
shared governance in the post-reform period compared to the pre-reform year, 1990, for which
we normalize the coefficient to zero ( 1990 Treated
                                                    0). The model includes year effects,  k , so
that common trends or year-specific shocks will not bias results. As a summary measure, we
also report treatment effect averages (rather than year-specific coefficients) in the post-reform
period where the regressor of interest is 1[Emp1988  150] × 1[ t  1991] estimated with respect
to base-year 1990, and an analogous pre-reform effect covering both 1988 and 1989. By contrast,
pre-period effects capture potential pre-trends. We report standard errors clustered at the
firm level.

Potential Confounders and Control Variables A potential source of bias is that firms in
different size categories were on different trajectories in the early 1990s even in the absence
of the reform. For example, Finland experienced a deep recession from 1990 to 1993, which
could have had a differential effect on firms in different size categories. We implement several
strategies to control for such confounders. First, as described below, our baseline specification
draws on a sample that is quite local around 150 employees, rather than comparing very large
to very small firms. In addition, we report more local specifications using even narrower
bandwidths around the 150 employee threshold. Second, we control for the primary amplifier
    Relatedly, we have also experimented with placebo effects around counterfactual size cutoffs, which would
pick up differential trends by firm size during the post-reform period unrelated to the reform (Ganong and Jäger,
2018). Consistent with systematic size-and-time-dependent shocks not driving our results, and consistent with


                                                        11
of the Finnish recession identified in Gorodnichenko, Mendoza, and Tesar (2012) by including
flexible and industry-year effects (NACE Level 1, i.e., letters), as the recession was inherited
from Russia and mediated by industry-specific trade exposure. Third, in our most granular--
and overall preferred--specification, we add firm fixed effects to gauge concerns of potentially
differential attrition over time.

Data We use several administrative data sources on firm and workers from Statistics Finland.
We CPI-adjust all nominal variables (measured in Finnish markka until 2001 and EUR
thereafter) to 2010 EUR (which is inconsequential for our estimated treatment effects due to
the inclusion of year effects). We winsorize all continuous outcome variables at the 1% level.
    First, our matched employer-employee data draws on the FOLK Employment Relationship
Data containing individual-level information, which we match to the firm-level data. It reports
the length, in days, of the employee-employer relationship by calendar year. We merge the
dataset to the FOLK Basic panel, which, for all Finnish individuals, reports demographics
(gender, age, education) and annual total earned and capital income by year from 1988 to 2017.
    Second, for firm financials, we draw on the Financial Statement Data Panel, which contains
firm-level accounting data from Statistics Finland from 1988 to 2017. Its sources are Statistics
Finland's survey from 1988 to 1993, including all large enterprises (larger than 100 employees
in manufacturing and trade, and larger than 50 employees in construction and road transport)
and a sample of smaller firms based on stratified sampling by industry and employment.
Starting in 1994, the data captures the universe of firms.
    Third, we merge on the Quality of Work Life Survey, an employee-level survey from 1990
through 2013 including information on labor relations and work quality, conducted as part of
the October and November Labour Force Survey, and covering employed persons or wage
earners aged 15 to 64 in face-to-face interviews. In our main analysis, we use the 1990 and
1997 waves, each of which covered around 4,000 workers (for earlier uses, see, e.g., Böckerman
and Ilmakunnas, 2008; Böckerman, Bryson, and Ilmakunnas, 2012).
    Fourth, we will draw on existing surveys of worker representatives from various years
as well as our own survey from 2020, described in Section 2, as well as separate in-depth
interviews, described in Section 8.

Employment Measure The employment concept relevant for the shared governance thresh-
old is the number of employees excluding temporary and seasonal workers. We construct
employment at the end of the year (on 31st of December), and drop workers with fewer than
91 days of contracted work in the year, and with zero earned income.
the bandwidth robustness checks, we find no systematic pattern of placebo estimates across outcome variables.




                                                     12
Summary Statistics In lieu of a separate summary statistics table, we report control means,
generally in the baseline preperiod of 1990 and separately by firm group, for each of our
outcome variables in the regression tables. Appendix Figure A.1 reports on the industry
composition of our sample. In terms of the firm size distribution, the 150 employee cutoff is at
the median with 50.2% of employment in firms above the cutoff in the matched employer-
employee data.

Sample In our main DiD specification, we draw on all firms with 1988 employment in a
100-employee bandwidth around the threshold, i.e., between 50 and 149 employees (control
group) and 150 to 250 (treatment group). In robustness checks, we also use smaller bandwidths
as well as "donut hole" specifications, leaving out firms with 1988-employment very close to
150 to assess the role of measurement error or limited persistence right around the cutoff.
    We do not restrict the sample to firms surviving throughout our observation period.
Instead, we compare results with and without firm effects, which mitigate the impact of
attrition, and study survival effects directly as an outcome.

Intent-To-Treat, Employment Persistence, and First Stage Our DiD design is intent-to-treat
as we assign firms into treatment and control firms based on pre-treatment employment in
1988, rather than on concurrent employment, which is an outcome potentially affected by the
treatment.
     In Figure 2, we gauge the persistence of this assignment. In Panel (a), we show the
evolution of the share of firms above the threshold, separately for the control firms (red line,
hollow circles) and the treatment firms (blue line, solid circles). By construction, the shares
are 0 and 1 in 1988, the base year in which we sort these firms by their employment. The
graph then shows some convergence, such that by 1991, the onset of the reform, 5% and 64%
of firms in the control and treatment groups are above the threshold and hence will be subject
to a worker right to board-level representation. The gap between the two time series in the
post-reform period captures the difference between the rates of treatment.
     We also offer an instrumental variables (IV) interpretation with a formal first stage for
scaling the reduced-form effect sizes we later report. Formally, the treatment is a worker
right to shared governance, i.e., Dit 1[Empit  150] · 1[ t  1991], which is a function of
concurrent employment Empit (precisely, we will use end-of-year employment of the previous
year, consistent with the practice we describe above). Note that this IV interpretation captures
the effect of giving workers the right to shared governance (rather than capturing the effect of
take-up), which can affect outcomes through threat effects even when workers do not exercise
     This analysis draws upon the matched employer-employee data matched with the firm-level accounting data
set. We display a parallel analysis in Appendix Figure A.3 in which we use the matched employer-employee data
only and find similar results.


                                                     13
their statutory right to shared governance (see, e.g., Lewis, 1963; Farber, 2005). Precisely
because of such potential threat effects, we would not want to interpret an IV specification
with take-up of the institution as the endogenous variable. Figure 2 Panel (b) reports the
year-specific coefficients from the difference-in-differences specification with this treatment
indicator Dit as outcome--normalizing the difference to zero in 1990. Here, we find coefficients
of about 0.6 in 1991 and coefficients stabilizing at or just below 0.4 starting in 1993. For the
first stage that averages over the post-reform period through 1997, we find a coefficient of
0.454 (SE 0.028). Hence, an IV interpretation of our average reduced-form effects would
roughly double them (1/0.454  2.20). However, as we will find quantitatively small effects
on most outcomes, even a doubling of effects would not substantively change our qualitative
conclusions. Since the first-stage effect captures not just the persistence of the sorting but may
also capture potential causal effects on employment, we focus on reduced-form effects below.


4     Worker Exit and Job Quality
Motivated by the influential framework distinguishing voice versus exit (Hirschman, 1970;
Freeman, 1980), we estimate the effects of the reform-induced boost to worker voice on worker
exit. We then turn to measures of job quality, namely a revealed-preference ranking of firms,
worker health and workplace safety, and, finally, subjective evaluations of job quality.


4.1   Separations
Through various channels, worker voice is predicted to lower separations. A fundamental
prediction of Hirschman (1970) is that improving stakeholders' voice will reduce their exit,
by giving them a chance to change their institution from within. In our context, rather
than taking amenities (or wages) as given as in, e.g., models of monopsony (e.g., Card et al.,
2018), workers can communicate their preferences and may directly affect workplace design.
Moreover, separations serve as a standard catch-all revealed-preference measure of the relative
attractiveness of an employer (see, e.g., Krueger and Summers, 1988). Finally, reducing
involuntary layoffs is among the outcomes incumbent workers may value and, our surveys
show, representatives prioritize.

Overall Separations We start by studying separations of any kind. To exposit our method-
ology, we report our specifications and robustness checks in detail for this outcome variable.
   Our separations indicator takes our baseline employment definition, of the last day of
the calendar year, and asks which fraction of workers are no longer with the same employer
exactly one year later. This measure captures essentially permanent separations from the
original employer. It comprises direct job-to-job transitions, which are more likely to reflect

                                               14
voluntary worker quits, as well as separations into nonemployment, which are more likely to
reflect involuntary layoffs. The baseline separation rate at the calendar year horizon in our
firm and worker sample is 0.25 for our full worker sample in the treatment group in 1990, the
year preceding the reform. In our plots, a year- t separation rate denotes separations that occur
in calendar year t among workers employed with their original employer on December 31st of
the preceding, year t - 1.
    We report results in Figure 3 Panel (a), the levels, and Panel (b), the year-specific DiD
effects, and in Column (1) of Table 2, the DiD effect pooled over all post-reform years. We find
that pre-trends are flat and that the separation rates in the treatment and control group track
each other closely before--but also after the reform in 1991. In our most basic specification,
the point estimate for the treatment effect in the post-reform period is -0.018 (SE 0.014). Since
some of the post-reform period includes a recession, we additionally include year-specific
industry effects, since industry exposure was a large mediating factor (see, e.g., Gorodnichenko,
Mendoza, and Tesar, 2012, and Section 2.5). The point estimates remain stable at -0.013 (SE
0.014) effects, indicating that the recession is unlikely to affect the estimates. In our most
fine-grained specification with industry-year and firm fixed effects (thereby controlling for
selective attrition), we find a treatment, post-period effect of -0.029 (SE 0.013). The pooled
pre-period estimate (1988 and 1989) relative to 1990 is -0.007 (SE 0.013), so that we cannot
reject the parallel trends assumption underlying the identification assumption of our design
in any of the specifications. Based on our preferred specification, we can rule out reductions
in the separation rate of more than 0.055 and also reject zero at the 5% level. Compared to
baseline separation rates (1990 control means reported in the table and can be read off the raw
time series in Panel (a)), we thus find a reduction in separations of about 12% and can rule out
effects larger than a 22% reduction. Overall, our point estimates are thus consistent with a
small decline in separation rates.
    As with all other outcome variables, we further assess the robustness by reporting on
specifications with more local bandwidths or that exclude a set of observations around the
150-employee threshold. We report these results in Panels (a) and (b) of Appendix Figure
A.9. At smaller bandwidths, potential biases from size-specific shocks may be less relevant;
however, sample size falls, so standard errors increase (and the first stage would fall). We
find very similar estimates when focusing on smaller bandwidths. We similarly find that our
point estimates are robust to the exclusion of observations near the 150-employee threshold in
"donut hole" specifications in Appendix Figure A.9 Panel (b).

Job-to-Job Transitions We now separately study job-to-job transitions, as proxies for vol-
untary separations and hence for the relative attractiveness of the employer. Out of the
   All separations not classified as job-to-job separations are into nonemployment. We track the original spell
(which lasted through December 31st of the preceding year), and look for the end of the last spell with the


                                                      15
baseline any-separation rate of 0.225, job-to-job transitions occur at a rate of 0.097 (38.5%); the
remaining transitions, 0.155 (61.5%), are employment-to-nonemployment transitions.
    In Figure 3 Panels (c) and (d) and in Column (2) of Table 2, we report an effect of -0.012 (SE
0.012) in our basic specification and a similar point estimate when controlling for industry-year
effects. From a baseline rate of 0.097, these effects imply around a 10% reduction in job-to-job
transitions.
    However, once we control for firm effects (i.e., our preferred specification), estimates are
closer to zero, at -0.007 (SE 0.010), implying about a 7% reduction in job-to-job transitions. We
can rule out small positive or negative point effects on job-to-job transitions outside of the 95%
confidence interval spanning -0.027 and 0.013. We also find that effect sizes are robust to other
bandwidths or varying donut holes (see Appendix Figure A.9).
    As a quantitative benchmark of the implied increase in job quality that would correspond to
a 7% decline in job-to-job separations, we draw on estimates of how firms' wage policies affect
job-to-job transitions, as through the lens of a monopsony framework, in which separations
are related to firms' relative wages. Bassier, Dube, and Naidu (forthcoming) estimate the
elasticity of job-to-job separations to firm-level wage premia to be around 4 (based on the
preferred estimates in Table 4 Columns (2) through (9) for EE separations). Inverting this
elasticity implies that a 1.75% increase in a firm's wage premium would correspond to the
7% point estimate for the separations effect. In Section 4.2, we provide another quantitative
interpretation of direct job flows as estimates of how workers rank different employers by
revealed preference.

Separations into Nonemployment We also study separations into nonemployment, in
Figure 3 Panels (e) and (f) and in Column (3) of Table 2. This outcome captures layoff risk or
job stability. Of course, the effects mechanically correspond to the residual between overall
separations and job-to-job transitions. Here, we find negative effects of -0.006 (SE 0.008) in
the specification without controls and an estimate of -0.022 (SE 0.007) when controlling for
industry-year and firm fixed effects. Since we include firm effects, this result is not driven
by selective attrition of firms. The point estimates are robust to varying the bandwidth and
the size of the donut hole (see Appendix Figure A.9 Panels (e) and (f)). Our estimates thus
indicate small reductions in the probability of separations into nonemployment.

Robustness to Alternative Separation Definitions Our results are robust to two alternative
separation rate definitions. First, in Appendix Figure A.5, we adjust for potentially spurious
original employer in the calendar year under consideration. To account for potentially spurious and short gaps
accompanying non-seamless direct job transitions, we permit up to a 30 day buffer of nonemployment; to avoid
coding parallel spells ending at the same time as a job transition, we require that the next job last at least after the
31st day following the separation from the original job.



                                                          16
separations due to, e.g., relabeling of firm IDs for administrative reasons, or due to mergers
and acquisitions. We identify clusters of employees separating from an origin firm and
jointly moving into a destination firm in which they the constitute the majority of employees
(following the ideas in Hethey-Maier and Schmieder, 2013, see figure note for more details). In
this check, we recode such exits as stays rather than separations. Second, to remove potential
high-turnover workers that worker representatives may not represent as insiders, we also
zoom into samples of employees with at least one year of tenure (Appendix Figure A.6), and
of workers aged 20 to 55 (Appendix Figure A.7).

Overall Assessment Overall, the evidence points to small, if any, effects on job-to-job
transitions, a revealed preference measure of job quality. This vantage point provides
no evidence that the worker voice institution significantly increases job quality. We find
evidence for small reductions of about two percentage points on annual separation rates into
nonemployment, suggesting reduced layoffs and increased job security or entrenchment of
workers.


4.2   Revealed-Preference Job Quality Based on Worker Flows
As a complement to our analysis on job-to-job separations, we study a revealed-preference
measure of job quality that uses the quantity and direction of job-to-job transitions. Specifically,
we draw on the extension of the PageRank algorithm to labor market flows by Sorkin (2018),
who defines firm quality recursively such that "good firms hire from other good firms and
have few workers leave." We create an index of firm quality based on Sorkin's methodology
separately in the pre-reform period (1988-1990) and the post-reform period (1992-1997) and
detail our implementation in Appendix D.1. We then report DiD effects on whether the
treatment group firms increased their ranking relative to control group firms, comparing the
post- to the pre-reform period.
    We report results in Column (4) of Table 2 using the firm value (normalized to have zero
mean and unit standard deviation in the pre-period) as the outcome variable. We find effects
ranging between -0.043 (0.105) in our basic specification to -0.065 (SE 0.104) with controls
for industry-year and firm fixed effects. The point estimates are thus close to zero and we
can reject decreases (increases) in firm values of more than 0.27 (0.14) pre-period standard
deviations. Studying alternative transformations of the outcome variable leads to similar
conclusions (see Appendix Table A.5). In sum, we find no evidence for large increases in a
revealed-preference measure of job quality, although confidence intervals do not rule out
small effects in either direction.




                                                17
4.3   Worker Health and Workplace Safety
We next focus on a measure that captures worker health and workplace safety--crucial job
quality attributes, and a testable prediction of the long-standing hypothesis that worker
representatives aim to improve health and workplace safety (see Freeman and Medoff, 1985,
for US unions).
    Our administrative outcome variable is sickness leaves (of more than ten working days,
e.g., receiving benefits after a long illness or an accident). In the data, sickness leave benefits
are coded in the same category as maternity leave benefits. To isolate primarily sickness rather
than maternity leaves, we zoom into two subsamples of workers, those older than 40, and
male workers. The firm-level outcome is the count of such spells normalized by employment
in the respective worker subsample. The base rates are around 0.08 for both samples in our
treatment group firms in 1990.
    We report results in Columns (5) and (6) of Table 2 and in Appendix Figure A.8. For
employees older than 40, we estimate a null effect of -0.002 (SE 0.003) across all specifications.
We also find an economically small violation of the parallel trends assumption in the pre-
period, marginally statistically significant, when not controlling for industry-year fixed effects.
Zooming into the male sample, we find a similar small negative effect of -0.001 (SE 0.003).
Overall, we thus do not find a significant reduction in measures of employee sickness or
accidents, and can rule out even small improvements of this measure of worker health and
safety.


4.4   Survey-Based Subjective Job Quality and Labor Relations
We close our analysis of job quality with subjective measures reported directly by workers.
We draw on the Finnish Quality of Work Life Survey, and merge it to our administrative
data. We conduct difference-in-differences analyses drawing on the 1990 wave and the first
post-reform wave in 1997. As the survey is not a panel and is a sample of firms, we focus
on contemporaneous employment as the assignment variable and do not impose size-based
sample restrictions. The survey samples a randomly drawn worker in the firm (aged 15 to 64).
Hence, we cannot assess pre-trends as we cannot link the pre-1990 surveys to administrative
data on firm size. Finally, we caveat that worker representation may change reference points
for job quality, in addition to standard concerns about subjective assessments.
    We draw on multiple underlying survey items and use factor analysis to extract one
underlying factor based on a weighted average of individual survey items, turned into a
z-score with zero mean and unit standard deviation using the post-reform control group
mean and standard deviation (in 1997). Our goal is to reduce the number of outcomes we
study by focusing on a summary index. We detail the procedure and the individual variables


                                                18
in Appendix D.2.

Subjective Job Quality For our analysis of subjective job quality, we draw on 21 survey
items, such as whether problems at work make it hard to focus at work, whether one's
supervisor is supportive and encouraging, and the relative importance of the content vs.
the salary associated with the job (all variables listed in Appendix D.2). We report results
for this job quality index in Column (4) of Table 2. We find a moderate increase of the job
quality index in 1997, of 0.182 (SE 0.084) and of 0.146 (SE 0.088), for baseline and industry-year
controls respectively (we cannot include firm effects due to the repeated cross-section nature
of the survey). Overall, the survey points towards small to moderate increases in perceived
job quality as a consequence of granting workers a right to formal worker voice and shared
governance.

Labor Relations We create a labor relations index based on 10 survey items, e.g., asking
workers about conflicts between management and employees or the timing of receiving
information about changes in work tasks (all variables listed in Appendix D.2). Column
(5) of Table 2 reports a small, statistically insignificant increase the labor relations index, of
0.063 (SE 0.083) or 0.063 (SE 0.089) with industry-year effects. We thus do not find that, from
the perspective of worker respondents, labor relations have improved. However, since the
survey samples a randomly drawn worker, it need not speak to the perceptions of worker
representatives.


5    Wages, the Wage Structure, and the Labor Share
We now study whether the worker voice institution affects wages, the wage structure within
the firm, rent sharing, and the labor share. First, wages are an important attribute of job
quality, and hence of direct interest for the question of whether worker voice benefits workers.
Second, analyzing wages completes our interpretation of the absence of large separation
effects. Specifically, perfectly compensating differentials, between firms with and without
worker voice institutions, would lead wages to fall if worker voice raised non-wage amenities,
such that overall job quality differentials and separation rates remain unchanged. Third, even
though the institution provides no veto rights, relatively few formal decision rights, and gives
firms various paths to curbing worker power, it may also entail a formal boost of workers'
bargaining power even in wage setting.

Mean Wages We start by studying the firm-level mean of raw worker-level log wages, and
report results in Figure 4 Panels (a) and (b) and Column (1) of Table 3. Pre-trends are parallel.


                                               19
We find a positive effect of 0.033 (SE 0.016) in our basic specification, and a slightly smaller
estimate of 0.024 (SE 0.012) in our most fine-grained specification.

Isolating Firm and Worker Pay (AKM) Premia: Composition Adjustment Wage effects
could reflect shifts either in firms' wage policies, or in worker composition. To estimate firms'
pay premia, we use Abowd, Kramarz, and Margolis (1999) (AKM) regressions of worker-
level log wages including firm effects (wage policies) and worker fixed effects (capturing
the permanent earnings potential of a worker) and cubic controls for potential experience
interacted with education groups (secondary, vocational, university degrees). We estimate
AKM specifications in rolling three-year windows and use observations from t , t + 1, and
t + 2 to calculate outcomes to associate with period t .
    We report results in Figure 4 Panels (c) and (d) and Column (2) of Table 3. In our basic
specification, we find that the effect on the AKM pay premium is about a third lower than
the effect on mean log wages and is statistically significant at 0.019 (SE 0.009). However, in
all of the specifications with control variables, we find smaller point estimates that are only
marginally significant. In our preferred specification, we find a point estimate of 0.016 (SE
0.010). The confidence interval allows us to reject effects above 0.036 or -0.004. Overall, the
institution thus did not strongly boost workers' wage premia, but our confidence intervals
would accommodate small increases of less than 3.6 percent.

Within-Firm Wage Structure A long-standing hypothesis in the literature posits that worker
representation may compress the wage distributions (as in the case of US unions, see, e.g.,
Freeman and Medoff, 1985; Western and Rosenfeld, 2011; Farber et al., 2018). We study
effects on deciles of the within-firm wage distribution and report pooled post-period DiD
estimates in Figure 4 Panel (e), as well as in Appendix Table A.2. Point estimates reveal
pay increases of around 0.05 to 0.07 at the lower end of the within-firm wage distribution,
which diminish, roughly linearly, to around 0.01 at the 90th percentile. Overall, while noisily
estimated, the evidence appears consistent with some additional pay compression within the
firm resulting from worker voice and any wage increases largely concentrated at the lower
end of the within-firm wage distribution.

Executive Compensation Since Finnish boards set executive compensation, we now ask
whether having workers on the board influences the firms' wage structure at the very top.
Executive pay can reflect agency issues (Bertrand and Mullainathan, 2003), which worker
representation may curb or exacerbate. Alternatively, executive pay setting can be viewed as a
bargaining problem between labor and capital, or within labor (Edmans and Gabaix, 2016;
Piketty, Saez, and Stantcheva, 2014).



                                               20
    We identify executives of a company using the board-level data set, as often the highest-
level executives are not formally employees. We then obtain the total compensation of that
executive (including bonus payments) in the matched employer-employee data. Importantly,
unlike in other administrative data sets in which studying executive pay is not possible (e.g., in
Germany, as in Jäger, Schoefer, and Heining, forthcoming), compensation in the Finnish data
is not capped at a social security maximum. Appendix D.3 describes this variable construction
in detail.
    As the rightmost estimates in Figure 4 Panel (e) and Columns (10) and (11) of Appendix
Table A.2 show, we report essentially a zero effect on executives' log compensation (-0.004, SE
0.035). As a second compensation concept we add to labor income all capital income from any
source--which, however, need not come from the executive's employer. For this broader but
more tentative compensation measure, the point estimates are small, positive and statistically
insignificant (0.053, SE 0.041). We thus do not find strong effects on executive compensation in
either direction.

Rent Sharing We next directly study rent sharing elasticities, capturing potential shifts in
the wage setting process indicative of higher worker bargaining power. We focus on the cross-
sectional relationship between firm-level composition-adjusted wage (AKM) policies and labor
added per worker, using the typical log-log specification. In split-the-surplus rules like Nash
bargaining, the pass-through of productivity into wages identifies the bargaining parameter
(as in, e.g., Jäger et al., 2020), which is hypothesized to increase following boosts to worker
authority in corporate decisions (Grout, 1984; Jäger, Schoefer, and Heining, forthcoming).
    In Figure 4 Panel (f), we plot pay premia (firm AKM fixed effects) against average log value
added per worker (controlling for industry-year fixed effects to isolate firm-specific surplus
shifts). For the control firms, the baseline rent sharing elasticity is 0.063 (SE 0.006) (in line
with although in the lower end of estimates in other settings, as reviewed in, e.g., Jäger et al.,
2020). We find a statistically insignificant treatment effect of 0.017 (SE 0.012). Specifically, the
point estimate implies that a hypothetical 10% increase of firm-specific labor productivity
compared to its industry peers would only raise wages by an additional 0.17% with worker
representation. The estimates permit us to rule out moderate boosts to wages from this
channel.

Labor Share A potential reason for the absence of wage effects is that while workers grab a
larger share of the pie, the pie may shrink due to less efficient production or discouragement
of investment. We study effects on firm performance direction below in Section 6. We directly
study the effect on the firm-specific labor share, calculated as the wage bill divided by value
added, in Table 3 Column (3). We find small negative and statistically insignificant effects on
the labor share with estimates of -0.010 (SE 0.014) in our basic specification and -0.022 (SE

                                                21
0.014) in our preferred specification, allowing us to rule out even small increases in the labor
share by more than 0.5 percentage points. (The average labor share in our treatment group is
0.576 in 1990).

Summary In sum, we have found only small positive, if any, effects on wages as a consequence
of granting workers a right to shared governance. Our estimates leave room for small increases
in pay premia as well as evidence consistent with a small amount of pay compression.The
point estimate in our preferred specification is 1.6 percent and confidence intervals permit
us to rule out shifts in firms' wage policies above 3.2 percent. The positive point estimates,
indicating small wage increases, are within the range of estimates in the reform-based DiD
design building on the repeal of board representation in some new firms in Germany (Jäger,
Schoefer, and Heining, forthcoming), and smaller than the estimates in an important early
industry-based design studying the introduction of codetermination in Germany (Svejnar,
1981). For RD studies with firm-level employment as the running variable, there is a broader
range of estimates, between ­0.031 (Kim, Maug, and Schneider, 2018) and 0.066 (Redeker, 2019)
for parity codetermination in Germany and -0.009 for codetermination in Norway (Blandhol
et al., 2020). We include a cross-sectional RD design for our context in Appendix C, but build
on our reform-based DiD design as our main research design.


6    Firm Performance
While effects on job quality from the workers' perspective appear limited, a large body of
literature posits that boosting worker voice may increase productivity, by lowering turnover
(Hirschman, 1970; Freeman, 1980) or by facilitating information flows and cooperation.
Information sharing may reduce information asymmetries underlying coordination and
contracting problems (Grossman and Hart, 1981; Malcomson, 1983). Shared governance
may attenuate hold-up of workers by firms, as with firm-specific training or back-loaded
compensation. Worker representatives could also apply more stringent monitoring, if
executives wield more influence over shareholder directors than over worker directors
(Hermalin and Weisbach, 1998), and worker representatives could curb managers' short-
termism if their horizon is longer than that of outside shareholder directors. On the other
hand, several theories also posit adverse consequences for firm performance, for example
through hold-up or entrenchment of workers (Jensen and Meckling, 1979).

Survival As the basic measure of firm performance, we analyze effects on firm survival.
This analysis also investigates potential attrition, as our remaining firm performance outcomes
are conditional on survival.


                                              22
    We report results in column (4) of Table 3 and in Panels (a) and (b) of Figure 5, where
we plot the time series of the share of the firms surviving from 1988. Panel (a) shows the
raw cumulative survival fractions, equal to one in 1988 by construction. The lines for the
treatment and control groups lie on top of each other in the pre-reform periods, validating the
pre-trends assumption. This remains true in 1991, when the reform takes action, implying no
immediate survival effects. Starting in 1992, a small gap opens up between the treated and the
control firms, indicating a positive effect on firm survival. Panel (b) plots the corresponding
DiD regression estimates by year. The pre-period effects are insignificant and close to zero,
supporting our parallel trends assumption. The post-period effects starting 1992 are positive,
with an effect of 0.035 (SE 0.022) for the pooled post-reform observations without controls
and 0.037 (SE 0.021) when controlling for industry-year effects (results are identical when
controlling for firm effects since the panel is by construction balanced for this outcome variable).
We report results of robustness checks in Appendix Figure A.12.
    Overall, the estimates allow us to rule out effects on survival below -0.4 percentage points
for our preferred specification. That is, the worker voice institution does not appear to affect
firm survival negatively; if anything, the point estimates indicate a marginally significant
positive effect. (We note that any composition effects through potentially selective firm survival
would not mechanically affect our estimates of effects on other outcomes in the specifications
with firm effects.)

Labor Productivity Our second measure of firm performance is labor productivity, i.e., log
value added per worker. In our DiD framework and due to our inclusion of industry-year
fixed effects, the effects also correspond to shifts in the marginal product of labor for instance
with Cobb-Douglas production. We report results in Table 3 Column (5) and Figure 5 Panels
(c) and (d). In our baseline specification, we document a positive but statistically insignificant
effect of 0.043 (SE 0.035). Confidence intervals permit us to reject effects below -0.028 and
above 0.106. With firm effects, we find slightly higher and statistically significant effects of
0.067 (SE 0.031). In sum, our evidence suggests small increases in labor productivity.

Capital Intensity With a Cobb-Douglas production function, effects on value added per
worker could reflect shifts either in TFP or in the capital-labor ratio. These outcomes could
even move in opposite direction, as, e.g., TFP may increase due to increased information
sharing (Freeman and Medoff, 1985) while disinvestment lowers the capital-labor ratio (Grout,
1984; Jensen and Meckling, 1979; Jäger, Schoefer, and Heining, forthcoming).
   Considering fixed assets as our capital proxy, we report effects on the capital-labor ratio in
Column (6) of Table 3. Our basic specification gives positive effect of 0.099 (SE 0.078), which
decreases to 0.035 (SE 0.048) with industry-year and firm fixed effects. These, if anything,
positive effects on capital formation are inconsistent with the disinvestment predicted by the

                                                23
Jensen and Meckling (1979) hold-up view (and consistent with findings in Jäger, Schoefer, and
Heining, forthcoming). The point estimates can, in a back-of-the-envelope calculation, on their
own account for a significant share of the increase in the labor productivity. With standard
errors of 0.048 in the specification with industry-year and firm fixed effects, the effects are
however more noisily estimated than our effects on, for instance, worker-level wages. The
95% confidence interval allows us to rule out negative effects below -0.059. The upper bound
permits us to rule out positive effects above 0.129, implying that the capital intensity effects
could account for a substantial part of the labor productivity effect.

An RD Design: Investment We have also experimented with capital expenditure (invest-
ment) as an outcome variable, which is available in Finnish data only starting in 1994, and
hence cannot be studied in our DiD design. However, it could be studied in a regression dis-
continuity (RD) design. In Appendix C, we report an RD design for log capital expenditure as
an outcome and also report RD results for our other outcome variables. We find positive albeit
imprecisely estimated effects. However, we do not interpret these coefficients, because the RD
design is not a compelling setup as (i) there need not be a permanent policy discontinuity at
150 employees (due to firms above/below the cutoff moving in and out of transitory treatment,
due to lagged or anticipation effects), (ii) the running variable is not sharply defined due to
some discretion in the employment measure, and (iii) due to concerns of firm selection around
the cutoff. These concerns have motivated our reform-based DiD design in the first place.

Total Factor Productivity We next study log total factor productivity (TFP). We report these
effects in Table 3 Column (7). In our basic specification, we find negative point estimates of
-0.038 (SE 0.060). With industry-year and firm fixed effects, we find a marginally significant
point estimate of 0.063 (0.034). The 95% confidence interval ranges from -0.004 to 0.130, such
that our labor productivity effects could be driven total factor productivity increases.

Profitability We close by studying the capital side of income by measuring effects on
profitability. We have already documented in Section 5 that the labor share, if anything,
marginally decreased. We now study a measure for the profit margin, which we define
as net income (i.e., earnings after depreciation, interest, and taxation) divided by revenue.
Across specifications, we find estimates close to zero. We find a precisely estimated effect of
0.006 (SE 0.008) which decreases to -0.001 (SE 0.008) when we include firm fixed effects and
industry-year fixed effects. Our results thus indicate no (negative) effects on profitability.
    With Cobb-Douglas production, a percent shift in the capital-labor ratio entails a percent shift in value added
per worker adjusted for the capital share, which is 0.424 in our sample if calibrated to one minus the labor income
share.
    We assume a Cobb-Douglas specification and measure the 2-digit industry-level factor shares as the ratio of
total payroll divided by total value added among firms with both variables being nonmissing, for each year.


                                                        24
An RD Design: Dividends The Finnish data has dividend data available only starting 1994,
such that we cannot study dividends in our DiD design, as with the capital expenditure data.
In Appendix C, we report an additional RD design for log dividends and log dividends over
revenue. We find positive albeit imprecisely estimated effects. Again, we do not interpret
these coefficients further due to the lack of credibility but include the estimates for the sake of
completeness.

Revealed-Preference Evidence from Bunching At 150 Threshold As a revealed preference
complement to our analysis of profitability, we implement a test of whether firms avoid being
subject to the 1991 law by changing their size such that they are just below the size threshold
of 150 employees. We report the density of firm size around the policy threshold, both before
and after the 1991 reform, in Appendix Figure A.14. We find no visual evidence that firms
bunch below the 150-employee threshold. Formal McCrary (2008) tests do not reject continuity
of the density at the policy threshold either. We thus find no evidence that firms avoid being
subject to the codetermination law (as they would have if shared governance imposed net
costs, as in response to other labor regulations or tax incentives studied in Garicano, Lelarge,
and Van Reenen, 2016; Benzarti and Harju, forthcoming).

Overall Assessment We find limited effects on margins of firm performance, suggesting
that worker voice did not measurably lower firm performance, with point estimates pointing
towards a positive direction for survival and labor productivity. In addition, our confidence
intervals put tight bounds on the rent-extraction and agency cost views of worker involvement
in corporate decision making.


7    Similar Effects From Alternative Codetermination Institu-
     tion: 2008 Expansion of Shop-Floor Representation in Small
     Firms
One potential explanation for the limited effects of the 1991 introduction of worker voice
through board-level representation and other negotiated firm-level variants is that the ensuing
representation may simply duplicate (or be weaker than) a pre-existing codetermination
institution, shop-floor representation. We have described this institution in Section 2.3. We
estimate the effects of shop-floor representation on the same set of outcomes, leveraging a 2007
reform that made this labor representation mandatory in certain firms starting in 2008. More
broadly, our evaluation of this reform provides a quasi-experimental design that may speak to
the effects of this kind of shop-floor codetermination institution, akin to works councils in


                                                25
other countries, an area where causal estimates from quasi-experimental designs or sharp RD
designs are lacking (see Addison, 2009, for an overview of existing studies of works councils
in Germany).

The Reform Figure 6 Panel (a) visualizes the reform. Before 2008, the Cooperation Act
mandated shop-floor representation in firms with at least 30 employees. A 2007 law change
lowered the threshold to 20 employees. The impetus was an effort to unify the previous
versions of the law and promote interactive cooperation between the employer and the
employees (HE 254/2006), as well as compliance with the European Commission Directive on
informing and consulting employees in the European Community (2002/14/EC). Employer
associations opposed the reform on the grounds that it would hobble small firms with
bureaucracy (see, e.g., Suomen Yrittäjät, 2007, for a statement by the Federation of Finnish
Enterprises). To our knowledge, there exists only one empirical study of the reform, a
difference-in-differences analysis in an important master's thesis by Keskinen (2017), which
we build on and expand with a wider range of outcomes and visual analysis of raw data.

DiD Design We follow an analogous DiD strategy as for the 1991 reform. We track a cohort
of firms based on their pre-reform employment in 2005, again three years before the law
change, and estimate effects relative to 2007, the baseline year before the reform becomes
active. The treatment group comprises firms with 2005 employment between 20 and 29. We
track two control groups separately: firms with 2005 employment of 10 to 19, and of 30 to 39.

Results Figure 6 Panel (b) reports a first stage for the firm being subject to the shop-floor
representation mandate. For each of the three groups, it plots the average of the firm-level
indicator of employment of at least 30 (if before 2008) or at least 20 (starting 2008, post-reform).
We see a considerably sharper relative increase in the treatment group compared to either
control group, especially the smaller firms, indicating substantial employment persistence.
     In the other panels, we report time series for key outcome variables, for job-to-job transitions
(Panel c)), mean log wages (Panel (d)), firm survival (Panel (e)) and labor productivity (Panel
(f)). In each panel we print the DiD estimates pooled for 2008 to 2013 (to mirror the time
horizon as in the 150 reform, although the graphs show effects through 2017 for illustration),
separately estimated against the smaller and larger firms as controls. Throughout, we find
    To lighten the administrative burden, the law does not extend all rights to shop-floor representatives in firms
with 20 to 29 employees; for example, they only have information rights upon request, and only firms with 30 or
more employees are, for example, required to negotiate on recruiting details and gender equality plans. The
reform also led to some minor changes in firms with 30 or more employees. In some cases, collective bargaining
agreements prescribed the presence of shop-floor representatives in smaller firms not subject to the law. Surveys
suggest that nearly 50% of firms in the 20 to 29 employee size category did not have shop-floor representation in
2007, so the law change applied to large share of those firms (see Suomen Yrittäjät, 2010, Figure 2).



                                                        26
that the groups move in parallel pre-reform, and continue on those parallel paths from 2008
onward. The time series of raw data provides transparent visual evidence that the expansion
of this additional dimension of worker voice did not result in larger effects than the 1991
reform. Appendix Tables A.3 and A.4 report the regression results for these as well as all
other outcomes. Overall, effects are small and precisely estimated, with the strongest and
statistically most significant effect being a positive one on the subjective labor relations quality
index, again a positive point estimate on subjective work quality, and interestingly a small
negative effect on AKM firm effects.

Implications The 2008 expansion of shop-floor codetermination also had at best small effects
on worker and firm outcomes. We draw two conclusions. First, the baseline presence of
shop-floor representation in our main analysis sample of firms is unlikely to explain the
absence of large effects of board-level and alternative representation following the 1991 reform,
as could have been the case if these two worker voice institutions had been substitutes. Second,
as a substantive result in its own right in an area where causal estimates have been elusive, we
find that shop-floor representation as an independent worker voice institution has similarly
limited effects as the higher-level representation induced by the 1991 reform.


8    Discussion, Interpretation, and Interview Evidence
Overall, we have found that the boost to worker voice has not translated into substantially
higher job quality from the perspective of workers. While we have found some evidence for
moderate reductions in nonemployment separations, increases in subjective measures of job
quality, and a small reduction in within-firm inequality, our estimates allow us to rule out
even relatively small effects on most outcomes pertaining to job quality or surplus. Most
importantly, we have found no reductions in job-to-job separations, which is where the rubber
meets the road for the exit-voice theory. On the firm side, our estimates suggest small positive
effects on survival and on labor productivity, but these need to be contrasted with largely zero
effects on most outcomes and confidence intervals excluding even moderate positive or small
negative effects.
    We close our paper by reflecting on the nature of the institution we study and discussing
two potential explanations for its limited effects. To guide our interpretation, we draw
on surveys of board-level and shop-floor representatives, and organize our discussion by
distinguishing between two broad channels of worker voice (see, e.g., Freeman and Medoff,
1985; Kochan et al., 2019). By shifting power, worker voice allows workers to express and
defend their interests against managers or owners, and (with formal decision rights) directly
affect corporate decision making. Through the information channel, worker voice gives workers


                                                27
an avenue to communicate feedback to managers and owners and vice versa. The information
channel has also been hypothesized to facilitate job security through better monitoring and
enforcement of implicit contracts (Malcomson, 1983).

Worker Power One potential explanation of the limited magnitude of the effects of the 1991
reform is that it provided too small a boost of workers' power in corporate decision-making to
substantially move the needle on core economic outcomes. There are three patterns consistent
with this interpretation.
    First, indicative of limited worker power conveyed by the law, only about 60% of above-
threshold firms appear to adopt any form of worker representation as a result of the reform.
Table 1 clarifies that the most common reason for failing to adopt worker representation is
that the employer opposed it--presumably reflecting employers bargaining away or simply
blocking the institution, perhaps particularly in instances where it would interfere with their
interests and/or have negative effects. Thus, employers appear to hold significant power over
workers' ability to take up their statutory rights. In this respect, Finland differs from other
contexts such as Germany, where board-level representation is mandatory rather than a right
(Jäger, Schoefer, and Heining, forthcoming).
    Second and relatedly, even in firms that do adopt worker representation, worker represen-
tatives' real authority may be limited; after all, workers get only 20% of the seats on the board
according to the statutory default, a low figure compared to, e.g., 33 and 50% in Germany
(Jäger, Schoefer, and Heining, forthcoming). Additionally, employers can choose the modality
of shared governance--which board workers will be involved in, if following the statutory
provisions. When asked what impact would result from the institution, one respondent in our
2020 survey says bluntly:

     The employer always has a majority. No direct effect.

Employers can also avoid this statutory default of board representation by bargaining
employees down to even weaker forms of representation, such as advisory councils without
any explicit decision-making power. We discussed these institutional details in Section 2.
Consistent with this view, our paper enters an active policy debate in 2021 about a potential
strengthening of the institution (see, e.g., Työ-ja Elinkeinoministeriö, 2020, a companion paper
that builds on our survey evidence).
    Third, representatives' self-assessed influence is relatively low. In our own 2020 survey of
worker representatives, there is no area of decision-making where a majority of respondents
claim they have an impact (Figure 7 Panel (b)). Between 35 and 50% report that "managers
are not willing to give workers a voice" or that "managers listen [to advice] but cannot take
it into consideration" (Figure 7 Panel (c)). In the 2001 survey of shop-floor representatives,
76% say that worker representation "feels like a formality," and 65% believe the rights of

                                               28
worker representatives are too narrow (Figure 7 Panel (d)). In our own 2020 survey of worker
representatives, respondents state that "Our forums are not `real' places of government" and
"Management is likely to ignore the administrative representative and try to water down his
position as much as possible." Another respondent illustrates this situation in response to our
open-ended questions:

      [...] management has, in fact, already decided the course of action at the stage
      when I become aware of it. At that point, it is virtually impossible to influence the
      big lines anymore; maybe you can say your words and negotiate on some details.

Similarly, another respondent remarks that

      I have a feeling that I cannot influence the company's decisions [...] things cannot
      be influenced before decisions are made, they are only information about decisions
      already made.

Overall, in our 2020 survey, a majority of respondents believe that the institution does not
affect profits, investment or wages (Figure 7 Panel (e)). While we were able to find some
anecdotes in which representatives report having had concrete impact, and while worker
representatives list ambitious goals such as preventing layoffs, raising wages, and improving
working conditions among their key priorities (Figure 7 Panel (a)), our DiD estimates reveal
that on average, their influence is limited.

Information Sharing Even though the institution may not have boosted workers' real power
or distributed significant rents towards labor, it could have had an effect on firm and worker
outcomes through an information-sharing channel, which is at the core of the influential
exit-versus-voice framework of Hirschman (1970). Specifically, worker voice may improve firm
performance by reducing worker turnover, improving task organization, raising social capital,
cooperation, and trust, and helping managers take preventive action (see, e.g., Freeman and
Medoff, 1985; Ichniowsky, Shaw, and Prennushi, 1997; Gant, Ichniowski, and Shaw, 2002;
Bryson, Charlwood, and Forth, 2006; Böckerman, Bryson, and Ilmakunnas, 2012; Peutere,
Saloniemi, Böckerman, Aho, Nätti, and Nummi, forthcoming). The existing evidence rests
either on documenting demand for worker voice (see Bryson and Freeman, 2013; Kochan et al.,
2019, and references therein) or on correlational studies (Freeman and Kleiner, 2000; Batt,
Colvin, and Keefe, 2002; Ng and Feldman, 2011), which (as authors in the literature frequently
    For instance, a worker board representative of a shipbuilding company in Turku describes concrete examples
of how he acts as an intermediary between the board and the workforce and exerts influence over decisions
regarding production, workplace safety and environment, or outsourcing (Gold, Kluge, and Conchon, 2010).
    At a broader level, by boosting perceptions of the procedural justice of managers' choices, worker voice may
increase loyalty and commitment to tasks (Folger, 1977; Earley and Lind, 1987; Lind, Kanfer, and Earley, 1990).



                                                      29
acknowledge) may be confounded by worker sorting and subject to other empirical challenges
(as documented by, e.g., Morrison, 2011; Sluiter, Manevska, and Akkerman, forthcoming).
    Three patterns suggest that the worker voice institution we study can be understood as an
information sharing platform.
    First, in many instances, firms implement the institution in the form of a pure information
exchange and advisory platform, as we discussed in Section 2, a unique feature of the Finnish
context.
    Second, many representatives view facilitating information flows as their main function--
rather than wielding real authority, which we considered above. In our in-depth interviews
covering representatives from five major companies, all five representatives were ambiguous
about whether they actually possess influence, but they all mention information sharing as one
of the ways they can contribute. Three out of the five explicitly say that the primary function
of a worker representative is to facilitate information sharing, with the first interviewee stating:

       The body where I work is [...] really a way for the company to share information.
       [...] Providing information is our main task, and we can't make any decisions,
       everything comes already decided.

The second interviewee stated:

       I personally think that the role of an administrative representative is to convey
       information [...]

A third one states:

       It also often feels that the members of the management group want to talk to me
       because they feel that they are separated from the employees and want to hear my
       opinions. [...] I feel that I am a link between the employees and the management
       group.

A fourth interviewee says that:

       [...] I can bring the personnel's thoughts and ideas to the management team very
       freely. And bring different types of thinking from employees.
    As an exception, Jäger, Schoefer, and Heining (forthcoming) study a reform-based quasi-experiment in
Germany. Blandhol, Mogstad, Nilsson, and Vestad (2020) study moves of workers into firms with and without
worker representation as well as firms above and below size thresholds (see also Kim, Maug, and Schneider, 2018,
and others for Germany). Keskinen (2017) analyzes the 2008 reform of shop-floor representation in Finland. Ong,
Riyanto, and Sheffrin (2012) and Adhvaryu, Molina, and Nyshadham (2019) present lab and field experiments
giving subjects the opportunity to give feedback or not.
    We found little support for the idea of procedural justice. Two respondents in our 2020 survey stated that
"There was also a notion that `The staff feels better taken into account in the company"', and that "Transparency
increases."


                                                       30
Moreover, a fifth representative believes that information sharing can indeed affect outcomes:

      [The role] improves information flow in the company, and giving people access to
      information makes it possible for them to influence matters.

Similarly, in our 2020 survey, open-ended responses about the impact of representation
included "Improving trust through cooperation and a better atmosphere for discussion,"
"Improved collaboration and communication between staff and managers," and "There will
be more open discussion." Notably, none of the respondents point to concrete changes
to company policy as a likely impact of worker representation, except for changes in the
organization of work or benefit programs.
    Third, even the small number of worker representatives who report influencing company
policy refer to the information sharing enabled by the institution as a primary mechanism
that allows them to wield influence. For example, Gold, Kluge, and Conchon (2010) conduct
an extensive interview with a board-level worker representative for a Finnish shipbuilding
company, who explains that he was only able to influence the allocation of surplus money from
the company pension fund because he heard about the surplus through his position on the
board. He also describes that while he does not directly participate in worker pay negotiations,
his knowledge of the firm's economic situation acts as an input into the negotiation strategy of
the shop-floor representatives.
    Concerning the information channel, our findings have two interpretations. One possibility
is that the reform led to an increase in information sharing--which, however, did not
have large effects on the core economic outcomes we study, i.e., firm performance and
job quality and wages. Our positive point estimates for labor productivity and capital
intensity leave some room for those theories. Similarly, our evidence on small reductions in
separations into nonemployment is consistent with models of implicit contracts, in which
better information flows increase employment security (Malcomson, 1983; Freeman and
Lazear, 1995). Alternatively, information exchange in the firm may happen extensively even
absent formal representation from board representation or shop-floor representation. Indeed,
Finnish managers in small firms (at most 49 employees, below the reform threshold) and large
firms (250 employees and more, above the reform threshold) consult/involve workers in some
(formal or informal) capacity with roughly equal frequency (77% vs. 82% for consultation,
66% vs. 68% for involvement in decision making), where we draw on the 2013 European
Companies Survey. We also surveyed human resource managers in firms with and without
worker representation, and most managers in the latter group mentioned informal channels
     A moderate gap in worker consultation/involvement emerges comparing firms with and without formal
employee representatives in the cross section (80% vs. 64% for consultation, 68% vs 55% for involvement),
although the latter group make up only a small fraction in Finland due to the broad definition of representation
in the question.



                                                      31
through which they directly consult workers.

Overall Conclusion Our quasi-experimental design studying the size-based introduction of
shared governance in Finnish firms reveals that board-level minority representation of workers,
and alternative negotiated implementations of worker voice, have at best small positive effects
on core economic outcomes in the dimensions of job quality and security, wages and firm
performance, putting some bounds on the positive effects on job quality predicted by theories
of worker voice (Hirschman, 1970; Freeman, 1980). At the same time, we can largely rule out
small detrimental effects across many outcomes, including firm performance, wages, and the
labor share, in contrast to a view of codetermination as a rent-extracting institution (Jensen and
Meckling, 1979). Our preferred interpretation is that the institution largely worked through
increased information sharing and cooperation, but did little to shift workers' real power in
corporate decision-making. Our quasi-experimental design studies firm-level variation, and
thereby naturally leaves open the important question of potential spillovers or equilibrium
effects through norm setting or market interactions, among the control firms.




    For example, managers mentioned "messages in Yammer [an online platform] or other direct communication,"
"committees," and "questionnaires" as ways that workers could directly express their voice.
    The absence of negative effects on firm performance is also consistent with findings in Germany (Jäger,
Schoefer, and Heining, forthcoming). Moreover, absence of wage effects in the Finnish (and German) contexts are
also consistent with the study of wage effects in Blandhol, Mogstad, Nilsson, and Vestad (2020), which features a
unitary board structure, as is predominant in Finland.


                                                       32
References
Abowd, John, Francis Kramarz, and David Margolis. 1999. "High Wage Workers and High
 Wage Firms." Econometrica 67 (2):251­333.
Addison, John. 2009. The Economics of Codetermination: Lessons from the German Experience. New
 York: Palgrave MacMillan.
Addison, John, Claus Schnabel, and Joachim Wagner. 2001. "Works Councils in Germany:
 Their Effects on Establishment Performance." Oxford economic papers 53 (4):659­694.
Adhvaryu, Achyuta, Teresa Molina, and Anant Nyshadham. 2019. "Expectations, Wage Hikes,
 and Worker Voice: Evidence from a Field Experiment." NBER Working Paper .
Bassier, Ihsaan, Arindrajit Dube, and Suresh Naidu. forthcoming. "Monopsony in Movers:
  The Elasticity of Labor Supply to Firm Wage Policies." Journal of Human Resources .
Batt, Rosemary, Alexander Colvin, and Jeffrey Keefe. 2002. "Employee Voice, Human Resource
  Practices, and Quit Rates: Evidence from the Telecommunications Industry." ILR Review
  55 (4):573­594.
Benzarti, Youssef and Jarkko Harju. forthcoming. "Using Payroll Tax Variation to Unpack the
  Black Box of Firm-Level Production." Journal of the European Economic Association .
Bertrand, Marianne and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2003. "Enjoying the Quiet Life? Corporate
  Governance and Managerial Preferences." Journal of Political Economy 111 (5):1043­1075.
Blandhol, Christine, Magne Mogstad, Peter Nilsson, and Ola Vestad. 2020. "Do Employees
  Benefit from Worker Representation on Corporate Boards?" NBER Working Paper .
Böckerman, Petri, Alex Bryson, and Pekka Ilmakunnas. 2012. "Does High Involvement
  Management Improve Worker Wellbeing?" Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization
  84 (2):660­680.
Böckerman, Petri and Pekka Ilmakunnas. 2008. "Job Disamenities, Job Satisfaction, Quit
  Intentions, and Actual Separations: Putting the Pieces Together." Industrial Relations
  48 (1):73­96.
Bøhren, Øyvind and Øystein Strøm. 2010. "Governance and Politics: Regulating Independence
  and Diversity in the Board Room." Journal of Business Finance & Accounting 37 (9-10):1281­
  1308.
Bryson, Alex, Andy Charlwood, and John Forth. 2006. "Worker Voice, Managerial Response
  and Labor Productivity: An Empirical Investigation." Industrial Relations Journal 37 (5):438­
  455.
Bryson, Alex and Richard Freeman. 2013. "Employee Perceptions of Working Conditions
  and the Desire for Worker Representation in Britain and the US." Journal of Labor Research
  34:1­29.
Card, David, Ana Rute Cardoso, Jörg Heining, and Patrick Kline. 2018. "Firms and Labor
  Market Inequality: Evidence and Some Theory." Journal of Labor Economics 36 (S1):S13­S70.




                                              33
Card, David, Jörg Heining, and Patrick Kline. 2013. "Workplace Heterogeneity and the Rise of
 West German Wage Inequality." Quarterly Journal of Economics 128 (3):967­1015.
Conchon, Aline. 2011. Board-level Employee Representation Rights in Europe: Facts and Trends.
 Etui Brussels.
Dickens, William, Lorenz Goette, Erica Groshen, Steinar Holden, Julian Messina, Mark
  Schweitzer, Jarkko Turunen, and Melanie Ward. 2007. "How Wages Change: Micro Evidence
  from the International Wage Flexibility Project." Journal of Economic Perspectives (2):195­214.
DiNardo, John and David Lee. 2004. "Economic Impacts of New Unionization on Private
  Sector Employers: 1984­2001." Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (4):1383­1441.
Earley, Christopher and Allen Lind. 1987. "Procedural Justice and Participation in Task
  Selection: The Role of Control in Mediating Justice Judgements." Journal of Personality and
  Social Psychology 52 (6):1148­1160.
Edmans, Alex and Xavier Gabaix. 2016. "Executive Compensation: A Modern Primer." Journal
  of Economic Literature 54 (4):1232­87.
Enriques, Luca, Henry Hansmann, and Reinier Kraakman. 2017. "The Basic Governance
  Structure: Minority Shareholders and Non-Shareholder Constituencies." In The Anatomy of
  Corporate Law: A Comparative and Functional Approach, edited by Reinier Kraakman.
Eurofound. 2020. "Living and Working in Finland." URL https://www.eurofound.europa.
  eu/country/finland#actors-and-institutions.
Farber, Henry. 2005. "Nonunion Wage Rates and the Threat of Unionization." ILR Review
  58 (3):335­352.
Farber, Henry, Daniel Herbst, Ilyana Kuziemko, and Suresh Naidu. 2018. "Unions and
  Inequality Over the Twentieth Century: New Evidence from Survey Data." NBER Working
  Paper .
Folger, Robert. 1977. "Distributive and Procedural Justice: Combined Impact of "Voice"
  and Improvement on Experienced Inequity." Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
  35 (2):108­119.
Freeman, Richard. 1980. "The Exit-Voice Tradeoff in the Labor Market: Unionism, Job Tenure,
  Quits, and Separations." Quarterly Journal of Economics 94 (4):643­673.
Freeman, Richard and Morris Kleiner. 2000. "Who Benefits Most from Employee Involvement:
  Firms or Workers?" American Economic Review 90 (2):219­223.
Freeman, Richard and Edward Lazear. 1995. "An Economic Analysis of Works Councils." In
  Works Councils: Consultation, Representation, Cooperation in Industrial Relations, edited by Joel
  Rogers and Wolfgang Streeck. NBER Comparative Labor Markets Series.
Freeman, Richard and James Medoff. 1985. "What Do Unions Do?" ILR Review 38 (2):244­263.
Ganong, Peter and Simon Jäger. 2018. "A Permutation Test for the Regression Kink Design."
 Journal of the American Statistical Association 113 (522):494­504.
Gant, Jon, Casey Ichniowski, and Kathryn Shaw. 2002. "Social Capital and Organizational


                                                34
  Change in High-Involvement and Traditional Work Organizations." Journal of Economics and
  Management Strategy 11 (2):289­328.
Garicano, Luis, Claire Lelarge, and John Van Reenen. 2016. "Firm Size Distortions and the
 Productivity Distribution: Evidence from France." American Economic Review 106 (11):3439­
 79.
Gold, Michael, Norbert Kluge, and Aline Conchon. 2010. 'In the Union and on the Board':
 Experiences of Board-Level Employee Representatives Across Europe. ETUI, Brussels.
Gorodnichenko, Yuriy, Enrique Mendoza, and Linda Tesar. 2012. "The Finnish Great Depres-
 sion: From Russia with Love." American Economic Review 102 (4):1619­44.
Gorton, Gary and Frank Schmid. 2004. "Capital, Labor, and the Firm: A Study of German
 Codetermination." Journal of the European Economic Association 2 (5):863­905.
Grossman, Sanford and Oliver Hart. 1981. "Implicit Contracts, Moral Hazard, and Unemploy-
  ment." The American Economic Review 71 (2):301­307.
Grout, Paul. 1984. "Investment and Wages in the Absence of Binding Contracts: A Nash
 Bargaining Approach." Econometrica 52 (2):449­460.
Gulan, Adam, Markus Haavio, and Juha Kilponen. 2014. "From Finnish Great Depression to
 Great Recession." Bank of Finland Bulletin 3 .
Hammer, Tove Helland and Ariel Avgar. 2005. "The Impact of Unions on Job Satisfaction,
 Organizational Commitment, and Turnover." Journal of Labor Research 26 (2):241­266.
Hermalin, Benjamin and Michael Weisbach. 1998. "Endogenously Chosen Boards of Directors
 and Their Monitoring of the CEO." American Economic Review 88 (1):96­118.
Hethey-Maier, Tanja and Johannes Schmieder. 2013. "Does the Use of Worker Flows Improve
 the Analysis of Establishment Turnover? Evidence from German Administrative Data."
 NBER Working Paper .
Hirsch, Boris, Thorsten Schank, and Claus Schnabel. 2010. "Works Councils and Separations:
 Voice, Monopoly, and Insurance effects." Industrial Relations: A Journal of Economy and Society
  49 (4):566­592.
Hirschman, Albert. 1970. Exit, Voice, and Loyalty: Responses to Decline in Firms, Organizations,
 and States, vol. 25. Harvard University Press.
Ichniowsky, Casey, Kathryn Shaw, and Giovanna Prennushi. 1997. "The Effects of Human
  Resource Management Practices on Productivity: A Study of Steel Finishing Lines." American
  Economic Review 87 (3):291­313.
Jäger, Simon, Benjamin Schoefer, and Jörg Heining. forthcoming. "Labor in the Boardroom."
  Quarterly Journal of Economics .
Jäger, Simon, Benjamin Schoefer, Samuel Young, and Josef Zweimüller. 2020. "Wages and the
  Value of Nonemployment." Quarterly Journal of Economics 135 (4):1905­1963.
Jensen, Michael and William Meckling. 1979. "Rights and Production Functions: An Applica-
  tion to Labor-Managed Firms and Codetermination." Journal of Business 52 (4):469­506.


                                              35
Keskinen, Maa. 2017. "Workplace Cooperation and Firm Performance - Evidence from
  Finland." Aalto University Master's Thesis .
Kim, Han, Ernst Maug, and Christoph Schneider. 2018. "Labor Representation in Governance
  as an Insurance Mechanism." Review of Finance 22 (4):1251­1289.
Kochan, Thomas, Duanyi Yang, William Kimball, and Erin Kelly. 2019. "Worker Voice in
 America: Is There a Gap between What Workers Expect and What They Experience?" ILR
 Review 72 (1):3­38.
Koskela, Erkki and Roope Uusitalo. 2003. "The Un-Intended Convergence: How the Finnish
  Unemployment Reached the European Level." CESifo Working Paper .
Kraft, Kornelius. 1986. "Exit and Voice in the Labor Market: An Empirical Study of Quits." Jour-
  nal of Institutional and Theoretical Economics (JITE)/Zeitschrift für die gesamte Staatswissenschaft
  142 (4):697­715.
Krueger, Alan and Lawrence Summers. 1988. "Efficiency Wages and the Inter-Industry Wage
  Structure." Econometrica :259­293.
Lee, David and Alexandre Mas. 2012. "Long-Run Impacts of Unions on Firms: New Evidence
  From Financial Markets, 1961-1999." Quarterly Journal of Economics 127 (1):333­378.
Lekvall, Per, Ronald Gilson, Jesper Lau Hansen, Carsten Lønfeldt, Manne Airaksinen, Tom
  Berglund, Tom von Weymarn, Gudmund Knudsen, Harald Norvik, Rolf Skog et al. 2014.
 "The Nordic Corporate Governance Model." The Nordic Corporate Governance Model, Per
  Lekvall, ed., SNS Förlag, Stockholm :14­12.
Lewis, Gregg. 1963. Unionism and Relative Wages in the United States: An Empirical Inquiry.
  Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lind, Allen, Ruth Kanfer, and Christopher Earley. 1990. "Voice, Control, and Procedural
  Justice: Instrumental and Noninstrumental Concerns in Fairness Judgements." Journal of
  Personality and Social Psychology 59 (5):952­959.
Malcomson, James. 1983. "Trade Unions and Economic Efficiency." The Economic Journal
 93:51­65.
Marttila, Jouko. 2016. Hillitty Markkinatalous: Kokoomuksen ja SDP: n Talouspoliittinen Lähentymi-
 nen ja Hallitusyhteistyö 1980-Luvulla (A Restrained Market Economy: Convergence Between the
 Coalition Party and the SDP and Economic Co-Operation in the 1980s). Ph.D. thesis, University
 of Helsinki.
McCrary, Justin. 2008. "Manipulation of the Running Variable in the Regression Discontinuity
 Design: A Density Test." Journal of Econometrics 142 (2):698­714.
Morrison, Elizabeth. 2011. "Employee Voice Behavior: Integration and Directions for Future
 Research." The Academy of Management Annals 5 (1):373­412.
Ng, Thomas and Daniel Feldman. 2011. "Employee Voice Behavior: A Meta-Analytic Test of
 the Conservation of Resources Framework." Journal of Organizational Behavior 33 (2):216­234.
Ong, Qiyan, Yohanes Riyanto, and Steven Sheffrin. 2012. "How Does Voice Matter? Evidence
 from the Ultimatum Game." Experimental Economics 15:604­621.


                                                 36
Pagano, Marco and Paolo Volpin. 2005. "Managers, Workers, and Corporate Control." The
  Journal of Finance 60 (2):841­868.
Peutere, Laura, Antti Saloniemi, Petri Böckerman, Simo Aho, Jouko Nätti, and Tapio Nummi.
  forthcoming. "High-Involvement Management Practices and the Productivity of Firms:
  Detecting Industry Heterogeneity." Economic and Industrial Democracy .
Pfeifer, Christian. 2011. "Works Councils, Union Bargaining and Quits in German Firms."
  Economic and Industrial Democracy 32 (2):243­260.
Piketty, Thomas, Emmanuel Saez, and Stefanie Stantcheva. 2014. "Optimal Taxation of Top
  Labor Incomes: A Tale of Three Elasticities." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy
  6 (1):230­71.
Redeker, Nils. 2019. "The Politics of Stashing Wealth: The Demise of Labor Power and the
  Global Rise of Corporate Savings." Center for Comparative and International Studies (CIS) .
Ringe, Wolf-Georg. 2016. "German versus Nordic Board Models: Form, Function, and
  Convergence." Nordic Journal of Business 65 (1):27­40.
Romano, Roberta. 1993. The Genius of American Corporate Law. American Enterprise Institute.
Sairo, Kari. 2001. Henkilöstön Hallintoedustus Metalli- ja Elektroniikkateollisuuden Yrityksissä (trans-
  lation: Personnel Representation in Companies of Metal- and Electronic Industry). Metallityöväen
  liiton Tutkimustoiminnan Julkaisuja. Metallityöväen liitto.
Sluiter, Roderick, Katerina Manevska, and Agnes Akkerman. forthcoming. "Atypical Work,
  Worker Voice and Supervisor Responses." Socio-Economic Review .
Snellman, Kenneth, Roope Uusitalo, and Juhana Vartiainen. 2003. Tulospalkkaus ja Teollisuuden
  Muuttuva Palkanmuodostus (translation: The Role of Profit Sharing Schemes in the Evolution of
  Wage Institutions in Manufacturing). Edita.
Sorkin, Isaac. 2018. "Ranking Firms Using Revealed Preference." Quarterly Journal of Economics
  133 (3):1331­1393.
Strøm, Øystein. 2007. "Better Firm Performance with Employees on the Board? Not in the
  Long Run." Working Paper .
Suomen Yrittäjät. 2007. "Suomen Yrittäjien Jussi Järventaus: YT-laajennus yrittäjyydelle
  kielteinen (translation: Federation of Finnish Entrepreneurs: Co-operation Extension is
  Negative for Entrepreneurship)." .
------. 2010. "Yt-lakikysely 2010 (translation: Co-operation Law Survey 2010)." .
Svejnar, Jan. 1981. "Relative Wage Effects of Unions, Dictatorship and Codetermination:
  Econometric Evidence From Germany." The Review of Economics and Statistics 63:188­197.
Teollisuuden Palkansaajat. 2017. "Hallintoedustajakyselyyn Osallistuneita (translation: Ad-
  ministrative Representative Survey)." .
------. 2019. "Perusraportti Hallintoedustuslakikysely 2019 (translation: Basic Report of
  Shared Governance Law Survey 2019)." .




                                                  37
Thomsen, Steen, Caspar Rose, and Dorte Kronborg. 2016. "Employee Representation and
  Board size in the Nordic Countries." European Journal of Law and Economics 42 (3):471­490.
Työ-ja Elinkeinoministeriö. 2020. "Yhteistoimintalain Uudistamista Valmistelleen Työryhmän
  Mietintö : Hallituksen Esitysluonnos Yhteistoimintalaiksi ja Eräiksi Siihen Liittyviksi Laeiksi
  (translation: Report of the Working Group Preparing the Reform of the Co-Operation Act:
  Draft Proposal of the Government for the Co-Operation Act and Certain Related Laws)." .
Uusitalo, Roope and Juhana Vartiainen. 2009. "Finland: Firm Factors in Wages and Wage
 Changes." In The Structure of Wages: An International Comparison, edited by Edward Lazear
 and Kathryn Shaw. NBER, University of Chicago Press, 149­178.
Western, Bruce and Jake Rosenfeld. 2011. "Unions, Norms, and the Rise in US Wage Inequality."
 American Sociological Review 76 (4):513­537.




                                               38
Figures

Figure 1: Corporate Governance and Worker Representation Options According To 1991
Reform


                   (a) Corporate Governance                          (b) Shared Governance Options
                  Without Shared Governance                               According to 1991 Law

                          Shareholders                                                    Shareholders


                          Elect                                                           Elect

                      Board of Directors                                              Board of Directors
                                                   Major           Elect                                           Major
                                                  Decisions                                                       Decisions


                Appoint                                                         Appoint                            Advisory Committee
                Control                                                         Control
               Dismiss
                                         Report
                                                                               Dismiss                   Report
           Compensation                                                    Compensation
                          Management                                                      Management
                                                                    Or



                                                                    Or

                           Workforce                                                       Workforce




Note: Panel (a) illustrates the governance structure of a Finnish firm with a unitary board structure and without
worker representation, which applied to firms before 1991 as well as to firms with fewer than 150 employees
post-1991. Panel (b) illustrates the governance structure under the statutory provision of the codetermination
law. We illustrate both the cases where workers exercise their statutory right to elect representatives to either
the board of directors or the firm's management group as well implementation of worker representation in
an advisory committee. Under the statutory provisions of the law, the firm can choose whether 20% worker
representation occurs on the board of directors or as part of the management group. Worker representation is
also often organized through an agreement stipulating an advisory committee, illustrated on the right. We do not
illustrate the less common case of a dual board structure and the corresponding option for worker representation
on the supervisory board.




                                                              39
                            Figure 2: Persistence of Treatment Assignment


                                (a) Fraction of Firms with Employment  150




                   (b) DiD: Fraction of Firms with Worker Right to Shared Governance

               1
                     Year-Specific DiD Effects
                      Year FEs
              .8      Industry-Year + Firm FEs


              .6


              .4


              .2
                                                         Pooled Post-Reform DiD Effects
                                                         Year FEs                  : 0.459 (SE 0.028)
                                                         Industry-Year + Firm FEs : 0.452 (SE 0.027)
               0
                1988     1989     1990     1991     1992     1993     1994     1995     1996     1997


Note: The figure plots the persistence of treatment assignment in matched employer-employee data matched with
the firm-level accounting data. Our DiD strategy sorts firms based on whether their pre-reform employment in
1988 was above or below 150 employees. Panel (a) plots the share of firms in the two groups with employment
above 150 over time. The difference between the two time series in the post-reform period after 1991 captures the
differential bite or first stage of our treatment assignment. Panel (b) plots results for a DiD specification as in
Equation (1) with the outcome being an indicator for a worker right to shared governance (i.e. employment of
at least 150 employees in the post-reform years). The vertical lines denote 95% confidence intervals based on
standard errors clustered at the firm level. We also report results only based on the matched employer-employee
data in Appendix Figure A.3. We report further robustness analyses in Appendix Figure A.4.




                                                        40
                                      Figure 3: Job Separation Effects of Worker Voice


                   (a) Any Separation: Levels                                                     (b) Any Separation: DiD
        .3                                                                            .1
                                          Treated Firms, 150  Emp1988  250                 Year-Specific DiD Effects
                                          Control Firms, 50  Emp1988 < 150                  Year FEs
                                                                                            Industry-Year + Firm FEs
                                                                                    .05
       .25


                                                                                      0
        .2

                                                                                    -.05
                                                                                                                          Pooled Post-Reform DiD Effects
                                                                                                      Baseline            Year FEs                  : -0.018 (SE 0.014)
       .15                                                                                             Year
                                                                                     -.1                                  Industry-Year + Firm FEs : -0.029 (SE 0.013)
         1988    1989   1990   1991    1992   1993   1994   1995   1996      1997       1988   1989   1990       1991   1992   1993     1994     1995    1996     1997

                 (c) Job-to-Job Separation: Levels                                             (d) Job-to-Job Separation: DiD
       .12                                                                            .1
                                          Treated Firms, 150  Emp1988  250                 Year-Specific DiD Effects
                                          Control Firms, 50  Emp1988 < 150                  Year FEs
                                                                                            Industry-Year + Firm FEs
        .1                                                                          .05



       .08                                                                            0



       .06                                                                          -.05
                                                                                                                          Pooled Post-Reform DiD Effects
                                                                                                      Baseline            Year FEs                  : -0.012 (SE 0.011)
                                                                                                       Year
       .04                                                                           -.1                                  Industry-Year + Firm FEs : -0.007 (SE 0.010)
          1988   1989   1990   1991    1992   1993   1994   1995   1996      1997       1988   1989   1990       1991   1992   1993     1994     1995    1996     1997

      (e) Separation into Nonemployment: Levels                                     (f) Separation into Nonemployment: DiD
                                                                                      .1
       .18                                Treated Firms, 150  Emp1988  250                 Year-Specific DiD Effects
                                          Control Firms, 50  Emp1988 < 150                  Year FEs
                                                                                            Industry-Year + Firm FEs
       .16                                                                          .05

       .14
                                                                                      0
       .12

                                                                                    -.05
        .1
                                                                                                                          Pooled Post-Reform DiD Effects
                                                                                                      Baseline            Year FEs                  : -0.006 (SE 0.008)
                                                                                                       Year
       .08                                                                           -.1                                  Industry-Year + Firm FEs : -0.022 (SE 0.007)
          1988   1989   1990   1991    1992   1993   1994   1995   1996      1997       1988   1989   1990       1991   1992   1993     1994     1995    1996     1997




Note: The figure displays the effects of shared governance on separation rates. The left column displays the
outcome in levels for treated firms (firms with employment between 150-250 in 1988) and for control firms
(firms with employment between 50-149 in 1988) over the period 1988-1997. The right column displays the
difference-in-differences estimates decomposed by years normalized relative to baseline year 1990. The dashed
vertical line in 1991 denotes the year the reform became active. In the right panels, the capped vertical bars denote
95% confidence intervals based on standard errors clustered at the firm level; we report the pooled post-reform
effect in the bottom right corner of each plot. We also report results in Columns (1) through (3) of Table 2. We
report robustness analyses in Appendix Figures A.5-A.7, Appendix Figure, A.9, and Appendix Table A.1.




                                                                               41
                                                                                     Figure 4: Wage Effects of Worker Voice
                                                 (a) Mean Log Wage: Levels                                                                  (b) Mean Log Wage: DiD
                                                                                                                            .15
       9.7      Treated Firms, 150  Emp1988  250                                                                                  Year-Specific DiD Effects
                Control Firms, 50  Emp1988 < 150                                                                                   Year FEs
                                                                                                                             .1    Industry-Year + Firm FEs
       9.6
                                                                                                                            .05

       9.5                                                                                                                   0

                                                                                                                           -.05
       9.4
                                                                                                                            -.1                                  Pooled Post-Reform DiD Effects
                                                                                                                                              Baseline           Year FEs                  : 0.033 (SE 0.016)
       9.3                                                                                                                                     Year
                                                                                                                           -.15                                  Industry-Year + Firm FEs : 0.024 (SE 0.012)
         1988                       1989                 1990        1991   1992     1993   1994      1995   1996   1997       1988    1989   1990       1991   1992   1993     1994   1995     1996    1997

                                    (c) AKM Pay Premium: Levels                                                                        (d) AKM Pay Premium: DiD
        .1                                                                                                                  .15
                                                                               Treated Firms, 150  Emp1988  250                   Year-Specific DiD Effects
                                                                               Control Firms, 50  Emp1988 < 150                    Year FEs
       .08                                                                                                                   .1    Industry-Year + Firm FEs

       .06                                                                                                                  .05

       .04                                                                                                                   0

       .02                                                                                                                 -.05

         0                                                                                                                  -.1                                  Pooled Post-Reform DiD Effects
                                                                                                                                              Baseline           Year FEs                  : 0.019 (SE 0.009)
                                                                                                                                               Year
       -.02                                                                                                                -.15                                  Industry-Year + Firm FEs : 0.016 (SE 0.010)
           1988                             1989             1990    1991   1992     1993     1994    1995   1996   1997       1988    1989   1990       1991   1992   1993     1994   1995     1996    1997

                                                               (e) Within-Firm Wage Percentiles and Executive Compensation
                                                    .15

                                                        .1

                                                    .05

                                                        0

                                                   -.05
                                                               Pooled Post-Reform DiD Effects
                                                    -.1
                                                                   Year FEs
                                                                   Industry-Year + Firm FEs
                                                   -.15
                                                             p10      p20      p30      p40          p50     p60    p70    p80        p90      Executive Earnings             Executive Earnings
                                                                                                                                                                               + Capital Income

                                                                                                             (f) Rent Sharing
                                                   .1
                                                                   Treated Firms with 150-250 Employees
                  Residualized AKM Pay Premium




                                                                   Control Firms with 50-149 Employees
                                                 .05

                                                   0

                                                 -.05

                                                  -.1
                                                                                                                                                 Slope of Control Group: 0.063 (SE 0.006)
                                                 -.15                                                                                                  Treatment Effect: 0.017 (SE 0.012)
                                                        -2                                             -1                                      0                                                1
                                                                                               Residualized Firm-Level Mean of Log Value Added per Worker

Note: The figure displays the effects of shared governance on firm-level wages. Panels (a) and (c) display the
outcome in levels for treated firms (firms with employment between 150-250 in 1988) and for control firms
(firms with employment between 50-149 in 1988) over the period 1988-1997. Panels (b) and (d) display the
difference-in-differences estimates decomposed by years normalized relative to baseline year 1990. The dashed
vertical line in 1991 denotes the year the reform became active. In the right panels (b) and (d), the capped vertical
bars denote 95% confidence intervals based on standard errors clustered at the firm level; we report the pooled
post-reform effect in the bottom right corner of each plot (and in Table 3). We report robustness analyses in
Appendix Figure A.10. Panel (e) reports DiD effects on different within-firm percentiles of the wage distribution
as well as (log) executive earnings (see also Table A.2). Panel (f) reports the relationship between firms' AKM pay
premium and average log value added in the post-reform period (controlling for industry effects).
                                                                                                                      42
                                   Figure 5: Firm Performance Effects of Worker Voice


                         (a) Firm Survival: Levels                                                      (b) Firm Survival: DiD
                                                                                      .15
                                            Treated Firms, 150  Emp1988  250                 Year-Specific DiD Effects
        1                                   Control Firms, 50  Emp1988 < 150                  Year FEs
                                                                                        .1    Industry-Year + Firm FEs

       .75
                                                                                      .05

        .5
                                                                                        0

       .25                                                                            -.05
                                                                                                                            Pooled Post-Reform DiD Effects
                                                                                                        Baseline            Year FEs                  : 0.035 (SE 0.022)
                                                                                                         Year
        0                                                                              -.1                                  Industry-Year + Firm FEs : 0.037 (SE 0.021)
         1988     1989    1990    1991   1992   1993   1994   1995   1996      1997       1988   1989   1990       1991   1992   1993     1994    1995     1996    1997

        (c) Log Value Added per Worker: Levels                                           (d) Log Value Added per Worker: DiD
       10.8                                                                             .3
                  Treated Firms, 150  Emp1988  250                                           Year-Specific DiD Effects
                  Control Firms, 50  Emp1988 < 150                                            Year FEs
                                                                                              Industry-Year + Firm FEs
       10.7                                                                           .15



       10.6                                                                             0



       10.5                                                                           -.15
                                                                                                                            Pooled Post-Reform DiD Effects
                                                                                                        Baseline            Year FEs                  : 0.043 (SE 0.035)
                                                                                                         Year
       10.4                                                                            -.3                                  Industry-Year + Firm FEs : 0.067 (SE 0.031)
           1988    1989    1990   1991   1992   1993   1994   1995   1996      1997       1988   1989   1990       1991   1992   1993     1994    1995     1996    1997




Note: The figure displays the effects of shared governance on firm survival and labor productivity and capital.
The left column displays the outcome in levels for treated firms (firms with employment between 150-250 in
1988) and for control firms (firms with employment between 50-149 in 1988) over the period 1988-1997. The right
column displays the difference-in-differences estimates decomposed by years normalized relative to baseline
year 1990. The dashed vertical line in 1991 denotes the year the reform became active. In the right panels, the
capped vertical bars denote 95% confidence intervals based on standard errors clustered at the firm level; we
report the pooled post-reform effect in the bottom right corner of each plot and in Table 3. We display other firm
performance outcomes in Appendix Figure A.11 and robustness analyses in Appendix Figure A.12.




                                                                                 43
Figure 6: Effects of Alternative Worker Voice Institution: Shop-Floor Representation Reform


                                                                                                                              (b) First Stage: Fraction of Firms with Shop-
                                                              (a) Timeline                                                    Floor Representation Mandate By Law
                                                                                                                                          Treated Firms, 20  Emp2005 < 30
                               1                                                                                                  1       Control Firms, 30  Emp2005 < 40
                                                                                                                                          Control Firms, 10  Emp2005 < 20
      (Require Shop Steward)




                                                                                                                                  .8

                                                                                     Treated Firms, 20  Emp < 30
                                                                                     Control Firms, 30  Emp < 40                  .6
                                                                                     Control Firms, 10  Emp < 20
                                                                                                                                  .4

                                                                                                                                  .2
                                                                                                                                                                                          DiD Effects
                               0                                                                                                                                                          Control Group 10-19   : 0.207 (SE 0.012)
                                                                                                                                  0                                                       Control Group 30-39   : 0.319 (SE 0.017)
                               2005                                   2008                                      Present
                                                                  Introduction                                                     1996           1999         2002         2005       2008      2011           2014         2017

                                                (c) Job-to-Job Separation                                                                                 (d) Mean Log Wages
                          .1          Treated Firms, 20  Emp2005 < 30
                                                                                                                                 10.2         Treated Firms, 20  Emp2005 < 30
                                      Control Firms, 30  Emp2005 < 40                                                                         Control Firms, 30  Emp2005 < 40
                                      Control Firms, 10  Emp2005 < 20                                                                         Control Firms, 10  Emp2005 < 20

          .08                                                                                                                     10



          .06                                                                                                                     9.8



          .04                                                                                                                     9.6

                                                                                     DiD Effects                                                                                          DiD Effects
                                                                                     Control 10-19    : -0.000 (SE 0.003)                                                                 Control 10-19     : 0.013 (SE 0.007)
                                                                                                                                  9.4
          .02                                                                        Control 30-39    : -0.004 (SE 0.005)                                                                 Control 30-39     : 0.001 (SE 0.010)
             1996                          1999          2002           2005      2008      2011         2014          2017            1996        1999         2002            2005   2008       2011          2014         2017

                                                        (e) Firm Survival                                                                 (f) Log Value Added per Worker
                 1                                                                       Treated Firms, 20  Emp2005 < 30
                                                                                                                                 10.9         Treated Firms, 20  Emp2005 < 30
                                                                                         Control Firms, 30  Emp2005 < 40                      Control Firms, 30  Emp2005 < 40
                                                                                         Control Firms, 10  Emp2005 < 20                      Control Firms, 10  Emp2005 < 20
                                                                                                                                 10.8
         .9

                                                                                                                                 10.7
         .8
                                                                                                                                 10.6

         .7
                                                                                                                                 10.5
                                   DiD Effects                                                                                                                                            DiD Effects
                                   Control 10-19     : 0.003 (SE 0.006)                                                                                                                   Control 10-19     : 0.003 (SE 0.012)
         .6                        Control 30-39     : 0.001 (SE 0.010)                                                          10.4                                                     Control 30-39     : 0.002 (SE 0.017)
           2005                                     2008                   2011                2014                    2017          1996          1999         2002            2005   2008       2011          2014         2017




Note: The figure displays the effects of a 2008 reform that lowered the threshold for mandatory shop-floor
representation from 30 to 20 employees. Panel (a) displays the timeline of the reform for firms in different size
categories. Panels (b) through (f) report time series of outcomes for three groups of firms: a treatment group
of firms with employment between 20 and 29 employees in 2005 and two control groups with 10-19 and 30-39
employees, respectively, in 2005. Panel (b) reports a first stage relationship indicating the share of firms with
law-induced shop-floor representation mandate. Formally, the outcome variable is equal to one for firms with at
least 30 employees in the pre-period and at least 20 employees in the post-reform period. We report the pooled
post-reform (2008-2013) effect in each plot and in Tables A.3 and A.4. We display other outcomes in Appendix
Figure A.13.




                                                                                                                            44
                 Figure 7: Survey Evidence on Worker Representatives' Perspectives


                                                Strongly Agree     Agree       Neutral         Disagree      Strongly Disagree      No Response
                                                        (a) Priorities: Which of the following goals are important to you? (2020)
               Good working conditions
          Avoiding redundancies and/or
                                layoffs
                            Good salary

                   Employment stability

                      Higher investment

                       Less outsourcing

                                                            (b) Impact: How much do you feel you could influence decisions
                                                                        in your role in the following areas? (2020)
        Improving cooperation between
          management and employees
     Improving the working conditions of
                               workers
      Overall welfare investments at the
                             workplace
       Training decisions for employees

              Wage levels of employees

        Business monitoring and control
       Strategic decision-making of the
                             company
      Company-level decisions, such as
                            production
                  Outsourcing decisions

                   Investment decisions

                                                (c) Challenges: What are the biggest challenges to the effectiveness of your role? (2020)
       Managers listen but cannot take it
                      into consideration
       Hard to build trust with managers
         Managers are not willing to give
                        workers a voice
          Management turnover reduces
             opportunities for influence
            Personality differences with
                               managers
                  Managers do not listen

             General lack of mutual trust

                                                  (d) Perceptions: To what extent do you agree with the following statements? (2001)

                                                                  Agree              Disagree              Can't say

        The system feels like a formality

                   The rights of worker
         representatives are too narrow

                                                  (e) Expectations: When a system of worker representation is set up in a company,
                                                                 how do you expect it to affect the following? (2020)

                                                 Increase             Remain the Same                 Decrease               Can't say

                            Productivity
                                 Profits
                            Investment
                                 Wages

                                            0      10        20        30       40        50        60        70        80          90      100


Note: The panels plot responses from our 2020 survey of 111 worker representatives in cooperation with a major
trade union federation, and from the 2001 survey of 203 shop-floor representatives who are members of the
Finnish metalworks union (Sairo, 2001). For further details and statistics, see notes of Table 1.

                                                                          45
     Tables

                                   Table 1: Survey Evidence on Prevalence and Forms of Worker Representation in
                                                                   Finnish Firms
                                                                          Panel (a): Do you have an administrative representative?
                                                               2001             2017              2019              2020
                               Yes                             60%               51%             47%               63%
                               No                              36%               40%             48%               37%
                               Missing response                4%                9%              5%                0%
                                                               Panel (b): In which governance body do the worker representatives participate?
                                                               2001              2017            2019              2020
                               Management                      60%              32%                37%                 28%
                               Board of directors              26%              23%                24%                 32%
                               Supervisory board               6%               17%                8%                  7%
                               Elsewhere                       9%               23%                23%                 24%
                               Missing response                0%               5%                 8%                  9%
                                                                          Panel (c): What is the legal basis for this representation?
                                                               2001             2017               2019                2020
                               According to the law            -                  26%               25%               31%
                               According to agreement          -                  40%               59%               54%
                               Other                           -                  -                 11%               4%
                               Missing response                -                  35%               5%                10%
                                                                 Panel (d): If you meet the threshold, why is there no worker representation?
46




                                                               2001               2017              2019              2020
                               The employer did not want it    34%              40%                45%                49%
                               The employees did not want it   -                1%                 5%                 3%
                               Not aware of the right          14%              6%                 8%                 11%
                               Can't say                       27%              19%                22%                -
                               Other reason                    25%              33%                22%                38%
                               N                               203              288                164                111
                               Restricted to  150 employees    No               Yes                Yes                Yes

     Note: The table presents results from four separate surveys of Finnish worker representatives, asking whether and in what form they have implemented the
     worker representation introduced by the 1991 reform. The 2001 survey was conducted among representatives who are members of the Finnish metalworks
     union, and covered 203 shop-floor representatives in metal and electronics companies (Sairo, 2001). This survey, unlike the others, is not restricted to firms
     above the 150 employee threshold and in these tabulations the sample is not restricted to those firms (these numbers are from a report and we cannot access the
     raw data and hence cannot re-calculate these numbers with the restriction imposed). However, 73% of respondents are in firms above the threshold. The 2017
     and 2019 surveys were conducted by a major Finnish trade union federation for industrial employees, and covered 288 and 164 firms with more than 150
     employees (Teollisuuden Palkansaajat, 2017, 2019). Respondents were worker representatives of various kinds (e.g., shop-floor representatives, European Works
     Council representatives) in those firms. The 2020 survey was conducted by us in cooperation with the same trade union federation, and covered 111 worker
     representatives of various kinds. The first panel reports responses to a question about whether the company has organised formal worker representation,
     and the second panel reports responses to a question about which governing body the representatives sit on, if they exist. Examples of responses from the
     free-form "Other" category for the body of representation include representation in multiple bodies, regular meetings between top management and worker
     representatives, and advisory boards. The "Missing response" category indicates respondents who did not know the answer or whose response was missing
     for a different reason. The third panel reports responses regarding the legal basis for the worker representation.
                                                 Table 2: Effects on Separations and Measures of Job Quality



                                     Any       Job-to-Job    Separation into     Firm Value Log      Sickness Spell   Sickness Spell   Job Quality    Labor Relations
                                  Separation   Separation    Nonemployment       Index (z-score)    (Older than 40)       (Male)         (z-score)    Quality (z-score)
                                     (1)           (2)             (3)                 (4)                (5)               (6)             (7)              (8)
      DiD: Year FEs
        Treatment                   -0.018       -0.012           -0.006             -0.043              -0.002           -0.001         0.182              0.063
        (1991-1997)                 (0.014)      (0.011)          (0.008)            (0.105)            (0.003)          (0.003)         (0.084)           (0.083)

         Pre-Period                 -0.014       -0.008           -0.005                                 0.007            0.005
         (1988-1989)                (0.015)      (0.012)          (0.007)                               (0.004)          (0.004)

      DiD: Industry-Year FEs
        Treatment                   -0.013       -0.010           -0.002             -0.049              -0.002           -0.002          0.146             0.063
        (1991-1997)                 (0.014)      (0.011)          (0.008)            (0.104)            (0.003)          (0.003)         (0.088)           (0.089)

         Pre-Period                 -0.014       -0.010           -0.004                                 0.006            0.004
         (1988-1989)                (0.014)      (0.011)          (0.007)                               (0.004)          (0.003)

      DiD: Year and Firm FEs
        Treatment                  -0.027         -0.006         -0.021              -0.053              -0.002           -0.002
        (1991-1997)                (0.013)       (0.010)          (0.007)            (0.107)            (0.003)          (0.003)
47




         Pre-Period                 -0.008       -0.009            0.000                                 0.008            0.004
         (1988-1989)                (0.013)      (0.011)          (0.007)                               (0.004)          (0.004)

      DiD: Industry-Year and Firm FEs
        Treatment                   -0.029        -0.007         -0.022              -0.065              -0.002           -0.001
        (1991-1997)                 (0.013)      (0.010)          (0.007)            (0.104)            (0.003)          (0.003)

         Pre-Period                 -0.007       -0.009            0.002                                 0.007            0.003
         (1988-1989)                (0.013)      (0.011)          (0.007)                               (0.004)          (0.004)


      1990 Average (Control):       0.249         0.079            0.170              -0.008            0.070             0.070            0.057           0.041
      1990 Average (Treated):       0.252         0.097            0.155              0.045             0.075             0.075           -0.045           -0.244
      N, Firm-Years (Control):      8,635         8,635            8,635              4,402             8,577             8,545            1,394            1,399
      N, Firm-Years (Treated):      1,833         1,833            1,833              1,409             1,827             1,829             701              703



     Note: The table reports results of DiD specifications as in Equation (1). All point estimates are reported relative to 1990, the year for which we normalize the
     difference between treatment and control group to zero. Treatment indicates the DiD treatment effect in the post-reform period from 1991 to 1997. We also
     report the pre-period difference between the two groups relative to 1990 to test the parallel trends assumption in the pre-reform period. The first panel reports
     DiD results without additional control variables, the second panel includes industry-year effects (NACE Level 1), the third and fourth panel repeat the same
     specifications including firm effects. Standard errors clustered at the firm level are reported in parentheses. We plot the results for separations in Figure 3, and
     for sickness in Appendix Figure A.8. We report robustness analyses in Appendix Figure A.5-A.9. The post-period for the Job Quality and Labor Relations
     Quality outcomes draws on the 1997 wave; the previous wave is 1990.
                                                       Table 3: Effects on Wages and Firm Performance



                                             Mean            AKM          Labor      Firm      Log Value Added       Capital     Total Factor    Profit
                                           Log Wage      Pay Premium      Share     Survival     per Worker         Intensity    Productivity    Margin
                                              (1)             (2)          (3)        (4)             (5)              (6)           (7)          (8)
                DiD: Year FEs
                  Treatment                  0.033          0.019          -0.010    0.035            0.043            0.099         -0.038       0.006
                  (1991-1997)                (0.016)        (0.009)       (0.014)   (0.022)          (0.035)          (0.078)       (0.060)      (0.008)

                   Pre-Period                -0.006          -0.000        0.016     0.000            -0.024           0.063         0.028        0.005
                   (1988-1989)               (0.013)        (0.008)       (0.011)   (0.015)          (0.033)          (0.073)       (0.060)      (0.005)

                DiD: Industry-Year FEs
                  Treatment                   0.017          0.016         -0.006    0.037            0.039            0.055         0.018        0.005
                  (1991-1997)                (0.015)        (0.009)       (0.014)   (0.021)          (0.034)          (0.075)       (0.049)      (0.008)

                   Pre-Period                -0.015          0.001         0.012    -0.005            -0.014           0.032         0.018        0.005
                   (1988-1989)               (0.013)        (0.008)       (0.011)   (0.015)          (0.032)          (0.072)       (0.048)      (0.006)

                DiD: Year and Firm FEs
                  Treatment                  0.035           0.019         -0.018    0.035           0.068             0.037         0.057        -0.000
48




                  (1991-1997)                (0.013)        (0.010)       (0.014)   (0.022)          (0.031)          (0.049)       (0.036)      (0.008)

                   Pre-Period                -0.003          -0.000        0.015     0.000            -0.023          -0.039         0.018        0.004
                   (1988-1989)               (0.010)        (0.007)       (0.011)   (0.015)          (0.028)          (0.046)       (0.035)      (0.005)

                DiD: Industry-Year and Firm FEs
                  Treatment                  0.024           0.016         -0.022    0.037           0.067             0.035         0.063        -0.001
                  (1991-1997)                (0.012)        (0.010)       (0.014)   (0.021)          (0.031)          (0.048)       (0.034)      (0.008)

                   Pre-Period                -0.007          0.001         0.012    -0.005            -0.016          -0.044         0.027        0.002
                   (1988-1989)               (0.009)        (0.007)       (0.011)   (0.015)          (0.028)          (0.047)       (0.034)      (0.005)


                1990 Average (Control):       9.459          0.023        0.600       0.930          10.499           10.059        6.115        -0.005
                1990 Average (Treated):       9.491          0.033        0.576       0.935          10.560           10.220        5.959        -0.010
                N, Firm-Years (Control):      8,684          7,089        5,056      12,648           4,979            5,037        4,979         5,049
                N, Firm-Years (Treated):      1,839          1,489        1,256       2,568           1,231            1,247        1,235         1,255


     Note: The table reports results of DiD specifications as in Equation (1). All point estimates are reported relative to 1990, the year for which we normalize the
     difference between treatment and control group to zero. Treatment indicates the DiD treatment effect in the post-reform period from 1991 to 1997. We also
     report the pre-period difference between the two groups relative to 1990 to assess the parallel trends assumption in the pre-reform period. The first panel
     reports DiD results without additional control variables, the second panel includes industry-year effects (NACE Level 1), the third and fourth panel repeat the
     same specifications including firm effects. Standard errors clustered at the firm level are reported in parentheses. We plot wage effects in Figure 4 and firm
     performance results in Figure 5 and Appendix Figure A.11. We report robustness analyses in Appendix Figure A.10.
                                Online Appendix of:
                                      Voice at Work
         Jarkko Harju, Simon Jäger, and Benjamin Schoefer

Contents
A Appendix Figures                                                                                             50

B Appendix Tables                                                                                              62

C Regression Discontinuity Design                                                                              66

D Data Appendix: Additional Details on Variable Construction                                                   70
  D.1 Constructing a Revealed-Preference Index of Firm Value . . . . . . . . . . . .                           70
  D.2 Quality of Work Life Survey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                    73
  D.3 Executive Compensation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                     75

Online Appendix References                                                                                     76

List of Figures
   A.1 Industry Composition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                    50
   A.2 Standard Deviation of Log Wages and AKM Firm Effects Over Time . . . . . .                              51
   A.4 Fraction of Firms with Worker Right to Shared Governance (Robustness Checks)                            52
   A.3 Persistence of Treatment Assignment, EE Sample . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                        52
   A.5 Separations for Employees Correcting for Spurious ID Changes . . . . . . . .                            53
   A.6 Separations for Employees With at Least One Year of Tenure . . . . . . . . . .                          54
   A.7 Separations for Employees Aged 20-55 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                      55
   A.8 Sickness: Fraction of Employees with Sick Benefits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                      56
   A.9 Separations and Sickness (Robustness Checks) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                        57
   A.10 Wage Effects (Robustness Checks) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                   58
   A.11 Firm Performance (Additional Outcomes) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                       59
   A.12 Firm Performance (Robustness Checks) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                       60
   A.13 Shop-Floor Representation Reform (Additional Outcomes) . . . . . . . . . . .                           61
   A.14 Density of Firm Size and McCrary Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                     68
   A.15 Regression Discontinuity Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                    69

List of Tables
   A.1   Effects on Separations and Sickness (Robustness Checks) . . . . .         .   .   .   .   .   .   .   62
   A.2   Effects on Within-Firm Wage Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     .   .   .   .   .   .   .   63
   A.3   Effects on Separations and Measures of Job Quality, 2008 Reform           .   .   .   .   .   .   .   64
   A.4   Effects on Measures of Firm Performance, 2008 Reform . . . . . .          .   .   .   .   .   .   .   65
   A.5   Effects on Firm Ranking Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   73

                                                49
A     Appendix Figures
                                                     Figure A.1: Industry Composition
                                                                               (b) Firm Sample in Matched Employer-
              (a) Firm Sample in Financials Data                               Employee Data

                         Manufacturing                                                                 Manufacturing

                  Wholesale and Retail                                                          Wholesale and Retail
                                                                                                         Construction
                           Construction
                                                                                          Transportation and Storage
             Transportation and Storage
                                                                                              Finance and Insurance
         Information and Communication
                                                                                      Information and Communication
       Accommodation and Food Service                                               Accommodation and Food Service
                 Finance and Insurance                                                        Scientific and Technical
                Scientific and Technical                                                  Administration and Support

             Administration and Support                                                           Electricity and Gas
                                                                                                      Other Services
                     Electricity and Gas
                                                                                      Human health and Social Work
         Human health and Social Work
                                                                                     Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing
                            Real Estate
                                                                                              Arts and Entertainment
                        Other Services                                                                    Real Estate
                 Arts and Entertainment                                                                    Education


                                           0   .1       .2           .3   .4                                             0   .1        .2          .3   .4
                                                    Share of Firms                                                                Share of Firms


Note: The figure plots the industry composition of firms in our sample for the baseline year of 1990 (in which,
e.g., our control means of outcome variables are also specified, reported in the regression tables).




                                                                               50
       Figure A.2: Standard Deviation of Log Wages and AKM Firm Effects Over Time




Note: The figure plots the standard deviation of individual log wages as well as of AKM firm effects over time.
For the individual log wages, we both report the overall standard deviation as well as the standard deviation of
individual wages of workers employed by firms in the largest connected sets (respectively for each three-year
time window) from the AKM estimation. The AKM firm effects are estimated in three-year windows and we
report the standard deviation for those firms in the largest connected set at each time horizon. The sample for
this is estimation is based on the entire matched employer-employee data (rather than the firm size window for
our main analysis).




                                                      51
Figure A.4: Fraction of Firms with Worker Right to Shared Governance (Robustness Checks)


                        (a) Bandwidth Analysis                                                            (b) Donuthole Analysis
        1                                                                              1

       .8                                                                              .8

       .6                                                                              .6

       .4                                                                              .4

       .2                                                                              .2

        0                                                                              0
            30     40        50       60       70          80         90       100          0      5      10      15 20     25     30    35       40     45    50
                                       Bandwidth                                                                    Size of Donut Hole
        (Including Firms With 1988 Employment Within Interval of the 150 Threshold)     (Excluding Firms With 1988 Employment Within Interval of the 150 Threshold)




Note: The figure reports robustness checks for the DiD analysis in Figure 2. The outcome variable is an indicator
for a firm being subject to the worker right to shared governance (i.e. having at least 150 employees in the
post-reform period). The figure plots DiD point estimates and 95% confidence intervals clustering standard
errors at the firm level and including firm fixed effects and industry-year fixed effects. The upper panel varies
the employment sample starting from a bandwidth of 10, i.e. 140-160, to a bandwidth of 100, our baseline
specification indicated by the solid black diamond. The lower panel displays a donuthole specification starting
from a hole size equal to 0, our baseline indicated by the black solid diamond, to a hole size equal to 50, excluding
firms with employment between 100-200.


                         Figure A.3: Persistence of Treatment Assignment, EE Sample


                                                                                      (b) DiD: Fraction of Firms with Worker Right to
   (a) Fraction of Firms with Employment  150                                         Shared Governance
                                                                                        1
                                                                                                Year-Specific DiD Effects
                                                                                                 Year FEs
                                                                                       .8        Industry-Year + Firm FEs


                                                                                       .6


                                                                                       .4


                                                                                       .2
                                                                                                                                 Pooled Post-Reform DiD Effects
                                                                                                                                 Year FEs                  : 0.391 (SE 0.025)
                                                                                                                                 Industry-Year + Firm FEs : 0.386 (SE 0.024)
                                                                                        0
                                                                                         1988      1989        1990    1991   1992   1993     1994     1995     1996     1997



Note: The figure is a robustness check for Figure 2. Here, the sample is based on matched employer-employee
data while Figure 2 restricts the sample to observations for which we also match firm data. For further details on
the panels, see figure note to Figure 2.




                                                                                 52
                Figure A.5: Separations for Employees Correcting for Spurious ID Changes


                       (a) Any Separation: Levels                                                        (b) Difference-in-Differences
           .3                                                                                 .1
                                             Treated Firms, 150  Emp1988  250                        Year-Specific DiD Effects
                                             Control Firms, 50  Emp1988 < 150                         Year FEs
                                                                                                      Industry-Year + Firm FEs
                                                                                             .05
          .25


                                                                                              0
           .2

                                                                                         -.05
                                                                                                                                     Pooled Post-Reform DiD Effects
                                                                                                                 Baseline            Year FEs                  : -0.018 (SE 0.014)
          .15                                                                                                     Year
                                                                                             -.1                                     Industry-Year + Firm FEs : -0.027 (SE 0.013)
            1988    1989   1990   1991   1992   1993   1994   1995    1996      1997            1988    1989      1990      1991   1992   1993     1994     1995    1996     1997

                                                                                                        (d) Job-to-Job Separation: DiD
                (c) Job-to-Job Separation: Levels
                                                                                        .1
                                                                                                   Year-Specific DiD Effects
    .12                                                                                             Year FEs
                                         Treated Firms, 150  Emp1988  250
                                                                                                    Industry-Year + Firm FEs
                                         Control Firms, 50  Emp1988 < 150
                                                                                       .05
     .1

                                                                                        0
    .08


                                                                                   -.05
    .06
                                                                                                                                     Pooled Post-Reform DiD Effects
                                                                                                               Baseline              Year FEs                  : -0.012 (SE 0.011)
                                                                                                                Year
                                                                                       -.1                                           Industry-Year + Firm FEs : -0.006 (SE 0.010)
    .04
       1988     1989   1990   1991   1992   1993   1994   1995   1996       1997          1988        1989     1990         1991   1992    1993      1994     1995      1996         1997

      (e) Separation into Nonemployment: Levels                                              (f) Separation into Nonemployment: DiD
                                                                                              .1
          .18                                Treated Firms, 150  Emp1988  250                        Year-Specific DiD Effects
                                             Control Firms, 50  Emp1988 < 150                         Year FEs
                                                                                                      Industry-Year + Firm FEs
          .16                                                                                .05

          .14
                                                                                              0
          .12

                                                                                         -.05
           .1
                                                                                                                                     Pooled Post-Reform DiD Effects
                                                                                                                 Baseline            Year FEs                  : -0.006 (SE 0.008)
                                                                                                                  Year
          .08                                                                                -.1                                     Industry-Year + Firm FEs : -0.022 (SE 0.007)
             1988   1989   1990   1991   1992   1993   1994   1995    1996      1997            1988    1989      1990      1991   1992   1993     1994     1995    1996     1997




Note: The figure displays the effects of shared governance on separation rates for employees correcting spurious
firm ID changes. Our procedure follows ideas in Hethey-Maier and Schmieder (2013) and identifies a spurious
exit as one in which a group of at least 50% of a firm's employees exit and then are all subsequently employed
at one firm in the subsequent year. In such a case, we recode the exit variable from 1 to 0. The left column
displays the outcome in levels for treated firms (firms with employment between 150-250 in 1988) and for control
firms (firms with employment between 50-149 in 1988) over the period 1988-1997. The right column displays
the difference-in-differences estimates decomposed by years normalized relative to baseline year 1990. The
dashed vertical line in 1991 denotes the year the reform became active. In the right panels, the capped vertical
bars denote 95% confidence intervals based on standard errors clustered at the firm level; we report the pooled
post-reform effect in the bottom right corner of each plot. We also report results in Columns (1) through (3) of
Table A.1. We report full and unadjusted sample results in Figure 3 and Columns (1) through (3) of Table 2.




                                                                                   53
                 Figure A.6: Separations for Employees With at Least One Year of Tenure


                    (a) Any Separation: Levels                                                    (b) Any Separation: DiD
       .25                                                                            .1
                                          Treated Firms, 150  Emp1988  250                 Year-Specific DiD Effects
                                          Control Firms, 50  Emp1988 < 150                  Year FEs
                                                                                            Industry-Year + Firm FEs
                                                                                    .05
        .2

                                                                                      0

       .15
                                                                                    -.05
                                                                                                                          Pooled Post-Reform DiD Effects
                                                                                                      Baseline            Year FEs                  : -0.021 (SE 0.015)
                                                                                                       Year
        .1                                                                           -.1                                  Industry-Year + Firm FEs : -0.024 (SE 0.013)
          1988    1989   1990   1991   1992   1993   1994   1995   1996      1997       1988   1989   1990       1991   1992   1993     1994     1995    1996     1997

                 (c) Job-to-Job Separation: Levels                                             (d) Job-to-Job Separation: DiD
       .12                                                                            .1
                                          Treated Firms, 150  Emp1988  250                 Year-Specific DiD Effects
                                          Control Firms, 50  Emp1988 < 150                  Year FEs
                                                                                            Industry-Year + Firm FEs
        .1                                                                          .05



       .08                                                                            0



       .06                                                                          -.05
                                                                                                                          Pooled Post-Reform DiD Effects
                                                                                                      Baseline            Year FEs                  : -0.015 (SE 0.012)
                                                                                                       Year
       .04                                                                           -.1                                  Industry-Year + Firm FEs : -0.006 (SE 0.011)
          1988    1989   1990   1991   1992   1993   1994   1995   1996      1997       1988   1989   1990       1991   1992   1993     1994     1995    1996     1997

      (e) Separation into Nonemployment: Levels                                     (f) Separation into Nonemployment: DiD
       .14                                                                            .1
                                          Treated Firms, 150  Emp1988  250                 Year-Specific DiD Effects
                                          Control Firms, 50  Emp1988 < 150                  Year FEs
                                                                                            Industry-Year + Firm FEs
       .12                                                                          .05



        .1                                                                            0



       .08                                                                          -.05
                                                                                                                          Pooled Post-Reform DiD Effects
                                                                                                      Baseline            Year FEs                  : -0.006 (SE 0.008)
                                                                                                       Year
       .06                                                                           -.1                                  Industry-Year + Firm FEs : -0.018 (SE 0.008)
          1988    1989   1990   1991   1992   1993   1994   1995   1996      1997       1988   1989   1990       1991   1992   1993     1994     1995    1996     1997




Note: The figure displays the effects of shared governance on separation rates for employees with at least one
year of tenure. The left column displays the outcome in levels for treated firms (firms with employment between
150-250 in 1988) and for control firms (firms with employment between 50-149 in 1988) over the period 1988-1997.
The right column displays the difference-in-differences estimates decomposed by years normalized relative to
baseline year 1990. The dashed vertical line in 1991 denotes the year the reform became active. In the right panels,
the capped vertical bars denote 95% confidence intervals based on standard errors clustered at the firm level; we
report the pooled post-reform effect in the bottom right corner of each plot. We also report results in Columns (4)
through (6) of Table A.1. We report full sample results in Figure 3 and Columns (1) through (3) of Table 2.




                                                                               54
                                 Figure A.7: Separations for Employees Aged 20-55


                   (a) Any Separation: Levels                                                    (b) Any Separation: DiD
        .3                                                                           .1
                                         Treated Firms, 150  Emp1988  250                 Year-Specific DiD Effects
                                         Control Firms, 50  Emp1988 < 150                  Year FEs
                                                                                           Industry-Year + Firm FEs
       .25                                                                         .05



        .2                                                                           0



       .15                                                                         -.05
                                                                                                                         Pooled Post-Reform DiD Effects
                                                                                                     Baseline            Year FEs                  : -0.021 (SE 0.015)
                                                                                                      Year
        .1                                                                          -.1                                  Industry-Year + Firm FEs : -0.027 (SE 0.013)
          1988   1989   1990   1991   1992   1993   1994   1995   1996      1997       1988   1989   1990       1991   1992   1993     1994     1995    1996     1997

                 (c) Job-to-Job Separation: Levels                                            (d) Job-to-Job Separation: DiD
       .12                                                                           .1
                                         Treated Firms, 150  Emp1988  250                 Year-Specific DiD Effects
                                         Control Firms, 50  Emp1988 < 150                  Year FEs
                                                                                           Industry-Year + Firm FEs
        .1                                                                         .05



       .08                                                                           0



       .06                                                                         -.05
                                                                                                                         Pooled Post-Reform DiD Effects
                                                                                                     Baseline            Year FEs                  : -0.014 (SE 0.012)
                                                                                                      Year
       .04                                                                          -.1                                  Industry-Year + Firm FEs : -0.003 (SE 0.011)
          1988   1989   1990   1991   1992   1993   1994   1995   1996      1997       1988   1989   1990       1991   1992   1993     1994     1995    1996     1997

      (e) Separation into Nonemployment: Levels                                    (f) Separation into Nonemployment: DiD
       .18                                                                           .1
                                         Treated Firms, 150  Emp1988  250                 Year-Specific DiD Effects
                                         Control Firms, 50  Emp1988 < 150                  Year FEs
       .16                                                                                 Industry-Year + Firm FEs
                                                                                   .05

       .14
                                                                                     0
       .12

                                                                                   -.05
        .1
                                                                                                                         Pooled Post-Reform DiD Effects
                                                                                                     Baseline            Year FEs                  : -0.007 (SE 0.008)
                                                                                                      Year
       .08                                                                          -.1                                  Industry-Year + Firm FEs : -0.024 (SE 0.008)
          1988   1989   1990   1991   1992   1993   1994   1995   1996      1997       1988   1989   1990       1991   1992   1993     1994     1995    1996     1997




Note: The figure displays the effects of shared governance on separation rates for employees aged 20-55. The
left column displays the outcome in levels for treated firms (firms with employment between 150-250 in 1988)
and for control firms (firms with employment between 50-149 in 1988) over the period 1988-1997. The right
column displays the difference-in-differences estimates decomposed by years normalized relative to baseline
year 1990. The dashed vertical line in 1991 denotes the year the reform became active. In the right panels, the
capped vertical bars denote 95% confidence intervals based on standard errors clustered at the firm level; we
report the pooled post-reform effect in the bottom right corner of each plot. We also report results in Columns (7)
through (9) of Table A.1. We report full sample results in Figure 3 and Columns (1) through (3) of Table 2.




                                                                              55
                         Figure A.8: Sickness: Fraction of Employees with Sick Benefits


                        (a) Older than 40: Levels                                                      (b) Older than 40: DiD
        .1                                                                           .03
                                           Treated Firms, 150  Emp1988  250                 Year-Specific DiD Effects
                                           Control Firms, 50  Emp1988 < 150                  Year FEs
       .09                                                                           .02     Industry-Year + Firm FEs

       .08                                                                           .01

       .07                                                                             0

       .06                                                                           -.01

       .05                                                                           -.02                                 Pooled Post-Reform DiD Effects
                                                                                                       Baseline           Year FEs                  : -0.002 (SE 0.003)
                                                                                                        Year
       .04                                                                           -.03                                 Industry-Year + Firm FEs : -0.002 (SE 0.003)
          1988   1989    1990    1991   1992   1993   1994   1995   1996      1997       1988   1989    1990      1991   1992   1993    1994     1995    1996     1997

                                (c) Male: Levels                                                                  (d) Male: DiD
        .1                                                                           .03
                                           Treated Firms, 150  Emp1988  250                 Year-Specific DiD Effects
                                           Control Firms, 50  Emp1988 < 150                  Year FEs
       .09                                                                           .02     Industry-Year + Firm FEs

       .08                                                                           .01

       .07                                                                             0

       .06                                                                           -.01

       .05                                                                           -.02                                 Pooled Post-Reform DiD Effects
                                                                                                       Baseline           Year FEs                  : -0.001 (SE 0.003)
                                                                                                        Year
       .04                                                                           -.03                                 Industry-Year + Firm FEs : -0.001 (SE 0.003)
          1988   1989    1990    1991   1992   1993   1994   1995   1996      1997       1988   1989    1990      1991   1992   1993    1994     1995    1996     1997




Note: The figure displays the effects of shared governance on sick benefits and maternity benefits. The left
column displays the outcome in levels for treated firms (firms with employment between 150-250 in 1988) and
for control firms (firms with employment between 50-149 in 1988) over the period 1988-1997. The right column
displays the difference-in-differences estimates decomposed by years normalized relative to baseline year 1990.
The dashed vertical line in 1991 denotes the year the reform became active. In the right panels, the capped
vertical bars denote 95% confidence intervals based on standard errors clustered at the firm level; we report the
pooled post-reform effect in the bottom right corner of each plot. We also report results in Columns (5) and (6) of
Table 2. We report robustness analyses in Figure A.9.




                                                                                56
                                   Figure A.9: Separations and Sickness (Robustness Checks)
                     (a) Any Separation, Bandwidth                                                                        (b) Any Separation, Donuthole
       .04                                                                                                    .04

       .02                                                                                                    .02

         0                                                                                                        0

      -.02                                                                                                    -.02

      -.04                                                                                                    -.04

      -.06                                                                                                    -.06

      -.08                                                                                                    -.08
             30         40           50         60         70             80          90         100                  0         5       10     15     20      25     30      35       40     45       50
                                                  Bandwidth                                                                                           Size of Donut Hole
                   (Including Firms With 1988 Employment Within Interval of the 150 Threshold)                            (Excluding Firms With 1988 Employment Within Interval of the 150 Threshold)


                  (c) Job-to-Job Separation, Bandwidth                                                        (d) Job-to-Job Separation, Donuthole
       .04                                                                                                    .04

       .02                                                                                                    .02

         0                                                                                                        0

      -.02                                                                                                    -.02

      -.04                                                                                                    -.04

      -.06                                                                                                    -.06

      -.08                                                                                                    -.08
             30         40           50         60         70             80          90         100                  0         5       10     15     20      25     30      35       40     45       50
                                                  Bandwidth                                                                                           Size of Donut Hole
                   (Including Firms With 1988 Employment Within Interval of the 150 Threshold)                            (Excluding Firms With 1988 Employment Within Interval of the 150 Threshold)


        (e) Sep. into Nonemployment, Bandwidth                                                         (f) Sep. into Nonemployment, Donuthole
       .04                                                                                                    .04

       .02                                                                                                    .02

         0                                                                                                        0

      -.02                                                                                                    -.02

      -.04                                                                                                    -.04

      -.06                                                                                                    -.06

      -.08                                                                                                    -.08
             30         40           50         60         70             80          90         100                  0         5       10     15     20      25     30      35       40     45       50
                                                  Bandwidth                                                                                           Size of Donut Hole
                   (Including Firms With 1988 Employment Within Interval of the 150 Threshold)                            (Excluding Firms With 1988 Employment Within Interval of the 150 Threshold)


              (g) Sickness, Older than 40, Bandwidth                                                      (h) Sickness, Older than 40, Donuthole
      .02                                                                                              .02


      .01                                                                                              .01


        0                                                                                                0


      -.01                                                                                             -.01


      -.02                                                                                             -.02
             30         40          50          60          70            80          90         100          0           5       10      15      20      25      30      35        40     45        50
                                                  Bandwidth                                                                                       Size of Donut Hole
                   (Including Firms With 1988 Employment Within Interval of the 150 Threshold)                        (Excluding Firms With 1988 Employment Within Interval of the 150 Threshold)


                       (i) Sickness, Male, Bandwidth                                                                       (j) Sickness, Male, Donuthole
      .02                                                                                              .02


      .01                                                                                              .01


        0                                                                                                0


      -.01                                                                                             -.01


      -.02                                                                                             -.02
             30         40          50          60          70            80          90         100          0           5       10      15      20      25      30      35        40     45        50
                                                  Bandwidth                                                                                       Size of Donut Hole
                   (Including Firms With 1988 Employment Within Interval of the 150 Threshold)                        (Excluding Firms With 1988 Employment Within Interval of the 150 Threshold)

Note: The figure plots DiD point estimates and 95% confidence intervals, clustering standard errors at the firm
level and including firm fixed effects and industry-year fixed effects. The left column varies the employment
sample starting from a bandwidth of 10, 140-160, to a bandwidth of 100, our baseline specification indicated by
the solid black diamond. The right column displays the donuthole specification starting from a hole size equal to
0, our baseline indicated by the black solid diamond, to a hole size equal to 50, excluding firms with employment
between 100-200. We display the corresponding baseline results in Figure 3, Appendix Figure A.8 and Table 2.
                                                                                                  57
                                              Figure A.10: Wage Effects (Robustness Checks)


                   (a) Mean Log Wage, Bandwidth                                                                    (b) Mean Log Wage, Donuthole
        .1                                                                                               .1



       .05                                                                                             .05



        0                                                                                                0



      -.05                                                                                             -.05
             30         40          50         60         70            80          90          100           0       5       10      15      20      25      30      35        40     45       50
                                                 Bandwidth                                                                                    Size of Donut Hole
                  (Including Firms With 1988 Employment Within Interval of the 150 Threshold)                     (Excluding Firms With 1988 Employment Within Interval of the 150 Threshold)


                  (c) AKM Pay Premium, Bandwidth                                                                  (d) AKM Pay Premium, Donuthole
        .1                                                                                               .1



       .05                                                                                             .05



        0                                                                                                0



      -.05                                                                                             -.05
             30         40          50         60         70            80          90          100           0       5       10      15      20      25      30      35        40     45       50
                                                 Bandwidth                                                                                    Size of Donut Hole
                  (Including Firms With 1988 Employment Within Interval of the 150 Threshold)                     (Excluding Firms With 1988 Employment Within Interval of the 150 Threshold)


                       (e) Labor Share, Bandwidth                                                                       (f) Labor Share, Donuthole
       .05                                                                                             .05



        0                                                                                                0



      -.05                                                                                             -.05



       -.1                                                                                              -.1
             30         40          50         60         70            80          90          100           0       5       10      15      20      25      30      35        40     45       50
                                                 Bandwidth                                                                                    Size of Donut Hole
                  (Including Firms With 1988 Employment Within Interval of the 150 Threshold)                     (Excluding Firms With 1988 Employment Within Interval of the 150 Threshold)




Note: The figure plots DiD point estimates and 95% confidence intervals, clustering standard errors at the firm
level and including firm fixed effects and industry-year fixed effects. The left column varies the employment
sample starting from a bandwidth of 10, 140-160, to a bandwidth of 100, our baseline specification indicated by
the solid black diamond. The right column displays the donuthole specification starting from a hole size equal to
0, our baseline indicated by the black solid diamond, to a hole size equal to 50, excluding firms with employment
between 100-200. We display the corresponding baseline results in Figure 4 and Table 3.




                                                                                                  58
                                  Figure A.11: Firm Performance (Additional Outcomes)


                     (a) Capital Intensity: Levels                                                 (b) Capital Intensity: DiD
       10.8                                                                             .5
                  Treated Firms, 150  Emp1988  250                                           Year-Specific DiD Effects
                  Control Firms, 50  Emp1988 < 150                                            Year FEs
                                                                                              Industry-Year + Firm FEs
       10.6                                                                           .25



       10.4                                                                             0



       10.2                                                                           -.25
                                                                                                                            Pooled Post-Reform DiD Effects
                                                                                                        Baseline            Year FEs                  : 0.099 (SE 0.078)
                                                                                                         Year
        10                                                                             -.5                                  Industry-Year + Firm FEs : 0.035 (SE 0.048)
          1988     1989    1990   1991   1992   1993   1994   1995   1996      1997       1988   1989   1990       1991   1992   1993     1994     1995    1996     1997

              (c) Total Factor Productivity: Levels                                          (d) Total Factor Productivity: DiD
       6.2                                                                              .5
                                            Treated Firms, 150  Emp1988  250                 Year-Specific DiD Effects
                                            Control Firms, 50  Emp1988 < 150                  Year FEs
                                                                                              Industry-Year + Firm FEs
       6.1                                                                            .25



        6                                                                               0



       5.9                                                                            -.25
                                                                                                                            Pooled Post-Reform DiD Effects
                                                                                                        Baseline            Year FEs                  : -0.038 (SE 0.060)
                                                                                                         Year
       5.8                                                                             -.5                                  Industry-Year + Firm FEs : 0.063 (SE 0.034)
          1988    1989    1990    1991   1992   1993   1994   1995   1996      1997       1988   1989   1990       1991   1992   1993     1994     1995    1996     1997

                         (e) Profit Margin: Levels                                                      (f) Profit Margin: DiD
       .04
                                            Treated Firms, 150  Emp1988  250          .04    Year-Specific DiD Effects
                                            Control Firms, 50  Emp1988 < 150                  Year FEs
                                                                                              Industry-Year + Firm FEs
       .02
                                                                                      .02


         0                                                                              0


       -.02                                                                           -.02
                                                                                                                            Pooled Post-Reform DiD Effects
                                                                                                        Baseline            Year FEs                  : 0.006 (SE 0.008)
                                                                                                         Year
       -.04                                                                           -.04                                  Industry-Year + Firm FEs : -0.001 (SE 0.008)
           1988    1989   1990    1991   1992   1993   1994   1995   1996      1997       1988   1989   1990       1991   1992   1993     1994     1995    1996     1997




Note: The figure displays the effects of shared governance on capital intensity, total factor productivity and the
profit margin. The left column displays the outcome in levels for treated firms (firms with employment between
150-250 in 1988) and for control firms (firms with employment between 50-149 in 1988) over the period 1988-1997.
The right column displays the difference-in-differences estimates decomposed by years normalized by baseline
year 1990. Main results in Figure 5. We report the pooled post-reform effect in the bottom right corner of each
plot and in Table 3.




                                                                                 59
                                               Figure A.12: Firm Performance (Robustness Checks)
                          (a) Firm Survival, Bandwidth                                                                           (b) Firm Survival, Donuthole
         .2                                                                                                  .2

       .15                                                                                                 .15

         .1                                                                                                  .1

       .05                                                                                                 .05

         0                                                                                                       0

       -.05                                                                                                -.05

        -.1                                                                                                 -.1
              30            40           50         60         70            80           90         100                 0       5       10      15      20      25      30      35        40     45       50
                                                      Bandwidth                                                                                          Size of Donut Hole
                       (Including Firms With 1988 Employment Within Interval of the 150 Threshold)                           (Excluding Firms With 1988 Employment Within Interval of the 150 Threshold)


      (c) Log Value Added per Worker, Bandwidth (d) Log Value Added per Worker, Donuthole
         .25                                                                                               .25


         .15                                                                                               .15


         .05                                                                                               .05


        -.05                                                                                               -.05


        -.15                                                                                               -.15
                  30          40          50        60         70            80          90          100                 0       5       10      15      20      25      30      35        40     45       50
                                                      Bandwidth                                                                                          Size of Donut Hole
                       (Including Firms With 1988 Employment Within Interval of the 150 Threshold)                           (Excluding Firms With 1988 Employment Within Interval of the 150 Threshold)


                        (e) Capital Intensity, Bandwidth                                                                       (f) Capital Intensity, Donuthole
         .3                                                                                                .3

         .2                                                                                                .2

         .1                                                                                                .1

          0                                                                                                 0

        -.1                                                                                                -.1

        -.2                                                                                                -.2
              30             40          50         60         70            80           90         100             0          5       10      15      20       25      30      35        40      45      50
                                                      Bandwidth                                                                                          Size of Donut Hole
                       (Including Firms With 1988 Employment Within Interval of the 150 Threshold)                           (Excluding Firms With 1988 Employment Within Interval of the 150 Threshold)


          (g) Total Factor Productivity, Bandwidth                                                           (h) Total Factor Productivity, Donuthole
         .25                                                                                               .25


         .15                                                                                               .15


         .05                                                                                               .05


        -.05                                                                                               -.05


        -.15                                                                                               -.15
                  30          40          50        60         70            80          90          100                 0       5       10      15      20      25      30      35        40     45       50
                                                      Bandwidth                                                                                          Size of Donut Hole
                       (Including Firms With 1988 Employment Within Interval of the 150 Threshold)                           (Excluding Firms With 1988 Employment Within Interval of the 150 Threshold)


                           (i) Profit Margin, Bandwidth                                                                           (j) Profit Margin, Donuthole
         .04                                                                                               .04


         .02                                                                                               .02


              0                                                                                                  0


        -.02                                                                                               -.02


        -.04                                                                                               -.04
                  30          40          50        60         70            80          90          100                 0       5       10      15      20      25      30      35        40     45       50
                                                      Bandwidth                                                                                          Size of Donut Hole
                       (Including Firms With 1988 Employment Within Interval of the 150 Threshold)                           (Excluding Firms With 1988 Employment Within Interval of the 150 Threshold)

Note: The figure plots DiD point estimates and 95% confidence intervals clustering standard errors at the firm
level and including firm fixed effects and industry-year fixed effects. The left column varies the employment
sample starting from a bandwidth of 10, 140-160, to a bandwidth of 100, our baseline specification indicated by
the solid black diamond. The right column displays the donuthole specification starting from a hole size equal to
0, our baseline indicated by the black solid diamond, to a hole size equal to 50, excluding firms with employment
between 100-200. We display the corresponding baseline results in Figure 5 and Table 3.
                                                                                                      60
                Figure A.13: Shop-Floor Representation Reform (Additional Outcomes)


                                (a) Any Separation                                                                    (b) Separation into Nonemployment
       .3       Treated Firms, 20  Emp2005 < 30
                                                                                                               .21         Treated Firms, 20  Emp2005 < 30
                Control Firms, 30  Emp2005 < 40                                                                            Control Firms, 30  Emp2005 < 40
                Control Firms, 10  Emp2005 < 20                                                                .19         Control Firms, 10  Emp2005 < 20



      .24                                                                                                      .17

                                                                                                               .15

      .18                                                                                                      .13

                                                                                                               .11
                                                                  DiD Effects                                                                                              DiD Effects
                                                                  Control 10-19    : -0.004 (SE 0.005)                                                                     Control 10-19   : -0.004 (SE 0.004)
      .12                                                         Control 30-39    : 0.001 (SE 0.007)          .09                                                         Control 30-39   : 0.005 (SE 0.005)
         1996        1999          2002           2005      2008         2011         2014          2017          1996          1999          2002           2005   2008         2011         2014        2017

                           (c) AKM Pay Premium                                                                                                 (d) Labor Share
        .05       Treated Firms, 20  Emp2005 < 30
                                                                                                               .9       Treated Firms, 20  Emp2005 < 30
                  Control Firms, 30  Emp2005 < 40                                                                       Control Firms, 30  Emp2005 < 40
                  Control Firms, 10  Emp2005 < 20                                                                       Control Firms, 10  Emp2005 < 20

       .025                                                                                                    .8



            0                                                                                                  .7



      -.025                                                                                                    .6

                                                                  DiD Effects                                                                                              DiD Effects
                                                                  Control 10-19    : -0.004 (SE 0.005)                                                                     Control 10-19   : 0.003 (SE 0.005)
       -.05                                                       Control 30-39    : -0.009 (SE 0.007)         .5                                                          Control 30-39   : 0.004 (SE 0.007)
           1996         1999        2002            2005     2008         2011         2014         2017         1996          1999         2002             2005   2008         2011        2014         2017

                               (e) Capital Intensity                                                                             (f) Total Factor Productivity
      10.2       Treated Firms, 20  Emp2005 < 30
                                                                                                               6.8         Treated Firms, 20  Emp2005 < 30
                 Control Firms, 30  Emp2005 < 40                                                                           Control Firms, 30  Emp2005 < 40
                 Control Firms, 10  Emp2005 < 20                                                                           Control Firms, 10  Emp2005 < 20
        10

                                                                                                               6.6
       9.8


       9.6
                                                                                                               6.4

       9.4
                                                                  DiD Effects                                                                                              DiD Effects
                                                                  Control 10-19    : -0.026 (SE 0.023)                                                                     Control 10-19   : 0.014 (SE 0.015)
       9.2                                                        Control 30-39    : -0.034 (SE 0.037)         6.2                                                         Control 30-39   : 0.014 (SE 0.023)
          1996         1999         2002           2005      2008         2011         2014         2017          1996          1999          2002           2005   2008         2011         2014        2017

                                                                                       (g) Profit Margin
                                                           .09        Treated Firms, 20  Emp2005 < 30
                                                                      Control Firms, 30  Emp2005 < 40
                                                           .07        Control Firms, 10  Emp2005 < 20

                                                           .05

                                                           .03

                                                           .01

                                                           -.01

                                                           -.03

                                                           -.05                                                         DiD Effects
                                                                                                                        Control 10-19    : -0.004 (SE 0.005)
                                                           -.07                                                         Control 30-39    : -0.006 (SE 0.007)
                                                               1996        1999         2002            2005        2008        2011         2014            2017




Note: The figure extends Figure 6 to other outcomes. It displays the effects of a 2008 reform that lowered the
threshold for mandatory shop-floor representation from 30 to 20 employees. We report the pooled post-reform
effect in the each plot and in Tables A.3 and A.4.



                                                                                                         61
     B     Appendix Tables

                                               Table A.1: Effects on Separations and Sickness (Robustness Checks)

                                       Correcting Spurious ID Changes               With at Least One Year of Tenure                     Employees Aged 20-55
                                    Any        Job-to-Job    Separation into      Any       Job-to-Job    Separation into      Any         Job-to-Job   Separation into
                                 Separation Separation      Nonemployment      Separation   Separation   Nonemployment      Separation     Separation  Nonemployment
                                    (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)           (5)              (6)           (7)             (8)            (9)
      DiD: Year FEs
        Treatment                   -0.018        -0.012        -0.006           -0.021        -0.015         -0.006          -0.021          -0.014         -0.007
        (1991-1997)                (0.014)       (0.011)        (0.008)         (0.015)       (0.012)         (0.008)        (0.015)         (0.012)        (0.008)

         Pre-Period                 -0.000        -0.001         0.000           -0.003        -0.003          -0.000         0.000           -0.001         0.001
         (1988-1989)               (0.014)       (0.011)        (0.007)         (0.014)       (0.012)         (0.007)        (0.014)         (0.012)        (0.007)

      DiD: Industry-Year FEs
        Treatment                   -0.012        -0.010        -0.002           -0.014        -0.013         -0.001          -0.014          -0.012         -0.002
        (1991-1997)                (0.014)       (0.011)        (0.008)         (0.015)       (0.012)         (0.008)        (0.015)         (0.012)        (0.008)

         Pre-Period                 0.000         -0.001         0.001           -0.004        -0.003          -0.000         0.002           -0.001         0.003
         (1988-1989)               (0.013)       (0.011)        (0.007)         (0.014)       (0.012)         (0.007)        (0.014)         (0.012)        (0.007)
62




      DiD: Year and Firm FEs
        Treatment                   -0.026**      -0.005        -0.021***        -0.026*       -0.008          -0.019**       -0.026**        -0.003         -0.023***
        (1991-1997)                (0.013)       (0.010)        (0.007)         (0.014)       (0.011)         (0.008)        (0.013)         (0.011)        (0.007)

         Pre-Period                 -0.005        -0.008         0.003           -0.010        -0.010          0.000          -0.004          -0.007         0.003
         (1988-1989)               (0.012)       (0.010)        (0.006)         (0.014)       (0.012)         (0.006)        (0.013)         (0.011)        (0.007)

      DiD: Industry-Year and Firm FEs
        Treatment                   -0.027**      -0.006        -0.022***        -0.024*       -0.006          -0.018**       -0.027**        -0.003         -0.024***
        (1991-1997)                (0.013)       (0.010)        (0.007)         (0.013)       (0.011)         (0.008)        (0.013)         (0.011)        (0.008)

         Pre-Period                 -0.002        -0.006         0.004           -0.009        -0.009          -0.001         -0.001          -0.006         0.005
         (1988-1989)               (0.012)       (0.010)        (0.006)         (0.013)       (0.012)         (0.007)        (0.013)         (0.011)        (0.007)


      1990 Average (Control):       0.249        0.079           0.170           0.207        0.079           0.128           0.249          0.081           0.168
      1990 Average (Treated)        0.252        0.097           0.155           0.218        0.100           0.118           0.251          0.099           0.152
      N, Firm-Years (Control):      8,635        8,635           8,635           8,235        8,235           8,235           7,988          7,988           7,988
      N, Firm-Years (Treated):      1,833        1,833           1,833           1,787        1,787           1,787           1,684          1,684           1,684


     Note: The table reports results of robustness checks for the separation outcomes analyzed in Figure 3 and Table 2. We plot outcomes in Appendix Figures
     A.5-A.7.
                                                      Table A.2: Effects on Within-Firm Wage Structure

                                                          Log Wage in Within-Firm Wage Percentile                                Executive      Executive Wage
                                   p10        p20        p30       p40        p50       p60        p70       p80       p90      (Log) Wage     & Capital Income
                                   (1)        (2)        (3)       (4)        (5)       (6)        (7)       (8)       (9)         (10)              (11)
      DiD: Year FEs
        Treatment                 0.069     0.058       0.037     0.035     0.028       0.023     0.020     0.014      0.015        -0.044            0.039
        (1991-1997)               (0.032)   (0.025)    (0.020)    (0.016)   (0.014)    (0.013)   (0.013)   (0.013)    (0.014)      (0.039)           (0.045)

         Pre-Period                0.006     -0.003    -0.007     -0.004     -0.005     -0.006    -0.010   -0.015      -0.012       0.001            -0.020
         (1988-1989)              (0.030)   (0.022)    (0.017)    (0.014)   (0.012)    (0.011)   (0.011)   (0.010)    (0.011)      (0.037)           (0.044)

      DiD: Industry-Year FEs
        Treatment                  0.045     0.034      0.017      0.016     0.012      0.010     0.010     0.005      0.009       -0.046             0.037
        (1991-1997)               (0.031)   (0.024)    (0.019)    (0.015)   (0.013)    (0.013)   (0.013)   (0.013)    (0.014)      (0.039)           (0.045)

         Pre-Period                -0.011    -0.015    -0.019     -0.016     -0.015     -0.014   -0.018    -0.020      -0.014       0.012            -0.015
         (1988-1989)              (0.029)   (0.022)    (0.016)    (0.013)   (0.011)    (0.010)   (0.010)   (0.010)    (0.010)      (0.037)           (0.045)

      DiD: Year and Firm FEs
        Treatment                 0.055     0.063      0.045     0.045      0.035      0.027     0.024      0.018      0.021        0.008             0.067
        (1991-1997)               (0.028)   (0.021)    (0.017)   (0.014)    (0.012)    (0.011)   (0.011)   (0.011)    (0.012)      (0.035)           (0.041)
63




         Pre-Period                0.002     -0.005    -0.011     -0.005     -0.003     -0.000    -0.003   -0.006      -0.003       0.024             0.019
         (1988-1989)              (0.026)   (0.018)    (0.013)    (0.010)   (0.008)    (0.007)   (0.007)   (0.007)    (0.007)      (0.025)           (0.031)

      DiD: Industry-Year and Firm FEs
        Treatment                  0.042    0.053      0.035     0.035      0.025       0.017     0.014     0.008      0.010        -0.004            0.053
        (1991-1997)               (0.027)   (0.020)    (0.016)   (0.013)    (0.011)    (0.011)   (0.011)   (0.011)    (0.011)      (0.035)           (0.041)

         Pre-Period                -0.003    -0.006    -0.014     -0.009     -0.007     -0.004    -0.007   -0.011      -0.007       0.021             0.013
         (1988-1989)              (0.026)   (0.018)    (0.012)    (0.010)   (0.008)    (0.007)   (0.007)   (0.007)    (0.007)      (0.026)           (0.032)


      1990 Average (Control):      8.528     9.062      9.333      9.501     9.622      9.722     9.820     9.932     10.110       10.508            10.806
      1990 Average (Treated):      8.576     9.116      9.384      9.538     9.649      9.744     9.841     9.954     10.125       10.709            11.077
      N, Firm-Years (Control):     8,684     8,684      8,684      8,684     8,684      8,684     8,684     8,684     8,684         6,766             6,773
      N, Firm-Years (Treated):     1,839     1,839      1,839      1,839     1,839      1,839     1,839     1,839      1,839        1,614             1,615


     Note: The table reports DiD effects on different percentiles of the within-firm wage distribution. See Table note for Table 3 for more information.
                                          Table A.3: Effects on Separations and Measures of Job Quality, 2008 Reform


                                                            Any       Job-to-Job   Separation into    Sickness Spell   Sickness Spell   Job Quality   Labor Relations
                                                         Separation   Separation   Nonemployment     (Older than 40)       (Male)         (z-score)   Quality (z-score)
                                                            (1)           (2)            (3)               (4)               (5)             (6)             (7)
                DiD: Year FEs
                  Smaller Control Firms                    -0.003       -0.005          0.002             -0.004           -0.000          0.229           0.344
                  (10  Emp2005 < 20)                      (0.005)      (0.004)         (0.004)           (0.003)          (0.003)         (0.167)          (0.153)

                   Larger Control Firms                    -0.004       -0.006          0.001             -0.003           0.003           0.267            0.009
                   (30  Emp2005 < 40)                     (0.008)      (0.005)         (0.005)           (0.004)          (0.004)         (0.213)          (0.199)

                DiD: Industry-Year FEs
                  Smaller Control Firms                    -0.003       -0.004          0.001             -0.004           -0.000          0.211            0.286
                  (10  Emp2005 < 20)                      (0.005)      (0.004)         (0.004)           (0.003)          (0.003)         (0.165)          (0.154)

                   Larger Control Firms                    -0.006       -0.006          0.000             -0.003           0.003           0.349            -0.027
                   (30  Emp2005 < 40)                     (0.008)      (0.005)         (0.005)           (0.004)          (0.004)         (0.224)          (0.200)

                DiD: Year and Firm FEs
                  Smaller Control Firms                    -0.004       -0.000          -0.004           -0.005            0.001
                  (10  Emp2005 < 20)                      (0.005)      (0.003)         (0.004)           (0.003)          (0.003)

                   Larger Control Firms                    0.002        -0.004          0.006             -0.002           0.005
64




                   (30  Emp2005 < 40)                     (0.007)      (0.005)         (0.005)           (0.004)          (0.004)

                DiD: Industry-Year and Firm FEs
                  Smaller Control Firms                    -0.004       -0.000          -0.004           -0.005            0.001
                  (10  Emp2005 < 20)                      (0.005)      (0.003)         (0.004)           (0.003)          (0.003)

                   Larger Control Firms                    0.001        -0.004          0.005             -0.002           0.005
                   (30  Emp2005 < 40)                     (0.007)      (0.005)         (0.005)           (0.004)          (0.004)


                2007 Average (Treated Firms):               0.244        0.078          0.166            0.063            0.081           -0.236           -0.128
                2007 Average (Smaller Control Firms):      0.240        0.070           0.170            0.058            0.075           -0.001            0.157
                2007 Average (Larger Control Firms):       0.237        0.074           0.163            0.058            0.083           -0.114           -0.220
                N, Firm-Years (Treated Firms):             15,074       15,074         15,074            14,795           14,624           353               399
                N, Firm-Years (Smaller Control Firms):     46,035       46,035         46,035            44,453           43,451           569               610
                N, Firm-Years (Larger Control Firms):      7,003        7,003           7,003             6,929            6,876           220               242


     Note: The table reports DiD effects of the 2008 reform, which affected firms with 20 to 29 employees. We report estimates relative to two separate control groups
     of firms with employment of 10 to 19 and 30 to 39 employees, respectively, in 2005. The treatment group is defined as firms with 2005 employment of 20 to 29
     employees. All point estimates are reported relative to 2007, the year for which we normalize the difference between treatment and the relevant control group
     to zero. Treatment indicates the DiD treatment effect in the post-reform period from 2008 to 2013. We report estimates using either smaller or larger firms as
     the comparison group. The first panel reports DiD results without additional control variables, the second panel includes industry-year effects (NACE Level 1),
     the third and fourth panel repeat the same specifications including firm effects. Standard errors clustered at the firm level are reported in parentheses. We plot
     some outcomes in Figures 6 and the remaining ones in Figure A.13. Since the last round of Quality of Work Life Survey prior to the reform was conducted at
     2003, for Job Quality and Labor Relations Quality, the "2007 Average" corresponds to the 2003 wave; the post-period for the survey draws on the 2013 wave.
                                                  Table A.4: Effects on Measures of Firm Performance, 2008 Reform


                                                           Mean         AKM        Labor      Firm      Log Value Added     Capital    Total Factor   Profit
                                                         Log Wage   Pay Premium    Share     Survival     per Worker       Intensity   Productivity   Margin
                                                            (1)          (2)        (3)        (4)             (5)            (6)          (7)         (8)
                DiD: Year FEs
                  Smaller Control Firms                    0.011       -0.002       0.002     0.004          0.012           0.040        -0.030       -0.003
                  (10  Emp2005 < 20)                      (0.008)     (0.005)      (0.005)   (0.006)        (0.014)         (0.032)      (0.022)      (0.005)

                   Larger Control Firms                    -0.004      -0.010       -0.002    0.002          0.040           0.030        0.002        -0.002
                   (30  Emp2005 < 40)                     (0.011)     (0.007)      (0.008)   (0.010)        (0.021)         (0.051)      (0.035)      (0.007)

                DiD: Industry-Year FEs
                  Smaller Control Firms                    0.012       -0.001       0.002     0.003          0.010           0.026        -0.012       -0.002
                  (10  Emp2005 < 20)                      (0.008)     (0.005)      (0.005)   (0.006)        (0.014)         (0.030)      (0.019)      (0.005)

                   Larger Control Firms                    -0.005      -0.009       -0.003    0.001          0.027           0.010        0.003        -0.003
                   (30  Emp2005 < 40)                     (0.010)     (0.007)      (0.008)   (0.010)        (0.021)         (0.049)      (0.031)      (0.007)

                DiD: Year and Firm FEs
                  Smaller Control Firms                    0.012       -0.003       0.004     0.004          -0.002          -0.025       0.009        -0.005
                  (10  Emp2005 < 20)                      (0.007)     (0.005)      (0.005)   (0.006)        (0.012)         (0.023)      (0.015)      (0.005)
65




                   Larger Control Firms                    0.001       -0.010       0.005     0.002          0.008           -0.033       0.018        -0.005
                   (30  Emp2005 < 40)                     (0.010)     (0.006)      (0.007)   (0.010)        (0.017)         (0.037)      (0.023)      (0.007)

                DiD: Industry-Year and Firm FEs
                  Smaller Control Firms                    0.013       -0.004       0.003     0.003          0.003           -0.026       0.014        -0.004
                  (10  Emp2005 < 20)                      (0.007)     (0.005)      (0.005)   (0.006)        (0.012)         (0.023)      (0.015)      (0.005)

                   Larger Control Firms                    0.001       -0.009       0.004     0.001          0.002           -0.034       0.014        -0.006
                   (30  Emp2005 < 40)                     (0.010)     (0.007)      (0.007)   (0.010)        (0.017)         (0.037)      (0.023)      (0.007)


                2007 Average (Treated Firms):              9.889        0.005       0.716      0.947        10.627           9.526         6.558       0.017
                2007 Average (Smaller Control Firms):      9.838       -0.013       0.708     0.944         10.595          9.437         6.570        0.026
                2007 Average (Larger Control Firms):       9.927        0.014       0.711     0.946         10.709           9.641        6.556        0.016
                N, Firm-Years (Treated Firms):            15,254       14,048      12,605     18,536        12,176          12,365        11,836      12,307
                N, Firm-Years (Smaller Control Firms):    46,607       42,191      38,112     57,190        36,848          37,254        35,883      37,327
                N, Firm-Years (Larger Control Firms):      7,048        6,458      5,717      8,568         5,542            5,622         5,384       5,580


     Note: The table reports DiD effects of the 2008 reform, which affected firms with 20 to 29 employees. We report estimates relative to two separate control
     groups of firms with employment of 10 to 19 and 30 to 39 employees, respectively, in 2005. The treatment group is defined as firms with 2005 employment of 20
     to 29 employees. All point estimates are reported relative to 2007, the year for which we normalize the difference between treatment and the relevant control
     group to zero. Treatment indicates the DiD treatment effect in the post-reform period from 2008 to 2013. We report estimates using either smaller or larger
     firms as the comparison group. The first panel reports DiD results without additional control variables, the second panel includes industry-year effects (NACE
     Level 1), the third and fourth panel repeat the same specifications including firm effects. Standard errors clustered at the firm level are reported in parentheses.
     We plot some outcomes in Figures 6 and the remaining ones in Figure A.13.
C        Regression Discontinuity Design
As a complement to the difference-in-differences design studying the 1991 introduction of
shared governance, we implement a more local regression discontinuity design comparing
firms above and below the 150-employee threshold over a longer horizon of 25 years, from
the introduction of the policy in 1991 to the end of our data in 2016. Overall, while we do
not provide a detailed interpretation due to the a priori caveats reiterated below, the estimates
broadly support the limited and small effects documented in the DiD design (and we can here
additionally measure capital investment and dividends).

A Priori Caveats We reiterate our caveats flagged in Section 6. Compared to the DiD
design made possible by the reform-based quasi-experiment, we view the RD design not as
compelling as (i) there need not be a permanent policy discontinuity at 150 employees (due
to firms above/below the cutoff moving in and out of transitory treatment, due to lagged or
anticipation effects), (ii) the running variable is not sharply defined due to some discretion in
the employment measure, and (iii) due to concerns of firm selection around the cutoff. These
concerns have motivated our reform-based DiD design in the first place.

RD Specification       Our regression model for the regression discontinuity design is:

  y it     +  1 1[Nit -1  150] + 2 (Nit -1 - 150) +  3 1[Nit -1  150]( Nit -1 - 150) + t , J (i ) +    it ,

                    Worker Rep.
                                                                                                      (A.1)

where y it denotes the outcome of firm i in year t . The running variable Nit -1 corresponds to
the employment concept relevant to the codetermination law. That is, it counts all employees
with more than 90 days of employment and positive earnings in a given year; we do not count
short temporary job contracts, such as seasonal workers. The regression discontinuity design
uses the same employment definition as the main analysis, namely a snapshot definition for
December 31st of a given (previous) year, which is the best approximation to the employment
concept that triggers codetermination in the subsequent year. Hence, we match the outcomes
variables of a given year to the employment number of the previous year. In addition to this
linear specification, we also report results from a quadratic one.
    Importantly, there are no other policy discontinuities, such as tax incentives or admin-
istrative burdens, that kick in at the 150 employee threshold. The coefficient of interest is
1 and captures the effect of the right to worker representation. To increase precision, our
specification also includes industry-year effects, t , J (i ) . Finally, we winsorize all continuous
outcomes y it at the 1% level.



                                                    66
Tax and Accounting Data from Finnish Tax Administration (1994 to 2016) We merge on
firm-level tax and accounting data from the Finnish Tax Administration, which covers all firms
from 1994 to 2016. This data set contains the additional variables (investments and dividends),
which we use in our RD analysis, but not available in our DiD sample period, as discussed in
Section 6.

Bandwidth Choice and Inference Our main specification uses the bandwidth choice pro-
cedure in Calonico, Cattaneo, and Titiunik (2014), CCT in the following, with a triangular
kernel. We cluster standard errors at the firm level.

McCrary Test We implement a McCrary (2008) test for discontinuity of the density of firms
at the 150 employee threshold and plot the density in Figure A.14. The corresponding McCrary
(2008) test does not reject continuity of the density at 150 employees ( p     0.118), among
observations of the post-reform period (1991-1997, we find p 0.485 when considering the
maximum post-reform horizon to 2016 to maximize observations and power).
    As we discuss in Section 6, the absence of bunching to the left of the 150 threshold is
already a substantial result, as it shows that firms do not manipulate their size to avoid, or
seek, falling under the shared governance policy (thereby differing from, e.g., evidence for
size-dependent regulations to distort firm size in France and Finland, see Garicano, Lelarge,
and Van Reenen, 2016; Harju, Matikka, and Rauhanen, 2019).

Graphic Illustration We visualize the data and research design using quadratic specifications
and binned scatter plots. For consistency across graphs, we plot the same bandwidth of 50
employees around the threshold. As in our regression specifications, we use a triangular
kernel around the policy discontinuity for weighting. We report the  1 and its standard error
from our regression specification in the figures as well. These are overall quantitatively very
similar. Potential differences between the RD effect visualized in the figure and the preferred
regression specification arise from (i) differences in bandwidth (optimal CCT bandwidth
vs. fixed), (ii) inclusion of industry and year effects, and (iii) the CCT bias-correction in the
regressions.




                                               67
                                        Figure A.14: Density of Firm Size and McCrary Tests

                                 (a) McCrary: Pooled                                                                          (b) McCrary: Pre and Post
                         80                                                                                        .03                                     Post-Reform, Total Obs: 49980:
                                                         Disc. Estimate: -0.194 (SE 0.124)
                                                                                                                                                           Disc. Estimate: -0.044 (SE 0.063)
                                                                     p = 0.118
                                                                                                                                                           Pre-Reform, Total Obs: 5091:
                                                                                                                                                           Disc. Estimate: -0.158 (SE 0.145)
                         60
       Number of Firms




                                                                                                                   .02
                                                                                                  Share of Firms




                         40


                                                                                                                   .01
                         20




                          0                                                                                         0
                           100    125         150                  175                  200                              50   75   100   125     150      175       200         225        250
                                            Employment                                                                                         Employment




Note: The figure reports density plots and results of McCrary (2008) tests for continuity of the density at policy
discontinuity of 150 employees. Panel (a) reports results for the pooled sample period from 1991 to 1997. Panel
(b) reports the results separately for the pre-reform period from 1988 to 1990 (dashed line) and the post-reform
period from 1991 to 2016 (solid line).




                                                                                             68
                                                Figure A.15: Regression Discontinuity Design

                (a) Any Separation                                         (b) Job-to-Job Separation                               (c) Sep'n into Nonemployment
   .19                                                             .065                                                            .135




  .185
                                                                                                                                    .13

                                                                    .06

   .18
                                                                                                                                   .125


  .175
                                                                   .055
                                                                                                                                    .12

   .17

                               linear
                                    CCT
                                          = 0.020 (SE 0.061)                                   linear
                                                                                                    CCT
                                                                                                          = -0.062 (SE 0.036)                                   linear
                                                                                                                                                                     CCT
                                                                                                                                                                           = 0.014 (SE 0.027)
                                                                                                                                   .115
  .165
                               quadratic
                                         CCT
                                             = -0.015 (SE 0.029)    .05
                                                                                               quadratic
                                                                                                         CCT
                                                                                                             = -0.043 (SE 0.022)                                quadratic
                                                                                                                                                                          CCT
                                                                                                                                                                             = 0.008 (SE 0.021)

         100      120   140      160            180          200          100     120   140      160            180          200          100     120   140      160             180         200
                          Employment                                                      Employment                                                      Employment



(d) Sickness Spell (Older than 40)                                         (e) Sickness Spell (Male)                                            (f) Mean Log Wage
  .064                                                             .086
                                                                                                                                   9.96



  .062                                                             .084

                                                                                                                                   9.94


   .06
                                                                   .082


                                                                                                                                   9.92

  .058
                                                                    .08


                                linear
                                     CCT
                                          = 0.003 (SE 0.008)                                    linear
                                                                                                     CCT
                                                                                                          = 0.004 (SE 0.004)        9.9
                                                                                                                                                                linear
                                                                                                                                                                     CCT
                                                                                                                                                                           = 0.013 (SE 0.026)
  .056                          quadratic
                                            = 0.014 (SE 0.008)
                                          CCT                      .078
                                                                                                quadratic
                                                                                                            = 0.007 (SE 0.004)
                                                                                                          CCT
                                                                                                                                                                quadratic
                                                                                                                                                                          CCT
                                                                                                                                                                             = 0.040 (SE 0.034)

         100      120   140      160            180          200          100     120   140      160            180          200          100     120   140      160             180         200
                          Employment                                                      Employment                                                      Employment



               (g) AKM Pay Premium                                                (h) Labor Share                                                (i) Firm Survival
                                                                   .74                                                              .99
  .055



   .05                                                             .73
                                                                                                                                   .985


  .045                                                             .72

                                                                                                                                    .98

   .04
                                                                   .71


  .035                                                                                                                             .975
                                                                    .7


   .03
                                linear
                                     CCT
                                           = 0.004 (SE 0.009)                                  linear
                                                                                                    CCT
                                                                                                          = -0.005 (SE 0.014)                                   linear
                                                                                                                                                                     CCT
                                                                                                                                                                           = 0.004 (SE 0.008)
                                quadratic
                                          CCT
                                              = 0.009 (SE 0.010)   .69
                                                                                               quadratic
                                                                                                         CCT
                                                                                                             = -0.009 (SE 0.016)    .97                         quadratic
                                                                                                                                                                          CCT
                                                                                                                                                                             = 0.006 (SE 0.009)

         100      120   140      160            180          200         100     120    140      160            180          200          100     120   140       160             180         200
                          Employment                                                      Employment                                                      Employment



(j) Log Value Added Per Worker                                      (k) Total Factor Productivity                                               (l) Capital Intensity
   10.8                                                            6.5                                                             10.4


                                                                                                                                   10.3

  10.75                                                            6.4
                                                                                                                                   10.2


                                                                                                                                   10.1
   10.7                                                            6.3
                                                                                                                                    10


                                                                                                                                    9.9
  10.65                                                            6.2

                                                                                                                                    9.8
                                linear
                                     CCT
                                          = -0.018 (SE 0.043)                                   linear
                                                                                                     CCT
                                                                                                          = -0.042 (SE 0.081)                                   linear
                                                                                                                                                                     CCT
                                                                                                                                                                           = 0.104 (SE 0.118)
   10.6
                                quadratic
                                            = 0.027 (SE 0.052)
                                          CCT                      6.1
                                                                                                quadratic
                                                                                                            = 0.008 (SE 0.101)
                                                                                                          CCT                       9.7
                                                                                                                                                                quadratic
                                                                                                                                                                          CCT
                                                                                                                                                                             = 0.121 (SE 0.140)

          100     120   140      160            180          200         100     120    140      160            180          200          100     120   140      160             180         200
                          Employment                                                      Employment                                                      Employment



                 (m) Profit Margin                                              (n) Log Investments                                             (o) Log Dividends
   .03                                                             13.2
                                                                                                                                   13.4



   .02
                                                                    13
                                                                                                                                   13.2


   .01
                                                                   12.8
                                                                                                                                    13

    0

                                                                   12.6
                                                                                                                                   12.8
  -.01

                               linear
                                    CCT
                                          = -0.005 (SE 0.011)      12.4
                                                                                                linear
                                                                                                     CCT
                                                                                                           = 0.014 (SE 0.101)                                  linear
                                                                                                                                                                    CCT
                                                                                                                                                                         = -0.013 (SE 0.155)
  -.02
                               quadratic
                                         CCT
                                             = -0.006 (SE 0.012)                                quadratic
                                                                                                          CCT
                                                                                                              = 0.043 (SE 0.124)   12.6                        quadratic
                                                                                                                                                                           = -0.051 (SE 0.189)
                                                                                                                                                                         CCT


         100      120   140      160            180          200          100     120   140      160            180          200          100     120   140      160             180         200
                          Employment                                                      Employment                                                      Employment


Note: The figure presents RD estimates based on the employment threshold of 150. Potential differences
between the RD effect visualized in the figure and the preferred regression specification arise from (i) differences
in bandwidth (optimal CCT bandwidth vs. fixed), (ii) inclusion of industry-year effects, and (iii) the CCT
bias-correction in the regressions.
                                                                                          69
D       Data Appendix: Additional Details on Variable Construc-
        tion
D.1     Constructing a Revealed-Preference Index of Firm Value
We study a revealed-preference measure of job quality that uses the full information on
the quantity and direction of job-to-job transitions. Specifically, we draw on the PageRank
algorithm, used and extended by Sorkin (2018) to provide a revealed-preference ranking of
US employers. We provide a summary of our implementation here.

D.1.1   The Sorkin (2018) Procedure

Let F be the set of firms in our firm ranking analysis. The procedure uses worker flows
from employer g to employer f , denoted M f g , to estimate relative job values and to assign a
common value V f to each employer f  F . In the underlying decision model, in the spirit of
an on-the-job search model, employed workers receive up to one outside offer each period.
Let  f denote the probability workers receive an offer from firm f . After receiving an offer,
workers choose whether to accept by comparing firm common values and independently
drawn idiosyncratic utility shocks associated with staying and leaving. Specifically, incumbent
employees receive a value of Vg + 1 from their current employer g , and a value of V f + 2 from
accepting a potential offer from an employer f . In this discrete choice setting, the number of
workers switching from employer g to f is then given by

                                Mf g       f N g Pr(Accept|Offer) ,                        (A.2)

where N g is the number of workers employed at firm g . Under the assumption that utility
                                                                                    exp V f
shocks are drawn from a type I extreme value distribution, Pr(Accept|Offer) exp V f +exp Vg .
Assuming in addition that the ratio of offers to firm size  f / N f is constant across firms,
Equation (A.2) yields the following relationship between firm common values:

                                            Mf g         f N g exp V f
                                            Mg f         g N f exp Vg
                                            Mf g        exp V f
                                                                                           (A.3)
                                            Mg f        exp Vg
                               g  F M f g exp Vg
                                                        exp V f    f  F.
                                   g F   Mg f

Intuitively, a firm's value is a weighted average of the values of the firms it hires from, where
weights are given by the size of hiring flows relative to total exit out of the firm. We estimate
firm values from the linear system these equations define using a power iteration algorithm,
detailed below.

                                                   70
    This stylized framework assumes that all job-to-job transitions are informative about
workers' preferences and that firms extend offers at rates proportional to their size. Sorkin
(2018) uses a richer model to relax these assumptions. In particular, he accounts for the
fact that some separations are exogenous (e.g. resulting from layoffs) by down-weighting
separations at contracting firms, while also allowing offer intensities to differ across employers.
We adopt the more parsimonious approach, since Sorkin finds that three-quarters of job-to-job
separations are endogenous, and relaxing the assumptions above does not qualitatively change
his main findings.
    Since information on firm values come from relative worker flows, the identification
condition for this estimation procedure is that firms be strongly connected. (To be part of a
strongly connected set, a firm must hire at least one worker from, and lose at least one worker
to, other firms in the strongly connected set.) We estimate the values V f separately in the
windows before and after the reform (1988-1990, 1992-1997 respectively) in the largest strongly
connected set of firms in each window.

D.1.2   Defining Employer-to-Employer (EE) Transitions for the Sorkin (2018) Procedure

For this exercise, we take the following steps to define EE transitions (which deviate from our
main definition of job-to-job transitions by maximizing the use of transitions on the spell level
rather than annual perspectives). Following Sorkin (2018), we drop any firm whose median
number of yearly non-singleton employees is below 10. Here, a non-singleton employee is one
who appears at least twice within the period of the analysis.
    One of the key assumptions of the methodology proposed by Sorkin (2018) is that the
moves used to estimate the firm ranking should be driven by employees' preferences. That is,
we need to identify worker-initiated EE transitions, at least up to a large and homogeneous
proportion among moves across firms. One of our challenges lies with the structure of the
dataset prior to 1995. Before 1995, our matched employer-employee dataset only recorded
start date and end date, employer ID and employee ID of spells, together with an aggregated
annual income of an employee. Thus, we cannot use wage-based strategies such as the one
used in Sorkin (2018) to determine the dominant employer at a given period for an employee
when spells overlap. To overcome this challenge, we posit that the longer a spell is, the more
likely the employer is a dominant one to a given employee. Based on this assumption, we use
the following rule to determine dominant employers.

   · Spells shorter than 3 months are not regarded as dominant.

   · When there are spells that are completely contained or almost completely contained
     (start no earlier than 30 days before or end no more than 30 days after) by other spells,
     the one with the longest duration is the dominant one.


                                                71
Hence, an EE transition occurs when a worker ends a dominant spell and begins a dominant
spell at a different employer within plus or minus 30 days (has a gap or an overlap of no more
than 30 days).

D.1.3   Computational Details

We now detail key steps toward constructing the firm ranks.

Strongly Connected Sets To find firms in strongly connected sets, we start by retaining all
firms with both inflow and outflows. Following Sorkin (2018), we use Tarjan's algorithm to
identify the largest strongly connected sets in the pre- and post-periods. We then estimate
firm values for the firms within these sets, separately in the pre- and post-periods.

Solving for Firm Values Due to the high-dimensional linear system of Equations (A.3),
we follow Sorkin (2018) and use the power iteration algorithm to approximate the solution,
stopping when the difference in norms of exp Vì between two adjacent iterations is smaller
than 0.001.

Transformation of Firm Ranking Index The estimated Page Ranks have a clear interpre-
tation based on the on-the-job search model. In particular, the raw indices corresponds to
the exponential of the firm value. In Table 2, we report DiD estimates for the effects on the
estimated firm values, V ^ f . To better interpret effect sizes, we transform firm values into a
z-score, using the mean and standard deviation of the pre-period index. We perform this
standardization using the pre-period distribution in both periods to avoid masking treatment
effects. We also report the DiD estimates using the raw index exp(V f ) as an outcome in
Column (3) and Column (4) of Table A.5.

Sample Selection Since the estimable set of firm values before and after the reform do not
perfectly overlap, we restrict our sample to firms belonging to the intersection of both sets
for the result reported in Table 2. In this section, we additionally report the estimates of firm
ranking value for the union of the two strongest connected sets in the pre- and post-period, in
Column (2) and Column (4) of Table A.5.




                                               72
                                    Table A.5: Effects on Firm Ranking Index


                                  Firm Value Log Index     Firm Value Log Index     Firm Value Index       Firm Value Index
                                  z-score (Intersection)      z-score (Union)     z-score (Intersection)    z-score (Union)
                                            (1)                     (2)                     (3)                   (4)
       DiD: Year FEs
         Treatment                       -0.043                  -0.055                   -0.013                0.004
         (1991-1997)                     (0.105)                 (0.093)                 (0.087)               (0.064)

       DiD: Industry-Year FEs
         Treatment                       -0.049                  -0.072                   0.021                 0.019
         (1991-1997)                     (0.104)                 (0.092)                 (0.085)               (0.063)

       DiD: Year and Firm FEs
         Treatment                       -0.053                  -0.056                   -0.017                0.015
         (1991-1997)                     (0.107)                 (0.100)                 (0.084)               (0.067)

       DiD: Industry-Year and Firm FEs
         Treatment                       -0.065                  -0.068                   0.014                 0.041
         (1991-1997)                     (0.104)                 (0.098)                 (0.082)               (0.067)


       1990 Average (Control):            -0.008                  0.014                   0.000                 0.006
       1990 Average (Treated):            0.045                   0.138                   0.009                 0.076
       N, Firm-Years (Control):           4,402                   4,584                   4,403                 4,585
       N, Firm-Years (Treated):           1,409                   1,416                   1,409                 1,416



Note: The table reports results of DiD specifications as in Equation (1). Column (1) uses the logarithm of
the raw index as an outcome, and reports the effects for the intersection sample of firms between pre- and
post-period strongest connected sets. Results of this column are also reported in Table 2 Column (4). Instead of
the intersection set of firms, Column (2) uses the union of the two sets of firms. Column (3) and Column (4)
report effects using the raw index in the intersection and union sets of firms, respectively, as outcome variables.


D.2     Quality of Work Life Survey
For our analysis of the 1991 reform, we draw on the 1990 and 1997 waves of the Finnish
Quality of Work Life Survey, merged with the administrative firm-level data, to assess effects
of the reform on subjective measures of worker voice, labor relations and job quality. (For our
analysis of the 2007 reform, we draw on the waves in 2003 and 2013, where we skip the 2008
wave, which is ambiguously timed as the 2007 reform became active in 2008.)
    We construct measures of job quality and of the quality of labor relations using factor
analysis. After selecting a set of variables (listed below) for a specific measure, we transform
each variable into a z-score and apply principal factor analysis, extracting a single factor
using the regression method. We then normalize the extracted factor into a z-score using the
post-reform mean and standard deviation of firms in our sample without a worker right to
shared governance in 1997 (i.e. firms with fewer than 150 employees) and normalize it such
that higher values indicate higher worker voice, job quality, or quality of labor relations.

Survey Items for Construction of Job Quality Index We select the following variables,
measured on Likert scales or as indicator variables and available in both waves we consider

                                                                73
(two per reform), for our construction of our job quality index:
   1. It is hard to focus on home due to issues at work.
   2. Do you have a fair wage compared to other jobs?
   3. Do you feel unwilling or mentally tired to go to work?
   4. Have you had a work related accident during past 12 months?
   5. How boring is your job?
   6. How physically demanding is your job?
   7. How mentally demanding is your job?
   8. How demanding the pace of work in your job?
   9. Tasks are well organized at our firm.
  10. There are too few employees in our firm for the tasks.
  11. There is an open atmosphere and team spirit in our firm.
  12. My supervisor supports and encourages me.
  13. My supervisor inspires me.
  14. Negative working conditions (17 sub-items).
  15. Uncertainty related to: transfer to other tasks.
  16. Uncertainty related to: furloughs.
  17. Uncertainty related to: layoffs.
  18. Uncertainty related to: unemployment.
  19. Uncertainty related to: disability.
  20. Opportunities to develop skills.
  21. Importance of wage vs. content of work.

Survey Items for Construction of Labor Relations Index We select the following variables,
measured on Likert scales or as indicator variables and available in all three waves we consider,
for our construction of our labor relations index:
   1. Do you belong to a labor union?
   2. Conflicts between managers and employees in your working unit
   3. Conflicts between employees in your working unit
   4. Conflicts between between different employee groups in your working unit
   5. My supervisor supports and encourages me.
   6. My supervisor actively interacts with employees.
   7. My supervisor openly informs employees about all decisions.
   8. My supervisor trusts the employees.
   9. When do you usually receive information about changes in your work tasks? (1 =
      Already at the planning stage; 2 = Just before the actual change; 3 = When the change
      has been decided or after).
  10. There is an open atmosphere and team spirit in our firm.

                                               74
D.3    Executive Compensation
We use individual-level occupation data (3-digit) to define chief executives and managing
directors. Then we merge these data with annual wage and total earned and capital income for
each individual, where earned income includes all wage income, benefits and pension income,
and capital income contains dividend, entrepreneurial, rental and interest income, among
others. Finally, we link these data with employee-employer level data to form firm-executive
pairs. When we observe two or more executives for a single firm in a year, we select the
highest-paid executive based on use the maximum total income measure for executive pay
(earned and capital income).
    There are two caveats regarding the data. First, the classification of occupations information
is only available for a subset of years (1990, 1993, 1995, 2000 and 2004 onward). We address
this issue by filling the data when we observe the same individual being an executive in the
same firm over time. We also fill data backward for years 1988 and 1989 and assume that
executives in 1990 are also executives in earlier years. Second, due to institutional reasons,
in some cases it could be that chief executives are not actually employed with the firm and
are thus missing from the employee-employer data set. However, our data still defines the
highest paid executive for 91.2% of the firm-year pairs and thus offers a reasonable proxy for
executive pay. We study wage income and total income (earned and capital income) separately
as a measure of executive pay. In addition, we study the executive pay share that is the total
income of all firm-level labor costs. For this measure, we draw on all executives at a firm.




                                               75
Online Appendix References
Calonico, Sebastian, Matias Cattaneo, and Rocio Titiunik. 2014. "Robust Nonparametric
  Confidence Intervals for Regression-Discontinuity Designs." Econometrica 82 (6):2295­2326.

Garicano, Luis, Claire Lelarge, and John Van Reenen. 2016. "Firm Size Distortions and the
 Productivity Distribution: Evidence from France." American Economic Review 106 (11):3439­
 79.

Harju, Jarkko, Tuomas Matikka, and Timo Rauhanen. 2019. "Compliance Costs vs. Tax
 Incentives: Why do Entrepreneurs Respond to Size-Based Regulations?" Journal of Public
 Economics 173:139­164.

Hethey-Maier, Tanja and Johannes Schmieder. 2013. "Does the Use of Worker Flows Improve
 the Analysis of Establishment Turnover? Evidence from German Administrative Data."
 NBER Working Paper .

McCrary, Justin. 2008. "Manipulation of the Running Variable in the Regression Discontinuity
 Design: A Density Test." Journal of Econometrics 142 (2):698­714.

Sorkin, Isaac. 2018. "Ranking Firms Using Revealed Preference." Quarterly Journal of Economics
  133 (3):1331­1393.




                                             76
