                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         CLIMATE POLICY, FINANCIAL FRICTIONS, AND TRANSITION RISK

                                      Stefano Carattini
                                        Garth Heutel
                                       Givi Melkadze

                                     Working Paper 28525
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28525


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2021




All authors acknowledge support from the Alliance for Market Solutions. Carattini acknowledges
support from the Grantham Foundation for the Protection of the Environment through the
Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change and the Environment and from the ESRC Centre
for Climate Change Economics and Policy as well as from the Swiss National Science
Foundation, grant number PZ00P1 180006/1. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Stefano Carattini, Garth Heutel, and Givi Melkadze. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Climate Policy, Financial Frictions, and Transition Risk
Stefano Carattini, Garth Heutel, and Givi Melkadze
NBER Working Paper No. 28525
March 2021
JEL No. E32,G18,Q58

                                         ABSTRACT

We study climate and macroprudential policies in an economy with financial frictions. Using a
dynamic stochastic general equilibrium model featuring both a pollution market failure and a
market failure in the financial sector, we explore transition risk ­ whether ambitious climate
policy can lead to macroeconomic instability. It can, but the risk can be alleviated through
macroprudential policies ­ taxes or subsidies on banks' assets. Then, we explore efficient climate
and macroprudential policy in the long run and over business cycles. The presence of financial
frictions affects the steady-state value and dynamic properties of the efficient carbon tax.
Macroprudential policy alone, without a carbon tax, is not very effective at addressing the
pollution externality.

Stefano Carattini                                Givi Melkadze
Department of Economics                          Department of Economics
Andrew Young School of Policy Studies            Andrew Young School of Policy Studies
Georgia State University                         Georgia State University
Atlanta, GA 30303                                Atlanta, GA 30303
scarattini@gsu.edu                               gmelkadze@gsu.edu

Garth Heutel
Department of Economics
Andrew Young School of Policy Studies
Georgia State University
Atlanta, GA 30303
and NBER
gheutel@gsu.edu
1        Introduction

        Achieving the Paris Agreement's goal to maintain global temperature increases within
2 C above pre-industrial levels will likely demand ambitious and quick climate policy action,
rather than the gradual "ramp-up" approach to policy favored by some integrated assessment
models like DICE. Such an ambitious and sudden policy may create macroeconomic risks given
the financial sector's investment in fossil fuel reserves and polluting industries. A non-trivial
fraction of financial intermediaries' asset portfolios is currently represented by carbon-intensive
assets at a high risk of becoming "stranded," i.e. losing most of their economic value. This
risk is what Mark Carney's influential speech at Lloyd's (Carney 2015) identified as "transition
risk," stemming from unanticipated ambitious climate action.1 Could a climate policy large and
sudden enough to near the 2 C goal cause a recession because of the financial sector's exposure
to risky assets? And if so, could some other policy mitigate this risk?

    Beyond its impact on the transition risk, the financial sector can have important implications
for the efficient design of climate policy in the long run and over business cycles. The Great
Recession has illustrated that financial and credit market frictions play a crucial role in driving
business cycles and has emphasized the need for macroprudential regulation to manage financial
stability risk (Gertler and Kiyotaki 2010, Bernanke 2019). Both the Great Recession and the
COVID recession have demonstrated that carbon pollution levels are sensitive to economic
activity. Given market failures associated with both greenhouse gas pollution and financial
frictions, and given banks' exposure to carbon-intensive assets, understanding the interactions
between climate policy and macroprudential policy is important for the efficient design of such
policies.

    The purpose of this paper is to study how the presence of financial market frictions affects the
efficient design of climate policy and the possibility of transition risk. We answer the following
two questions: (i) Could a sudden and ambitious climate policy shock create transition risk, and

    1
        See also ESRB (2016), Bank of England (2018), and Banque de France (2019).

                                                      2
can macroprudential policy alleviate this risk? (ii) How do financial frictions affect the efficient
design of climate policy and macroprudential financial policy in the long run and over business
cycles? We develop a dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) model with "brown"
(polluting) and "green" (non-polluting) production sectors and two sources of inefficiencies:
a pollution externality and financial frictions in a banking sector. We allow for two types of
policies: a carbon tax to target the climate externality, and macroprudential policies in the
form of a tax or a subsidy on banks' assets to target financial frictions.

   At the core of our model are banks that raise deposits from households and make loans to
non-financial firms in green and brown sectors. The firms in turn rely on bank credit to finance
capital purchases. Financial frictions between banks and depositors constrain the amount of
investment in the economy by banking sector equity (or net worth). When banks are in financial
stress (i.e., when their net worth is low), real economic activity falls. This is a newly-identified
channel through which climate policy can impact the economy.

   We calibrate the model to U.S. data and run two sets of simulations. First, we consider the
response of the economy to an exogenous abrupt introduction of ambitious climate policy, and
we study how this response can be mitigated using macroprudential policies. These simulations
address the threat of transition risk induced by climate policy. Second, we solve for the efficient
policy responses (the Ramsey problem) both in the long run (the steady state) and in response
to business cycles generated by exogenous productivity shocks (as in the real business cycle
literature). These simulations address how the pollution externality and the financial frictions
interact in the design of efficient policies. We consider both the first-best case, where both
a carbon tax and macroprudential policies are available, and second-best cases where some
policies are constrained. To assess the role of financial stability risk, we compare economies
both with and without financial frictions.

   Our first set of simulations shows that transition risk is possible ­ ambitious climate action
can trigger instability in the banking sector ­ and that macroprudential policy can alleviate


                                                 3
this risk. Without financial frictions, an unanticipated introduction of a permanent carbon tax
triggers a transition away from brown production and towards green production. With financial
frictions, the same carbon tax can lead to a contraction in both the green and brown sectors
­ a recession. Due to financial instability in the banking sector, climate policy has a negative
spillover effect on the green sector. The carbon tax lowers the market value of carbon-intensive
assets (asset stranding). Because of their exposure to these assets, banks experience equity
losses and are forced to cut lending to both brown and green producers.

   The extent of transition risk depends on banks' exposure to carbon-intensive assets at
the time of climate action. Therefore, we consider macroprudential policy tools that shift
banks' portfolio composition away from brown assets to mitigate the transition risk. Financial
regulators, acting within their financial stability mandates, can reduce banks' exposure to
climate-sensitive industries and mitigate the risk of a disorderly transition to a low carbon
economy. That is, central banks and financial regulators can limit transition risk now to prevent
the need to delay, on financial stability grounds, ambitious climate policy, when the opportunity
for more stringent policy would present itself. We stress that the results of these simulations
are not intended to show that "ambitious climate policy will cause a recession," but rather that
prudent financial regulation can be enacted to ensure that ambitious climate policy does not
cause a recession. The argument that the threat of macroeconomic instability should prevent
climate policy from being enacted thus ignores the ability of macroprudential policy to eliminate
that threat.

   It is worth comparing our way of modelling macroprudential policies ­ taxes or subsidies
on banks' assets ­ to Basel-type capital requirements, which are a more common approach
to financial regulation in advanced economies. Broadly, capital requirements impose limits on
banks' leverage ratios.2 In our model, the financial friction itself imposes an endogenous leverage

   2
     Basel accords ­ developed by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision ­ represent an international
regulatory framework that requires banks to hold a certain amount of equity capital in proportion to their
risk-weighted assets. While capital requirements are common, many countries also use a tax on banks' balance
sheets as a macroprudential policy tool. See Cerutti, Claessens and Laeven (2017) for a survey.

                                                     4
constraint on banks. Given this constraint, the taxes and subsidies on banks' assets that we
model incorporate, in a tractable way, climate-related factors in macroprudential regulation.
For example, a tax on brown assets encourages banks to shift their portfolios away from carbon-
intensive sectors. This tax policy closely mimics a capital requirement policy that introduces
positive risk-weights on banks' brown assets (e.g., a "brown-penalizing" factor) within the Basel
framework, which would also discourage banks from lending to carbon-intensive firms.3

    In our second set of simulations, we solve for the efficient carbon tax and macroprudential
policy, both in the long run (the steady state) and over business cycles driven by productivity
shocks. The steady-state results demonstrate the importance of the interaction of the two mar-
ket failures. Without financial frictions, the carbon tax brings about the first best by reducing
emissions. With financial frictions, and when the only available policy instrument is the carbon
tax, the second-best carbon tax is lower than its first-best level. This is because the inefficiency
from financial frictions works in the opposite direction as the climate externality ­ the financial
frictions lead to underproduction, and the pollution externality leads to overproduction. When
the only available policy instrument is a uniform macroprudential policy ­ a tax or subsidy
on banks' assets that is the same for brown and green assets ­ then output is higher than in
the unregulated equilibrium, but pollution is also higher. The regulator uses macroprudential
policy to primarily tackle financial frictions and pays very little attention (in a quantitative
sense) to fixing the climate externality. Using macroprudential policy alone as a substitute for
climate policy is not very efficient. This is even true when the regulator can use a differentiated
macroprudential policy ­ a tax or subsidy on banks' assets that can be different for brown and
green assets. Under the second-best differentiated macroprudential policy, pollution is not much
lower than it is under the second-best uniform macroprudential policy. When both a carbon tax

   3
     The current version of the Basel accords (Basel III) does not assign risk weights to assets based on climate-
related risks. But, central banks are starting to consider implicit taxes on banks depending on the carbon
intensity of their assets. See Campiglio et al. (2018), Krogstrup and Oman (2019), and van der Ploeg (2020) for
surveys of a broader set of policy tools, including climate stress-tests and risk disclosure, and "brown-penalizing"
and "green-supporting" factors, whose main goal is to encourage banks to decarbonize their balance sheets. The
taxes or subsidies on banks' assets that we model can also mimic such tools, which shift banks' portfolios away
from brown assets.

                                                         5
and macroprudential policy are available, then the first-best outcome can be achieved. Hence,
the implementation of macroprudential policy is not only useful in dealing with transition risk,
but also later on, to complement climate policy with the goal of leading to an efficient level of
economic activity and emissions.

    The business cycle results also demonstrate the importance of accounting for both market
failures. In response to a negative total factor productivity shock, when financial frictions
are present, the efficient carbon tax falls by more than when those frictions are absent. As a
result, emissions are less procyclical when financial frictions are present. When macroprudential
policies are available, emissions are more procyclical than when the carbon tax is the only
available instrument. In the absence of a carbon tax, macroprudential policies (both uniform
and differentiated) yield more procyclical emissions than the first best.

    Overall, our paper contributes to several strands of literature. We contribute to a growing
theoretical literature on climate policy and stranded assets. Van der Ploeg and Rezai (2020) and
Rozenberg, Vogt-Schilb and Hallegatte (2020) show that unanticipated changes in climate policy
may result in the stranding of carbon-intensive capital.4 We also contribute to an emerging
literature analyzing the role of central banks and macroprudential authorities in tackling climate
change, including Campiglio (2016) and B¨
                                        oser and Senni (2020). Further, our paper is related
to an established literature in macroeconomics allowing for financial frictions, building on the
seminal work by Bernanke and Gertler (1986) and Kiyotaki and Moore (1997). This literature,
which largely emerged in response to the Great Recession, identifies credit market frictions
and disruptions in the banking sector as an important source of macroeconomic fluctuations
(Meh and Moran 2010, Jermann and Quadrini 2012, Christiano and Ikeda 2013, Brunnermeier
and Sannikov 2014, Iacoviello 2015).5 Finally, we contribute to the literature that studies

   4
       See also reviews by Monasterolo (2020) and Semienuk et al. (2020). There is also growing empirical
literature studying climate policy and stranded assets, such as Ramelli et al. (2018), Carattini and Sen (2019),
Barnett (2020), Sen and von Schickfus (2020). Van der Ploeg (2020) provides a review of the inability of financial
markets to fully price climate risks.
     5
       See Brunnermeier, Eisenbach and Sannikov (2013) for an extensive survey of the literature on macroeco-
nomic models with financial frictions.

                                                        6
macroprudential regulation of the financial sector (e.g., Gertler, Kiyotaki and Queralto 2012,
Angeloni and Faia 2013, Collard et al. 2017, De Paoli and Paustian 2017, Jeanne and Korinek
2020). Our way of modelling macroprudential policy instruments as taxes and subsidies on
banks' assets is most similar to that of Gertler, Kiyotaki and Queralto (2012) and De Paoli and
Paustian (2017).

    Methodologically, our paper combines two strands of the DSGE literature. The first adds
an environmental component to a DSGE model (which has been called an E-DSGE model)
to study climate and other environmental policies under business cycles, including Fischer and
Springborn (2011), Heutel (2012), and Dissou and Karnizova (2016).6 Second, our paper relates
to the literature addressing the role of financial frictions in driving macroeconomic dynamics,
using a banking sector DSGE model from Gertler and Kiyotaki (2010) and Gertler and Karadi
(2011). Our model combines a standard DSGE real business cycle model with an environmental
component (as in the E-DSGE literature) and with banking financial frictions (as in Gertler
and Kiyotaki 2010 and Gertler and Karadi 2011).

    A concurrent working paper by Diluiso et al. (2020) also combines an E-DSGE model with
a banking sector and financial frictions based on Gertler and Karadi (2011) to address a related
set of research questions. As we do, they study transition risk stemming from climate policy,
but unlike our paper, they do not study first-best or second-best efficient policy design via the
Ramsey optimization problem. In addition, our results on transition risk differ substantially
from theirs. Diluiso et al. (2020) conclude that "even for very ambitious climate targets,
transition risks are limited for a credible, exponentially growing carbon price." However, what
concerns central banks and policymakers is mostly an unanticipated, sudden carbon policy
shock ("too late, too sudden"), potentially leading to a "hard landing," where a large portion
of the economy, not only the fossil fuel sector, is exposed to transition risk (Battiston et al.
2017). Hence our focus on abrupt transitions and both brown and green sectors.
   6
     See Fischer and Heutel (2013) for an early survey of this literature. Golosov et al. (2014) also develop a
DSGE model with an environmental externality but do not study business cycles. Gallic and Vermandel (2020)
develop a DSGE model of climate and weather shocks, but without pollution or pollution policy.

                                                      7
    Several other E-DSGE papers also consider macroeconomic policies and the interaction
between macroeconomic and environmental policies. Annicchiarico and Di Dio (2015, 2017)
and Economides and Xepapadeas (2018) add a new-Keynesian specification of price rigidities
to an E-DSGE model to study monetary policy. Chan (2020) compares fiscal and monetary
policies to climate policies. As mentioned earlier, like our paper, Diluiso et al. (2020) also
combine an E-DSGE model with financial frictions and macroprudential policy, as do Benmir
and Roman (2020) and Ferrari and Landi (2020).

    The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents the model, and Section 3 describes the
calibration. Sections 4 and 5 present our simulation results. In Section 4, we assess the tran-
sition risk of climate-policy-induced recession by presenting the response to an unanticipated
exogenous emissions tax, both with and without financial frictions, and with and without
macroprudential policies. Section 5 considers efficient policy design by presenting results from
the Ramsey problems, both first-best and second-best, in both the deterministic steady state
and in response to exogenous productivity shocks. Section 6 concludes.




2     Model

     We consider a closed economy consisting of households, a government, and four types
of firms ­ financial intermediaries (banks), capital producers, and non-financial final-goods-
producing "green" and "brown" firms. The economy features two sources of inefficiency. The
first is a standard environmental externality: brown firms do not internalize how their individual
production decisions affect the pollution stock and thus aggregate output. The second source
of inefficiency comes from financial market frictions: the moral hazard problem between banks
and depositors constrains the amount of credit in the economy by banks' net worth. Since
bankers cannot issue new equity when constrained, credit is undersupplied, and shocks to the
economy are inefficiently amplified through the standard financial accelerator mechanism. To
address these inefficiencies, we model two types of policies: climate policy, in the form of a

                                                8
carbon tax, and macroprudential policies, in the form of taxes or subsidies on banks' assets.



2.1     Households

      We follow Gertler and Karadi (2011) in formulating the household sector. There is a
continuum of identical households of measure unity. Each household has a continuum of a
unit measure of family members. A fraction (1 - ) of members are workers, and a fraction 
are bankers. Workers supply labor hours to non-financial firms in brown and green production
sectors and return wage income to the household. Each banker manages a financial intermediary
(a bank) and transfers dividends to the household. There is perfect consumption insurance
within the household. The household consumes and saves. Households cannot save by directly
lending to productive firms. Rather, they can only save through depositing funds in banks.

   A representative household chooses consumption Ct , savings in the form of bank deposits
                                              g
Dt , and sector-specific labor hours, Lb
                                       t and Lt , to maximize

                                                                      1+
                                                                           1- 
                                                 1+L           1+L   1+L
                                              Lb           (Lg
                                                                              
                                                       +     t)
                                                                              
                                  1            t                            
                 E0          t      C t -
                                                                            ,
                                                                                              (1)
                                 1-                    1+
                       t=0
                                                                              


subject to the budget constraint,


                                  b b     g g
                       Ct + Dt = wt Lt + wt Lt + Rt-1 Dt-1 + t + t + Tt ,                     (2)


       b      g
where wt and wt are wage rates in brown and green sectors, Rt-1 is a non-contingent interest
rate on bank deposits, t are net dividends from banks, t denotes profits from the ownership
of non-financial firms, and Tt is a lump-sum transfer from the government. The parameter
  (0, 1) is the household's subjective discount factor,      > 0 is a labor disutility parameter,
and  > 0 controls the curvature of the utility function.



                                               9
    The specification of labor hours in the utility function follows Horvath (2000) and allows
for imperfect labor substitutability between the sectors. In every period the representative
                                                                                                      1
                                                                                 1+L         1+L    1+L
household is endowed with one unit of time. Denote by Lt                    Lb
                                                                             t         + (Lg
                                                                                           t)             total
(composite) hours worked in period t. When L = 0, labor hours in brown and green sectors
are perfect substitutes. When L > 0, labor hours are imperfect substitutes across the sectors.
The parameter  is the inverse of the Frisch elasticity of the labor hours aggregator.
                                                                                                                   -
                                                                                                          L1+ 
    Let Mt,t+1   UU
                  c,t+1
                    c,t
                        be the household's stochastic discount factor, where Uc,t = Ct -                   t
                                                                                                          1+

is the marginal utility of consumption in period t. Then households' optimal consumption and
sector-specific labor supply decisions are characterized by standard first order conditions:


                                             Et (Mt,t+1 Rt ) = 1,                                           (3)


                                      -L          L
                                     Lt      Li
                                              t
                                                         i
                                                      = wt , for i = {g, b}.                                (4)



2.2      Bankers

       Each banker manages a financial intermediary (a bank). The banker offers loans to non-
financial firms by combining her own net worth with external funds raised from households in
                                                                                             i
the form of deposits. In particular, at time t, an individual banker j purchases securities Sj,t ,
at unit price Qi                                                             7
               t , issued by final good producing firms in sector i = {g, b}. We assume that the

government can levy macroprudential taxes (or subsidies if negative) ti , i = {g, b}, on banks'
assets. We allow these taxes to potentially differ across brown and green assets, which would
capture the scenario in which a supervisory authority takes into account environmental aspects
in bank capital regulation.8 In addition, banks are subject to small asset management costs,

   7
     These securities are claims on the gross rate of return on sector-specific capital.
   8
     As mentioned earlier, these taxes or subsidies capture some of the proposed policies in bank regulatory
frameworks, e.g., brown penalizing and green supporting factors. Taxes on banks' assets require information
about firms' emissions, unlike carbon taxes, which can be implemented upstream. But we consider this a feasible
policy. For instance, in the United Kingdom all large firms must disclose carbon emissions under the Streamlined
Energy and Carbon Reporting scheme, while in the United States large polluters must report carbon emissions

                                                       10
described below in detail. The banker finances the expenditure side of her balance sheet with
net worth Nj,t and newly issued deposits Dj,t .

    The individual bank's balance sheet or flow-of-funds constraint is


                                           g   g g        g g
                   (1 + tb )Qb  b
                             t Sj,t + (1 + t )Qt Sj,t + (Qt Sj,t , Wj,t ) = Dj,t + Nj,t ,                   (5)


                                                                         Qg  g            2
                                                                          t Sj,t
where  is a quadratic cost function, (Qg  g
                                       t Sj,t , Wj,t ) =
                                                                     
                                                                     2    Wj,t
                                                                                   - sg       Wj,t . Here Wj,t 
           g g                                                                             g
Qb  b
 t Sj,t + Qt Sj,t is the total value of assets held by banker j at time t. The parameter s

is a measure of banks' long-run (steady-state) green-to-total assets ratio, and  > 0 is the
adjustment cost parameter. In our calibration, these costs are very small, and their sole purpose
is to make banks' steady-state portfolio choice determinate.9

               b        g
    Denote by Rk,t and Rk,t the time t realized gross rates of return on banks' brown and green
assets, respectively. The individual bank's net worth evolves according to


                                       b       b b       g      g g
                             Nj,t+1 = Rk,t +1 Qt Sj,t + Rk,t+1 Qt Sj,t - Rt Dj,t .                          (6)



    As in Gertler and Kiyotaki (2010) and Gertler and Karadi (2011), we introduce the following
moral hazard problem to limit banks' ability to obtain external funds: After raising deposits
and purchasing assets at time t, a banker managing the bank can choose to divert an exogenous
fraction  of total assets for personal use (i.e., transfer the funds to his/her own household).10
The cost to the banker from diverting the funds is that the depositors can shut down the bank
after recovering the remaining (1 - ) fraction of assets. Recognizing the possibility of bankers
"running away," depositors will thus lend to banker j only if she has incentives to operate
honestly.


to the Environmental Protection Agency under the Greenhouse Gas Reporting Program.
     9
       This is a common technical tool to make portfolio choice determinate in models solved around a determin-
istic steady state (Gertler, Kiyotaki and Queralto 2012, Aoki, Benigno and Kiyotaki 2018).
    10
       Households deposit funds in banks other than the ones they own.

                                                      11
    Let Vj,t denote the franchise (or continuation) value of the bank at the end of period t. Then
for the depositors (households) to be willing to deposit money with banker j , the following
incentive constraint must be satisfied,


                                                            g g
                                          Vj,t   Qb  b
                                                  t Sj,t + Qt Sj,t .                                         (7)
                                                              Wj,t



Households are willing to lend to a bank as long as the bank's franchise value Vj,t , which
measures the present discounted value of future profits from operating honestly, is larger than
the gains from diverting funds. This inequality always holds, so in equilibrium, bankers never
actually "run away" or divert funds.

    At the end of each period, a banker exits the business with exogenous probability 1 -  .11
Upon exit, a banker transfers her retained earnings to her family in the form of dividends
and becomes a worker.12 Surviving bankers reinvest all their net worth. Since bankers are
members of households, they maximize the expected present value of their terminal wealth (or
future dividend payouts to households). A banker chooses asset holdings in green and brown
                    i
production sectors Sj,t , i = {g, b}, and deposits Dj,t to maximize

                                               
                                  Vj,t = Et           (1 -  )   -t-1 Mt, Nj,    ,                            (8)
                                               =t+1


subject to (5), (6) and (7), where Mt, is the households' stochastic discount factor Mt, 
       U
  -t Uc, .
           c,t

                        Qg  g
                         t Sj,t
    Denote by sg
               t =       Wj,t
                                  the portfolio share of green assets.13 It is convenient to reformulate


  11
      This assumption is common in the financial frictions literature (Gertler and Kiyotaki 2010, Gertler and
Karadi 2011) and guarantees that banks never accumulate enough internal funds to avoid the need for external
finance.
   12
      The number of bankers that become workers in every period is thus (1 -  ) . To keep the relative proportion
of each group fixed over time, we assume that the same number of workers randomly become bankers in every
period.
   13
      We dropped the bank-specific index j from sg
                                                 t , because as we show later the portfolio shares are the same
across banks.

                                                         12
the banker's problem in which the banker decides on holdings of total assets (Wj,t ) and the
portfolio share of green assets (sg
                                  t ). Appendix A contains a detailed characterization of the

bank's problem and associated optimality conditions. Here we discuss key equations.

   In the Appendix, we show that the bank's value function is linear in individual net worth,


                                           Vj,t = t Nj,t ,                                     (9)


where t  1 is the time-varying shadow value of a bank's net worth, common across banks.
Combining (9) with (7), we can express the incentive constraint as


                                                g    g       t
                                   Qb    b
                                    j,t Sj,t + Qj,t Sj,t       Nj,t .                        (10)
                                                             

                                          t
Bank's assets cannot exceed a fraction    
                                              of its equity capital. In our calibrated model, this
constraint will always bind in the proximity of the steady state. Aggregating (10) at equality
over the entire banking sector yields


                                              g g       t
                                     Qb  b
                                      t St + Qt St =      Nt .                               (11)
                                                        

This is the key equation capturing the negative financial accelerator and the inefficiency arising
from the financial sector. When banks are financially constrained, the demand for capital in
                     g g
the economy Qb  b
             t St + Qt St is restricted by the amount of financial intermediaries' net worth

(Nt ). Shocks to the economy get amplified through fluctuations in the banking sector's equity
capital. Bankers do not internalize this effect that their net worth has on the economy ­ this
is analogous to a second externality ­ and thus the equilibrium is inefficient.

   Equation (11) determines the total amount of brown and green capital intermediated by
banks. The demand for sector-specific assets is then pinned down by the optimal portfolio share




                                                 13
of green assets,

                                        g         b        g  b
                             Et t+1    Rk,t +1 - Rk,t+1 - t - t Rt
                    sg
                     t   =                                                            + sg ,                    (12)
                                              Et [t+1 Rt ]

where t+1  Mt,t+1 (1 -  + t+1 ) is the banker's effective stochastic discount factor. The
numerator on the right-hand-side of equation (12) is the expected discounted excess return on
green assets over brown assets, taking into account the tax advantage or disadvantage of each
type of asset. For example, all else equal, a higher tb or lower tg increases the optimal share of
green assets in the bank's portfolio. Therefore, through macroprudential taxes a regulator can
affect the relative attractiveness of brown versus green assets in banks' portfolios.

   Banks that exit the business are replaced by an equal number of new banks, with each of
                                                           
them receiving a small initial start-up transfer          1-   i={g,b}   Qi  i
                                                                          t St from the households. Thus,

the aggregate banking sector's net worth evolves according to
                                                                 
                                            i       i i
                     Nt+1 =                Rk,t +1 Qt St - Rt Dt + 
                                                                                    Qi  i
                                                                                     t St ,                     (13)
                                 i={g,b}                                  i={g,b}



and the net dividend payouts to households are
                                                                    
                                                 i       i i
                   t+1 = (1 -  )                Rk,t +1 Qt St - Rt Dt - 
                                                                                       Qi  i
                                                                                        t St .                  (14)
                                      i={g,b}                                i={g,b}




   As is common in the financial frictions literature, we define the aggregate banking sector
                                                                                                  g g
                                                                                          Qb  b
                                                                                           t St +Qt St
leverage ratio as the value of banks' total assets over net worth, levt                        Nt
                                                                                                       .   Similarly,
credit spread is a difference between the expected rate of return on a given type of asset and
the risk-free rate, spreadi      i
                          t  Et Rk,t+1 - Rt , i  {b, g }.




                                                     14
2.3     Final Goods Firms

      Two types of representative firms produce final goods: green and brown. Brown production
entails emissions as a byproduct, while green production does not. Both production sectors rely
on the banking sector to obtain funds to purchase capital.



2.3.1    Production Technology


Pollution negatively affects productivity in both green and brown sectors. Both types of firms
operate a Cobb-Douglas production technology with capital Kti-1 and labor (Li
                                                                            t ) inputs,



                                                          i        1-i
                      Yti = [1 - d (Xt )] At Kti-1            Li
                                                               t         , 0 < i < 1,


where Xt is the pollution stock in the economy, d (·)  (0, 1) is an increasing damage function;
At is the aggregate economy-wide total factor productivity (TFP) shock


                        log At = A log At-1 + A A,t , A,t  N (0, 1) .                             (15)


Green and brown goods are imperfect substitutes for each other. The aggregate final consump-
tion good Yt is a constant elasticity of substitution aggregate of sectoral outputs,

                                                                                       Y
                                    1         Y -1                 1            Y -1   Y -1
                      Yt =      b   Y
                                        Ytb   Y
                                                     + 1-     b    Y
                                                                       (Ytg )   Y
                                                                                              ,   (16)


where Y > 0 is the elasticity of substitution parameter, and  b is the weight on brown input
in the final good production. The demand functions for the two types of output are

                                          Yt         g            Yt
                             Ytb =  b           , Y    = 1 -  b
                                                                    Y ,                           (17)
                                         pb
                                          t
                                              Y     t
                                                                (pg
                                                                  t)




                                                     15
              g
where pb
       t and pt denote relative prices of brown and green goods. The final consumption good

is numeraire, and its price is normalized to 1.



2.3.2   Brown Sector


Production in the brown sector entails emissions as a byproduct. The pollution stock Xt evolves
according to
                                     Xt = X Xt-1 + et + erow
                                                         t ,                                 (18)

where et denotes current-period domestic emissions and erow
                                                        t   is emissions imposed from the
rest of the world. Domestic emissions depend on production in the brown sector Ytb and the
fraction of emissions abated µt ,
                                      et = (1 - µt ) h Ytb .                                 (19)

Abatement costs Zt units of the final good,


                                         Zt = f (µt ) Ytb .                                  (20)


We follow Nordhaus (2008) and Heutel (2012) in specifying the functional forms for emissions
elasticity with respect to output, h Ytb = Ytb , and the abatement cost function, f (µt ) =
1 µt . An environmental externality arises because the representative brown firm does not
    2



internalize how its production affects both green and brown output through the pollution stock
Xt and associated damages d (Xt ).

   At the end of period t final goods firms in the brown sector purchase capital Ktb from
capital producers at market price Qb
                                   t . Following Gertler and Karadi (2011), the firms finance

their capital purchases by issuing financial claims Stb to banks. Each claim is priced at the same
price Qb                     b b     b b
       t as capital so that Qt Kt = Qt St . After production takes place in time t + 1, the

firm can sell the undepreciated capital 1 -  b Ktb on the market at price Qb
                                                                           t+1 . There are no

                                                                                            b
financing frictions between firms and banks, and the firms offer a state-contingent payoff Rk,t +1


                                                  16
on securities owned by the financial intermediaries.

   Brown firms are subject to an emissions tax te imposed by the government. Their time t
realized profits are


               b    b b    e            b b     b    b    b
               t = pt Yt - t et - Zt - wt Lt - Rk,t Qt-1 Kt-1 + 1 - 
                                                                     b
                                                                       Qb  b
                                                                        t Kt-1 ,               (21)


The optimality conditions with respect to labor Lb
                                                 t and abatement (µt ) are:



                         b                Ytb b
                        wt = 1 - b            pt - f (µt ) - te (1 - µt ) h Ytb     ,          (22)
                                          Lbt



                                           te h Ytb = Ytb f (µt ) .                            (23)

A state-contingent return on brown assets, satisfying the first order optimality condition, is
given by
                                Yb
                            b K bt    pb             e
                                       t - f (µt ) - t (1 - µt ) h Yt
                                                                     b
                                                                             + 1 -  b Qb
                                                                                       t
                  b             t-1
                 Rk,t   =                                                                  .   (24)
                                                            Qb
                                                             t-1



2.3.3   Green Sector


Similar to brown firms, green firms rely on bank credit to purchase sector-specific capital Ktg at
price Qg                         g                               g
       t . They also hire labor Lt from households at wage rate wt . The green firms' optimality

conditions imply
                                             g            pg
                                                           t Yt
                                                             g
                                                               g
                                            wt   = (1 -  ) g ,                                 (25)
                                                           Lt

and
                                                   pg Y g
                                                 g Kt t
                                                     g  + (1 -  g ) Qg
                                                                     t
                                        g            t-1
                                       Rk,t =                            .                     (26)
                                                            Qg
                                                             t-1




                                                        17
2.4      Capital Firms

       Capital is sector-specific and immobile across sectors. Competitive capital-producing firms
build green and brown capital goods subject to convex capital adjustment costs. Producing Iti ,
                                                                                                           i          2
                                                                                                i        It
i = {g, b} , units of sector-specific new capital goods requires                           1+   2        i
                                                                                                        It
                                                                                                                -1         Iti units of
                                                                                                           -1

the final good, where the parameter i  0 controls the size of the adjustment cost (Christiano,
Eichenbaum and Evans 2005).14

   Denote by Qi
              t the price of new sector-specific capital goods. The capital producers solve


                                                                                                    2
                                                                                 i       Iti
                     max             E0         M0,t             Qi  i
                                                                  t It   -    1+              -1          Iti .                   (27)
                  {Iti }                  t=0
                                                                                 2      Iti-1
                           i={g,b}                     i={g,b}



The first order optimality condition associated with this problem is

                               2                                                                                  2
           i    Iti                         Iti               Iti                       Iti+1             Iti+1
Qi
 t = 1+              -1            +i            -1                -Et       Mt,t+1 i         -1                          , i = {g, b} .
           2   Iti-1                       Iti-1             Iti-1                       Iti               Iti
                                                                                                                                  (28)

   Sector-specific capital stock evolves according to


                                      Kti = 1 -  i Kti-1 + Iti , for i = {g, b} ,                                                 (29)


where  i is the depreciation rate of capital.




  14
     We include these investment adjustment costs to allow for endogenous movements in the price of capital
that contribute to fluctuations in banks' net worth. This is a standard way of making asset prices volatile,
which in turn makes financial frictions quantitatively more relevant (Kiyotaki and Moore 1997).

                                                                    18
2.5        Government

The government simply transfers net revenues from the carbon tax and the macroprudential
policies to households in a lump-sum manner,


                                                             g g g
                                     Tt = te et + tb Qb  b
                                                      t St + t Qt St .                                 (30)




3         Calibration

         In this section, we describe the calibration of the model. A period in the model corresponds
to one quarter. The model parameters can be divided into three categories: standard real
business cycle (RBC) parameters, parameters related to financial frictions, and parameters
related to climate externalities. Table 1 summarizes the calibrated values. The calibration is
based on the baseline scenario when all policy instruments are zero (te = tb = tg = 0).

     We choose standard values for the subjective discount factor  = 0.995 (which implies an
annualized risk-free rate of 2% in the steady state), the risk aversion parameter,  = 2, the
                                     1
Frisch elasticity of labor supply,   
                                         = 1, and the capital depreciation rate,  b =  g = 0.025. We
set the capital share in green production g to 0.33. We allow the brown sector to be slightly
more capital intensive, g = 0.35.15 Both of these values are commonly used in the RBC
literature. The parameter controlling for inter-sectoral elasticity of substitution between labor
hours (L ) is set to 1. This is the estimate found by Horvath (2000) using sectoral labor hours
data from the U.S. As is common in the RBC literature, we set the labor disutility parameter
    so that the fraction of time spent working in the steady state is 1
                                                                      3
                                                                        .

     For the elasticity of substitution between green and brown output, we rely on empirical
estimates in Papageorgiou, Saam and Schulte (2013) and set Y = 2. We choose the share of

    15
     For instance, Antweiler, Copeland and Taylor (2001) and Fullerton and Heutel (2007) find that the dirty
sector is slightly more capital intensive than the clean sector.

                                                    19
brown output in the production of final consumption good  b to target the steady-state ratio
of green-to-total capital stock of 0.60.16 The implied value,  b = 0.3326, is also consistent with
the fact that income share of green sector to total output is about 70%.

    The persistence and standard deviation of the aggregate TFP shock are set at the standard
RBC values, A = 0.95, A = 0.007. The investment adjustment cost parameter for both sectors
(i ) is 10. These values are in line with the parameter values also used in the environmental
DSGE literature (e.g., Heutel 2012, Annicchiarico and Di Dio 2015).

    We calibrate the environmental part of the model based on the most recent version of the
DICE model (Nordhaus 2018). While DICE models damage as a function of temperature, where
temperature is affected by the carbon stock through a dynamic climate model, here we simplify
and model damages directly as a function of carbon d (Xt ). The climate damage function takes
a quadratic form d (Xt ) = d0 + d1 Xt + d2 Xt2 . We use the parameter estimates d0 = -0.0076,
d1 = 8.10e - 6, and d2 = 1.05e - 8 from Gibson and Heutel (2020). In the parameterized
damage function, pollution stock (Xt ) is measured in gigatons, while in our model, the units
are abstract. To map the empirical estimates into the model, we set the steady-state pollution
level to 2030 GtC, which is the mean value of the carbon stock over the first 250 years of the
simulation in the DICE business-as-usual scenario.17 This implies that at the steady state,
damages are of 5.2% of output (i.e., d(Xss,model ) = 0.052). It also implies (as we will show in
the results) that the steady-state level of the efficient carbon tax is about $30 per ton of carbon
dioxide, which is approximately equal to the social cost of carbon found by studies relying on
DICE (Nordhaus 2017). Since other studies using other integrated assessment models (IAMs)
or other methodologies argue for higher social costs of carbon (e.g., Ricke et al. 2018, Pindyck
2019), our model can be understood as a conservative approach based on DICE. If anything,


   16
      This yields a slightly lower ratio of green-to-total capital stock than in some other studies, e.g. Fried, Novan
and Peterman (2020) calibrate a ratio of about 0.80. Since nearly all production uses at least some polluting
inputs, it is inevitably somewhat arbitrary to impose a strict cutoff between a green and brown sector.
   17                                   Xss,model                                                              d1
      That is, we compute dscale = 2030      GtC and rescale the empirical estimates accordingly: d1 = dscale and
         d2
d2 =    d2
               .
         scale



                                                         20
higher social costs of carbon would lead to stronger shocks to the economy if ambitious climate
policy is abruptly implemented. The same applies to carbon tax rates obtained following a
cost-effectiveness approach, as in Stiglitz et al. (2017) and IMF (2019).

    The abatement cost function is also parameterized following Nordhaus (2018). We set the
exponent 2 to 2.6 ­ the same value as in Nordhaus (2018). To calibrate the coefficient 1 ,
we take into account two considerations: First, the abatement cost coefficient is a decreasing
function of time in DICE, representing growth in abatement technology, though it is constant in
our model. Second, in our model, the abatement cost applies only to the brown sector, while in
DICE, it is calibrated as a share of total GDP. As in our strategy for the steady-state pollution
stock calibration, we take the mean value of the abatement coefficient from DICE over the first
250 years of the simulation, and then we rescale it to account for the fact that it applies just
to the brown sector.18 The resulting value of 1 is 0.0335.

    Since in our model emissions depend on brown production, we assume the unit elasticity of
emissions with respect to brown output,             = 1. This value is consistent with the estimates in
the existing one-sector environmental RBC literature.19 The pollution decay parameter X is
0.9965. Emissions from the rest of the world are assumed to be constant over time erow
                                                                                   t   = erow .
Consistent with the fact that the U.S. emits about one-sixth of global carbon dioxide, we set
erow to equal five times the steady-state value of domestic emissions.

    We set the bank survival rate  to 0.972 as in Gertler and Karadi (2011), implying that,
on average, bankers survive for about 9 years. We choose the values for the fraction of funds
that can be diverted () and transfer parameter ( ) to match the steady-state leverage ratio
of the banking sector of 4.5 and annualized credit spreads (both on brown and green assets)
of 90 basis points. This implies the parameter values  = 0.3409,  = 0.003, which are in


   18
      The mean value of the abatement cost coefficient for the first 250 years of DICE simulation is 0.015. We
multiply this value by the ratio Y  b to obtain the adjusted 1 .
                                   ss
                                  Yss
   19
      Heutel (2012) estimates the elasticity of CO2 emissions with respect to GDP using monthly data from the
U.S. and finds this elasticity to be within the range of 0.55 - 0.88. Doda (2014) finds this elascticity to be 1.01
using annual data.

                                                        21
line with the ones used in Gertler and Karadi (2011) and Gertler and Kiyotaki (2010). We set
the banks' portfolio adjustment cost parameter to a very small number,  = 10-4 , as its sole
purpose is to make banks' steady-state portfolio determinate. The parameter sg is set at 0.60
to be consistent with the share of green capital of 60%.




4         Climate action and transition risk

         In this section, we study transition dynamics to a low-carbon economy, and we assess the
risk of policy-induced recession and the potential for macroprudential policy to address it.20 We
consider a surprise introduction of a permanent emissions tax of 30.5 dollars per ton of CO2 ,
which is the efficient steady-state carbon price in our model. We can think of this scenario
as one in which, after decades of delayed and insufficient action, there is a sudden shift in the
global political environment resulting in the implementation of ambitious climate policy.

     The carbon tax that we consider is the same order of magnitude as those recommended by
Stiglitz and Stern (2017) and the IMF (2019), which argue that a global carbon tax within
the $40-$80 range by 2020 would be necessary to achieve the temperature trajectory consistent
with the Paris Agreement. If anything, a higher carbon tax would lead to a larger shock to
the economy when ambitious climate policy is abruptly implemented, making our approach
conservative or accommodating expectations of a positive carbon tax rate among agents. That
is, our experiment can also be seen as a carbon tax shock of 30.5 dollars per ton of CO2 above
expectations, i.e., a surprise increase of 30.5 dollars in the carbon tax rate that agents had
priced in.

     The economy starts in the baseline deterministic steady state (with no policies of either
type, climate or macroprudential). In time period (quarter) 5, the economy is surprised by the
introduction of a permanent emissions tax.21 We focus on the transition dynamics in which the
    20
         We solve the model numerically using the Dynare package developed by Adjemian et al. (2011).
    21
         The $30.5 per ton of CO2 tax corresponds to an increase in te from 0 to 0.017. To obtain dollar amounts

                                                        22
economy has perfect foresight about its future path after the tax has been introduced. In this
section we ignore productivity shocks. We compare results from our baseline model (described
above) to a model that does not have a financial sector and thus does not have financial
frictions.22 This allows us to gauge the importance of financial frictions in the macroeconomic
effects of a carbon price shock.

    Figure 1 plots the transition dynamics in response to the exogenous carbon tax. Solid lines
show the dynamics of our baseline model with financial frictions presented in Section 2. Dashed
lines show the dynamics of the model without financial frictions. In response to the carbon tax,
emissions fall by about 36% (Panel (a)), with or without financial frictions. The next two panels
show that the economy with financial frictions experiences a deeper recession: investment and
output fall by more than they do in the economy without financial frictions. In the long run,
once this carbon tax is implemented, output, investment, and efficiency will all increase because
of the tax internalizing the climate externality. However, the focus of the simulations in this
section is on the transition, so we present relatively short to medium term economic dynamics
(i.e., the first 20 periods after the carbon tax has been put in place).23

    The remaining panels of Figure 1 illustrate the mechanisms behind the climate-policy-
induced financial crisis. Panel (d) shows that the banking sector's net worth quickly falls
by about 10% before rebounding. These equity losses in the banking sector occur because
of falling asset prices (particularly on brown assets) from the emissions tax. With financial
frictions, undercapitalized banks are forced to cut lending to both brown and green sectors, so
both brown and green capital fall (Panels (e) and (f)). Without financial frictions, the economy

we perform a back-of-the-envelope calculation in which we set the steady state level of aggregate output in the
baseline model to be equal to the U.S. GDP ($20 trillion) and the steady state emissions to total U.S. emissions
(5 billion CO2 tons.)
   22
      The model without financial frictions is a two-sector environmental DSGE model in which households
directly lend capital to non-financial firms with no agency problem between households and firms.
   23
      Early in the transition, output falls even in the economy without financial frictions because the carbon tax
lowers equilibrium labor hours, and even though damages also fall, the former effect dominates. Once the new
post-tax steady state is reached, aggregate output is about 1 to 1.5% higher than the initial steady state, and
green production expands while brown production slightly contracts. Because of the very slow decay rate of
the carbon pollution stock (a quarterly decay rate of less than one-half of one percent, calibrated based on a
half-life of 50 years), it takes several hundred periods for the economy to reach this new steady state.

                                                       23
moves away from brown and towards green investment, and green capital expands as a result.
The green sector and the economy overall experiences a deeper and more prolonged recession
in the economy with financial frictions, since the frictions slow the transition from brown to
green production.

   We next ask whether macroprudential regulation can mitigate this transition risk by re-
ducing banks' exposure to brown assets. Suppose that prior to the introduction of the emis-
sions tax, the regulator enacts a tax-and-subsidy scheme on brown and green assets to shift
banks' steady-state portfolio composition away from brown assets. We set  b = 0.006 and
 g = -0.00316, which reduces the share of brown assets in banks' portfolios from 40% to 32%
but leaves steady-state output unchanged.

   Figure 2 shows the same transition dynamics as in Figure 1 for the economy with financial
frictions but also includes the dynamics after the introduction of the macroprudential policies.
These policies can mitigate the severity of the transition risk. Aggregate investment and output
fall by less with the macroprudential policy than without it, while the reduction in emissions
is the same. Since the banking sector is now less exposed to the brown sector, equity losses
are milder and credit issued to the firms falls by less. With the macroprudential policy, green
economic activity experiences a milder slowdown and faster recovery.24

   In Appendix D, we present simulations that consider other assumptions about the timing of
policy introduction. We present one set of simulations where the exogenous carbon tax is pre-
announced several periods in advance, rather than unanticipated. We also present simulations
where the macroprudential policies are introduced at the same time as the carbon tax, rather
than pre-existing before the carbon tax is implemented.




  24
    Figures A1 and A2 in the appendix present additional variables under the simulations presented in Figures
1 and 2, respectively.

                                                     24
5         Efficient climate and macroprudential policies

         In Section 4, we studied the financial sector's role for transition risk induced by an abrupt
implementation of climate policy, and the role of macroprudential policy to mitigate that risk.
In those simulations, we focused on exogenous policies. This section explores the interactions
between financial frictions and environmental externalities and their implications for efficient
policies. When both a carbon tax te and a uniform macroprudential tax tb = tg (subsidy if
negative) on banks' assets are available, the policymaker can fully undo both types of distor-
tions. We refer to this Ramsey-efficient policy mix and the associated allocations as the "first
best."25 Using the first best as a benchmark, we also consider second-best policies, that is, when
one of the instruments is absent from a policy toolbox. We also consider the case where the
policymaker can use a differentiated macroprudential policy, setting separate taxes on different
types of assets (green or brown) in banks' portfolio (tb = tg ).



5.1        Steady state

         Table 2 reports the deterministic steady-state outcomes of key variables in the models with
and without financial frictions across different policy scenarios. The first two columns report
steady-state outcomes in the model without financial frictions, under the no-policy scenario and
with the efficient emissions tax. Columns 3 and 4 consider similar policy scenarios in the model
with financial frictions, and the remaining columns also consider macroprudential policies. The
units of the emissions tax are in dollars per ton of CO2 , where we convert the arbitrary units
of the DSGE model to these real-world units using the strategy described in the calibration
section above. The macroprudential taxes are in percentages. The welfare losses are in terms
of compensating variation in consumption that equates the steady-state welfare under a given


    25
    In the social planner's problem, there are no asset management costs, which in our baseline decentralized
economy depend on prices. However, because these costs are very small in our calibration, numerical differences
between our "first-best" and the planner's efficient outcomes are negligible.

                                                      25
policy scenario to that of the first-best outcome.26 The remaining variables in Table 2 are
presented in arbitrary model units.

   In the absence of an emissions tax, firms do not internalize the negative climate externality,
pushing emissions up to inefficiently high levels in both economies, with and without financial
frictions. In the model with financial frictions, this effect is counteracted by the inefficiently low
production as bank lending to firms is constrained by the presence of financial frictions. The
two sources of market failure work in opposite directions, so unregulated steady-state emissions
are lower with financial frictions than without them.

   Without financial frictions, the efficient steady-state emissions tax is 0.017 in abstract DSGE
units, which corresponds to 30.5 dollars per ton of CO2 . With financial frictions, the second-
best carbon tax (absent any macroprudential policies) is 24.2 dollars per ton of CO2 . Because
the financial frictions work in the opposite direction of the climate externality, the presence
of financial frictions implies that the carbon tax would be lower. Steady-state emissions are
thus higher in the model with financial frictions, although this difference is small in magnitude
(0.23%). The second column is a first-best outcome, since without financial frictions the only
externality is pollution, and it is corrected through the Pigouvian tax. The fourth column is a
second-best outcome; there are two sources of market inefficiencies (pollution externality and
financial frictions) but only one instrument (the emissions tax) to address them.

   The last three columns report deterministic steady-state outcomes in the baseline model
(with both a pollution externality and financial frictions) when macroprudential policy instru-
ments are available. The fifth column is the case where only a uniform macroprudential policy
(i.e., tb = tg ) is available, and the sixth column allows for differentiated macroprudential
policies. The last column is the first-best scenario, with both types of instruments available.

   When only a uniform macroprudential policy is available, since financial frictions limit the
level of economic activity to inefficiently low levels, the policymaker subsidizes banks to increase
  26
     We also computed the unconditional mean of welfare based on the second-order approximation to a house-
hold's lifetime utility and obtained very similar welfare results.

                                                    26
credit supply to the economy. That is, the second-best policy recapitalizes the banking sector
           b    g
by setting ss = ss = -0.0018. As a result, banks' net worth, aggregate investment, and
output are all brought closer to their first-best levels. This second-best macroprudential policy,
however, implies much higher emissions than the first best due to increased economic activity.
The steady-state emissions are about 50% higher than their first-best level, implying more
severe future climate damages.27

    In column 6, the regulator can set differentiated macroprudential policies and thus take
environmental factors into account. Without an emissions tax, the planner subsidizes green
assets more than brown assets; the second-best steady-state taxes on brown and green assets
    b                g
are ss = -0.0014 and ss = -0.0021, respectively. As a result, emissions are lower relative
to the case with the uniform macroprudential policy, but the difference is small (0.7%). When
only macroprudential policies are available, the gains from pushing economic activity closer to
its first-best level largely outweigh the costs from increased climate damages. Macroprudential
policies alone are not effective at tackling climate change.

    To further illustrate the inefficiencies of using macroprudential policy for climate mitigation,
we consider a policy experiment where the regulator tries to achieve a substantial emissions
reduction using only differentiated macroprudential policies without an emissions tax. Suppose
                                                                    b
that the policymaker exogenously imposes a high tax on brown assets ss = 0.0085 and a high
                        g
subsidy to green assets ss = -0.005. This policy reduces emissions by about 15% relative to
the second-best level (equivalent to the simulation in column 6 of Table 2). While this yields
a substantial emissions reduction, it is costly. The welfare loss associated with this policy is
2.3%, in terms of steady-state compensating consumption variation, even accounting for the

  27
      Using the atmospheric modeling module of DICE, we can translate these differences in steady-state emis-
sions into temperature changes. We equate the unregulated simulation to DICE's baseline no-policy simulation.
Under the first-best in our model, steady-state emissions are 31% lower than under the unregulated, so in DICE
we exogenously reduce emissions in each period 31% lower than in the baseline. For each simulation, we calcu-
late the peak temperature change given by DICE. Under our first-best simulation, the peak temperature is 1  C
lower than it is under the unregulated baseline. Under the second-best simulations with only macroprudential
policies, emissions are 5 % higher than the unregulated baseline, and the peak temperature is 0.1  C higher
than the unregulated baseline.

                                                     27
welfare benefits of reduced pollution.28

    Appendix E describes a sensitivity analysis that varies two parameters which determine the
magnitude of the financial frictions and explores their effect on the second-best carbon tax.



5.2      Dynamics

       Next, we study the implications of pollution externalities and financial frictions for Ramsey-
optimal dynamic policies in response to productivity shocks. We consider impulse responses to
a one-standard-deviation negative shock to aggregate productivity.29

    Figure 3 shows the impulse responses of key variables in the economies with and without
financial frictions under the efficient emissions tax policy (without macroprudential policies).
Similar to the standard RBC model, a negative TFP shock has a contractionary effect on the
economy: aggregate investment and output fall.30

    Consistent with the previous findings in the E-DSGE literature, the efficient emissions tax
and emissions are both procyclical. Financial frictions affect the dynamics of the efficient carbon
tax. In the economy with financial frictions, the efficient emissions tax falls by much more in
response to the negative shock, so that emissions actually increase on impact (Figure 3, Panels
(b) and (c)). The procyclicality of emissions is thus dampened.

    The second-best emissions tax falls more with financial frictions because the financial fric-
tions inefficiently amplify the macroeconomic aggregates' responses to the negative TFP shock
via banks' net worth. A decline in productivity reduces banks' net worth by lowering the return
on assets. Given the lower level of equity, the banking sector becomes more constrained in its
  28
      The intuition for why macroprudential policies alone cannot efficiently address the climate externality is
the following. Efficiency requires that expected returns on two types of assets (capital) are equalized across
sectors. When only differentiated macroprudential policies are available, fixing the climate externality would
require these taxes to be very different from each other (i.e. big positive tax for brown vs. subsidy for green),
which would impede the efficiency condition that returns to capital have to be equalized.
   29
      The reaction of our economy to negative and positive shocks is symmetric.
   30
      Appendix Figure A8 presents the impulse responses of additional variables for this simulation. All sectoral
variables get depressed as the shock symmetrically impacts both sectors.

                                                       28
ability to raise deposits and lend to firms. The tighter credit supply further amplifies the decline
in investment and output. Since here the policymaker is equipped with only one instrument
­ the emissions tax ­ she uses this instrument to address both the pollution externality and
the financial frictions. In response to the negative productivity shock, the planner cuts the
emissions tax more aggressively to mitigate the fall in banks' net worth and credit supply.

    Figure 4 plots impulse responses when macroprudential policies are available. We consider
the second-best policies when only a uniform macroprudential policy is available (solid lines),
the second-best policies when differentiated macroprudential policy is available (dotted lines),
and the first-best policies when both an emissions tax and macroprudential policies are available
(dashed lines).31

    For the two second-best policies, the responses to these policies are barely distinguishable
from each other. In both cases, emissions fall by more than they do in the first best, while
investment, output, and net worth dynamics closely replicate the first-best responses. This
suggests that from the Ramsey-efficiency perspective, second-best macroprudential taxes do
not address negative pollution externalities over the business cycle. The intuition behind this
result is that climate damages, which affect net output, are driven by the pollution stock ­ a
very slow-moving variable over the business cycle. Therefore, the Ramsey planner with only
macroprudential taxes can let emissions fluctuate more than optimally in response to mean-
reverting productivity shocks without incurring much efficiency losses in investment and output.

    For the first-best policy, the planner uses the emissions tax to solely address the climate
externality and the macroprudential policy to stabilize the banking sector. The efficient tax on
banks' assets is procyclical. When the economy is in a recession, the policymaker subsidizes
banks' asset purchases, thereby propping up asset prices and bank equity.32 On impact, the


   31
      When an emissions tax is available, the macroprudential policies do not need to be differentiated to achieve
the first best, so we consider just uniform macroprudential policies in this case. Appendix Figure A9 presents
the impulse responses of additional variables for this simulation.
   32
      The procyclical nature of macroprudential tax levied on banks' assets is similar in nature to countercyclical
bank capital buffers advocated by the Basel III framework and adopted by financial regulators in many countries.

                                                        29
subsidy increases from its steady-state level of -0.22% to about -1.7%. As a result, banks' net
worth is greatly stabilized, falling by only 9% versus 17% in the absence of the macroprudential
policy.




6     Conclusion

Reaching the Paris Agreement's goal of keeping global warming within 2 C above pre-industrial
levels requires aggressive policy action. Central banks and financial regulators have recently
expressed concern that such a policy action could trigger transition risk, possibly leading to
a policy-driven recession. To minimize this transition risk, regulators have started expanding
their set of tools to include new macroprudential policies specifically tailored to green and
brown assets. Preventing transition risk is important, as is preventing the risk that ambitious
climate action is not implemented when the opportunity finally presents itself.

    We develop a DSGE model of an economy with two key market failures: a climate external-
ity and financial frictions. The model addresses the issues of transition risk and of the efficient
design of climate and macroprudential policies in the long run and over business cycles. We
simulate the transition in response to an exogenous carbon tax, both with and without macro-
prudential policies. We also simulate efficient climate and macroprudential policy. Our results
show that macroprudential policies can reduce the risk of a recession following a major climate
policy. Further, by addressing financial frictions, macroprudential policies can also support eco-
nomic growth once climate policy is in place. However, macroprudential policies alone, without
a climate policy, perform poorly in addressing the climate externality.

    Like other DSGE models, ours makes several simplifying assumptions that could be relaxed
in future work to address other questions. For example, our model contains a representative
agent and thus does not address concerns about equity or distributional issues; instead, we could
model heterogeneous agents or multiple sectors (as in Dissou and Karnizova 2016). Further,


                                                30
our calibration is based on the DICE model, which may lead to policy shocks that are too
conservative.

   Important policy implications follow from our study. Introducing macroprudential policy
today can prevent a potential recession tomorrow, or the need to forgo ambitious climate policy
because of transition risks. Climate and macroprudential policies work best when used as com-
plements, rather than substitutes. Each policy addresses a distinct market failure. Our paper
can guide current efforts by central banks and financial regulators to minimize the transition
risk from climate policy and ensure efficient outcomes in the long run and over business cycles.




                                              31
References

Adjemian, S., Bastani, H., Juillard, M., Mihoubi, F., Perendia, G., Ratto, M. and Villemot, S.:
    2011, Dynare: Reference manual, version 4.

Angeloni, I. and Faia, E.: 2013, Capital regulation and monetary policy with fragile banks,
    Journal of Monetary Economics 60(3), 311­324.

Annicchiarico, B. and Di Dio, F.: 2015, Environmental policy and macroeconomic dynamics in
    a new keynesian model, Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 69, 1­21.

Annicchiarico, B. and Di Dio, F.: 2017, Ghg emissions control and monetary policy, Environ-
    mental and Resource Economics 67(4), 823­851.

Antweiler, W., Copeland, B. R. and Taylor, M. S.: 2001, Is free trade good for the environment?,
    American Economic Review 91(4), 877­908.

Aoki, K., Benigno, G. and Kiyotaki, N.: 2018, Monetary and financial policies in emerging
    markets, Technical report.

Bank of England: 2018, Transition in thinking: The impact of climate change on the UK
    banking sector, Technical report, Bank of England, Prudential Regulation Authority.

Banque de France: 2019, Greening the financial system: The new frontier, Technical report,
    Banque de France.

Barnett, M.: 2020, The estimated impacts of climate policy risk, Technical report.

Battiston, S., Mandel, A., Monasterolo, I., Sch¨
                                               utze, F. and Visentin, G.: 2017, A climate
    stress-test of the financial system, Nature Climate Change 7(4), 283.

Benmir, G. and Roman, J.: 2020, Policy interactions and the transition to clean technology.

Bernanke, B. S.: 2018, The real effects of disrupted credit: Evidence from the global financial
    crisis, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2018(2), 251­342.

                                              32
Bernanke, B. S. and Gertler, M.: 1986, Agency costs, collateral, and business fluctuations.

B¨
 oser, F. and Senni, C. C.: 2020, Emission-based interest rates and the transition to a low-
    carbon economy, Working Paper 20/337, CER-ETH - Center of Economic Research (CER-
    ETH) at ETH Zurich.

Brunnermeier, M. K., Eisenbach, T. and Sannikov, Y.: 2013, Macroeconomics with Financial
    Frictions: A Survey, Cambridge University Press, New York.

Brunnermeier, M. K. and Sannikov, Y.: 2014, A macroeconomic model with a financial sector,
    American Economic Review 104(2), 379­421.

Campiglio, E.: 2016, Beyond carbon pricing: The role of banking and monetary policy in
    financing the transition to a low-carbon economy, Ecological Economics 121, 220­230.

Campiglio, E., Dafermos, Y., Monnin, P., Ryan-Collins, J., Schotten, G. and Tanaka, M.:
    2018, Climate change challenges for central banks and financial regulators, Nature Climate
    Change 8(6), 462­468.

Carattini, S. and Sen, S.: 2019, Carbon taxes and stranded assets: Evidence from Washington
    state, Working Paper 7785, CESifo Group Munich.

Carney, M.: 2015, Breaking the tragedy of the horizon - Climate change and financial stability,
    Technical report, Bank of England, London.

Cerutti, E., Claessens, S. and Laeven, L.: 2017, The use and effectiveness of macroprudential
    policies: New evidence, Journal of Financial Stability 28, 203­224.

Chan, Y. T.: 2020, Are macroeconomic policies better in curbing air pollution than environ-
    mental policies? A DSGE approach with carbon-dependent fiscal and monetary policies,
    Energy Policy 141, 111454.

Christiano, L. J., Eichenbaum, M. and Evans, C. L.: 2005, Nominal rigidities and the dynamic
    effects of a shock to monetary policy, Journal of Political Economy 113(1), 1­45.

                                              33
Christiano, L. J. and Ikeda, D.: 2013, Government Policy, Credit Markets, and Economic
    Activity, Studies in Macroeconomic History, Cambridge University Press, p. 226­331.

Collard, F., Dellas, H., Diba, B. and Loisel, O.: 2017, Optimal monetary and prudential policies,
    American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 9(1), 40­87.

De Paoli, B. and Paustian, M.: 2017, Coordinating monetary and macroprudential policies,
    Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 49(2-3), 319­349.

Diluiso, F., Annicchiarico, B., Kalkuhl, M. and Minx, J. C.: 2020, Climate actions and stranded
    assets: The role of financial regulation and monetary policy, Working Paper 8486, CESifo
    Group Munich.

Dissou, Y. and Karnizova, L.: 2016, Emissions cap or emissions tax? A multi-sector business
    cycle analysis, Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 79, 169­188.

Economides, G. and Xepapadeas, A.: 2018, Monetary policy under climate change.

ESRB: 2016, Too late, too sudden: Transition to a low-carbon economy and systemic risk,
    Technical Report 6/February 2016, European Systemic Risk Board.

Ferrari, A. and Landi, V. N.: 2020, Whatever it takes to save the planet? Central banks and
    unconventional green policy, Technical Report 2500, European Central Bank.

Fischer, C. and Heutel, G.: 2013, Environmental macroeconomics: Environmental policy,
    business cycles, and directed technical change, Annual Review of Resource Economics
    5(1), 197­210.

Fischer, C. and Springborn, M.: 2011, Emissions targets and the real business cycle: Inten-
    sity targets versus caps or taxes, Journal of Environmental Economics and Management
    62(3), 352­366.

Fried, S., Novan, K. and Peterman, W. B.: 2020, The macro effects of climate policy uncertainty,
    Technical report, Mimeo, March.

                                               34
Fullerton, D. and Heutel, G.: 2007, The general equilibrium incidence of environmental taxes,
    Journal of Public Economics 91(3-4), 571­591.

Gallic, E. and Vermandel, G.: 2020, Weather shocks, European Economic Review 124, 103409.

Gertler, M. and Karadi, P.: 2011, A model of unconventional monetary policy, Journal of
    Monetary Economics 58(1), 17­34.

Gertler, M. and Kiyotaki, N.: 2010, Financial intermediation and credit policy in business cycle
    analysis, Handbook of Monetary Economics, Vol. 3, Elsevier, pp. 547­599.

Gertler, M., Kiyotaki, N. and Queralto, A.: 2012, Financial crises, bank risk exposure and
    government financial policy, Journal of Monetary Economics 59, S17­S34.

Gibson, J. and Heutel, G.: 2020, Pollution and labor market search externalities over the
    business cycle, Working Paper 27445, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Golosov, M., Hassler, J., Krusell, P. and Tsyvinski, A.: 2014, Optimal taxes on fossil fuel in
    general equilibrium, Econometrica 82(1), 41­88.

Heutel, G.: 2012, How should environmental policy respond to business cycles? Optimal policy
    under persistent productivity shocks, Review of Economic Dynamics 15(2), 244­264.

Horvath, M.: 2000, Sectoral shocks and aggregate fluctuations, Journal of Monetary Economics
    45(1), 69­106.

Iacoviello, M.: 2015, Financial business cycles, Review of Economic Dynamics 18(1), 140­163.

IMF: 2019, Fiscal monitor: How to mitigate climate change, Technical report, IMF, Washington,
    DC.

Jeanne, O. and Korinek, A.: 2020, Macroprudential regulation versus mopping up after the
    crash, The Review of Economic Studies 87(3), 1470­1497.



                                              35
Jermann, U. and Quadrini, V.: 2012, Macroeconomic effects of financial shocks, American
    Economic Review 102(1), 238­71.

Kiyotaki, N. and Moore, J.: 1997, Credit cycles, Journal of Political Economy 105(2), 211­248.

Krogstrup, S. and Oman, W.: 2019, Macroeconomic and financial policies for climate change
    mitigation: A review of the literature, Technical Report 19/185, International Monetary
    Fund.

Meh, C. A. and Moran, K.: 2010, The role of bank capital in the propagation of shocks, Journal
    of Economic Dynamics and Control 34(3), 555­576.

Monasterolo, I.: 2020, Climate change and the financial system, Annual Review of Resource
    Economics 12(1), 299­320.

Nordhaus, W.: 2008, A question of balance: Weighing the options on global warming policies,
    Yale University Press.

Nordhaus, W.: 2018, Evolution of modeling of the economics of global warming: Changes in
    the DICE model, 1992­2017, Climatic Change 148(4), 623­640.

Nordhaus, W. D.: 2017, Revisiting the social cost of carbon, Proceedings of the National
    Academy of Sciences 114(7), 1518­1523.

Papageorgiou, C., Saam, M. and Schulte, P.: 2017, Substitution between clean and dirty energy
    inputs: A macroeconomic perspective, Review of Economics and Statistics 99(2), 281­290.

Pindyck, R. S.: 2019, The social cost of carbon revisited, Journal of Environmental Economics
    and Management 94, 140­160.

Ramelli, S., Wagner, A. F., Zeckhauser, R. J. and Ziegler, A.: 2018, Investor rewards to
    climate responsibility: Evidence from the 2016 climate policy shock, Working Paper 25310,
    National Bureau of Economic Research.


                                             36
Ricke, K., Drouet, L., Caldeira, K. and Tavoni, M.: 2018, Country-level social cost of carbon,
    Nature Climate Change 8(10), 895­900.

Rozenberg, J., Vogt-Schilb, A. and Hallegatte, S.: 2020, Instrument choice and stranded assets
    in the transition to clean capital, Journal of Environmental Economics and Management
    100, 102183.

Semieniuk, G., Campiglio, E., Mercure, J.-F., Volz, U. and Edwards, N. R.: 2020, Low-carbon
    transition risks for finance, WIREs Climate Change p. e678.

Sen, S. and von Schickfus, M.-T.: 2020, Climate policy, stranded assets, and investors' expec-
    tations, Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 100, 102277.

Stiglitz, J. E., Stern, N., Duan, M., Edenhofer, O., Giraud, G., Heal, G. M., la Rovere, E. L.,
    Morris, A., Moyer, E., Pangestu, M. et al.: 2017, Report of the High-level Commission on
    Carbon Prices.

van der Ploeg, F. and Rezai, A.: 2020, Stranded assets in the transition to a carbon-free
    economy, Annual Review of Resource Economics 12(1).

van der Ploeg, R.: 2020, Macro-financial implications of climate change and the carbon transi-
    tion, Working Paper, European Central Bank.




                                              37
Tables and Figures


                            Table 1: Calibration
        Parameter   Value      Description
        RBC parameters
                 0.995         Discount factor
                 2             Risk aversion
                 1             Frisch elasticity of labor hours
                 8.3849        Labor disutility
        L        1             Intrasectoral CES of labor hours
          b
                 0.35          Capital share in `brown' production
        g        0.33          Capital share in `green' production
         b g
         ,       0.025         Capital depreciation rate
            g
        b ,      10            Investment adjustment cost
        A        0.95          Persistence of aggregate TFP shocks
        A        0.007         Std. dev. of innovations to TFP


        Environmental parameters
        1         0.0335     Abatement cost function parameters
        2         2.6
        d0        -0.0076 Damage function parameters
        d1        8.10e - 6
        d2        1.05e - 8
        X         0.9965     Pollution decay
                  1          Emissions elasticity parameter
         row
        e         3.1499     Emissions in the ROW
        Y         2          CES between `green' and `brown' outputs
          b
                  0.3326     Share of `brown' output


        Banking sector parameters
                   0.3409     Fraction of divertable assets
                   0.972      Bankers' survival rate
                   0.003      Proportional transfer to new bankers
                      -4
                   10         Banks' portfolio management cost
        sg         0.60       Portfolio share of green assets

                                      38
                                                                      Table 2: Steady state
                                            No financial frictions                                   Financial frictions
                                         No policy     Emissions            No policy    Emissions     Uniform         Differentiated   Emissions tax
                                                       tax only                          tax only      macro-          macropru-        and uniform
                                                                                                       prudential      dential          macropruden-
                                                                                                       policies only policies only      tial policies
                                                                                                       ( b =  g )      ( b =  g )
          Emissions tax ($ per ton)      0              30.5                0            24.2          0              0                 30.5
          Tax on brown assets (%)        -              -                   0            0             -0.18          -0.14             -0.22
          Tax on green assets (%)        -              -                   0            0             -0.18          -0.21             -0.22
          Emissions                      0.676          0.432               0.630        0.433         0.668          0.663             0.432
          Aggregate output               1.506          1.519               1.407        1.416         1.488          1.489             1.519
          Banks' net worth               -              -                   3.276        3.281         3.675          3.677             3.773
          Welfare loss (% CV)            0.84           0                   1.97         1.30          1.00           0.98              0

        Note: This table shows the steady state values of selected variables in the economies with and without financial frictions under




39
     different policy scenarios. The units of the emissions tax are dollars per ton of CO2 , based on the calibration described in the text.
     Tax rates on banks' assets are in percentages. Welfare loss is in terms of compensating consumption variation relative to the first-best
     allocations. All other variables are in arbitrary model units.
                                     Figure 1: Transition dynamics to a low carbon economy

                                 (a) Emissions                                  (b) Aggregate investment                               (c) Aggregate output
                         0                                                       0                                                0


                        -10                                                    -0.5
       % dev. from ss




                                                              % dev. from ss




                                                                                                               % dev. from ss
                                                                                                                                -0.2

                        -20                                                      -1

                                                                                                                                -0.4
                        -30                                                    -1.5


                        -40                                                      -2                                             -0.6
                                 5   10 15 20    25                                    5   10 15 20       25                              5   10 15 20       25
                                     Periods                                               Periods                                            Periods
                              (d) Banks' net worth                                    (e) Green capital                                  (f) Brown capital
                         0                                                     0.15                                               0

                         -2                                                     0.1                                             -0.5
       % dev. from ss




                                                      % dev. from ss




                                                                                                               % dev. from ss
                         -4                                                    0.05
                                                                                                                                 -1
                         -6
                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                -1.5
                         -8                                                                                                                   Financial Frictions
                                                                        -0.05
                                                                                                                                              No Financial Frictions
                        -10                                                                                                      -2
                                                                               -0.1
                                 5   10 15 20    25                                    5   10 15 20       25                              5   10 15 20       25
                                     Periods                                               Periods                                            Periods


    Note: This figure shows the transition dynamics in response to an unanticipated introduction
of the permanent emissions tax of about 30 dollars per ton of CO2 in the economies with and
without financial frictions.




                                                                                              40
      Figure 2: Transition to a low carbon economy with macroprudential policy

                                   (a) Emissions                                  (b) Aggregate investment                               (c) Aggregate output
                           0                                                       0                                                0


         % dev. from ss   -10                                                    -0.5




                                                                % dev. from ss




                                                                                                                 % dev. from ss
                                                                                                                                  -0.2

                          -20                                                      -1

                                                                                                                                  -0.4
                          -30                                                    -1.5


                          -40                                                      -2                                             -0.6
                                   5   10 15 20    25                                    5   10 15 20       25                              5   10 15 20       25
                                       Periods                                               Periods                                            Periods
                                (d) Banks' net worth                                    (e) Green capital                                  (f) Brown capital
                           0                                                      0.1                                               0

                           -2
                                                                                 0.05                                             -0.5
         % dev. from ss




                                                        % dev. from ss




                                                                                                                 % dev. from ss
                           -4
                                                                                                                                   -1
                                                                                   0
                           -6
                                                                                                                                  -1.5
                           -8                                             -0.05                                                                 No Macroprud.
                                                                                                                                                Macroprud.
                          -10                                                                                                      -2
                                                                                 -0.1
                                   5   10 15 20    25                                    5   10 15 20       25                              5   10 15 20       25
                                       Periods                                               Periods                                            Periods


    Note: This figure plots the transition dynamics in the model with financial frictions to the
same emissions tax shock as in Figure 1 under two scenarios: (i) No macroprudential policy
(solid lines); (ii) with macroprudential policy (dashed lines). Macroprudential policy is such
that it lowers banks' steady-state exposure to the brown sector from 40% (baseline calibration)
to 32%. Deviations are calculated relative to the respective initial steady states.




                                                                                             41
                                     Figure 3: The Ramsey-efficient dynamic emissions tax

                                     (a) TFP                                          (b) Emissions tax                                          (c) Emissions
                        0                                                       0                                                         8

                                                                               -5                                                         6
                      -0.2
     % dev. from ss




                                                             % dev. from ss




                                                                                                                         % dev. from ss
                                                                              -10                                                         4
                      -0.4
                                                                              -15                                                         2

                      -0.6
                                                                              -20                                                         0

                      -0.8                                                    -25                                                         -2
                                10   20   30   40   50                                10   20   30   40     50                                  10    20   30     40   50
                                     Periods                                               Periods                                                    Periods
                             (d) Aggregate investment                                (e) Aggregate output                                      (f) Banks' net worth
                        0                                                       0                                                         0

                      -0.5
                                                                                                                                          -5
     % dev. from ss




                                                         % dev. from ss




                                                                                                                 % dev. from ss
                                                                              -0.5
                       -1
                                                                                                                                   -10
                      -1.5
                                                                               -1
                                                                                                                                   -15               Financial Frictions
                       -2
                                                                                                                                                     No Financial Frictions
                      -2.5                                                    -1.5                                                 -20
                                10   20   30   40   50                                10   20   30   40     50                                  10    20   30     40   50
                                     Periods                                               Periods                                                    Periods



    Note: This figure plots the impulse responses to a one-standard-deviation negative TFP
shock under the Ramsey-efficient emissions tax policy in the economies (i) with financial fric-
tions (solid lines) and (ii) without financial frictions (dashed lines).




                                                                                           42
      Figure 4: Ramsey-efficient dynamic policies under different sets of instruments

                                       (a) TFP                                                     (b) Emissions tax                                          (c) Emissions
                          0                                                                0                                                           0


                        -0.2                                                               -1
    % dev. from ss




                                                                          % dev. from ss




                                                                                                                                % dev. from ss
                                                                                                                                                     -0.5

                        -0.4                                                               -2

                                                                                                                                                      -1
                        -0.6                                                               -3


                        -0.8                                                               -4                                                        -1.5
                                  10   20 30     40   50                                           10   20 30         40   50                                10   20 30     40     50
                                       Periods                                                          Periods                                                   Periods
                               (d) Aggregate investment                                          (e) Aggregate output                                       (f) Banks' net worth
                          0                                                                0                                                           5

                        -0.5
    % dev. from ss




                                                           % dev. from ss




                                                                                                                                    % dev. from ss
                                                                                -0.5                                                                   0
                         -1

                        -1.5
                                                                                           -1                                                         -5
                         -2

                        -2.5                                                    -1.5                                                                 -10
                                  10   20 30     40   50                                           10   20 30         40   50                                10   20 30     40     50
                                       Periods                                                          Periods                                                   Periods
                               (g) Tax on brown assets                                          (h) Tax on green assets
                        0.5                                                          0.5

                          0                                                                0
    Diff. (%) from ss




                                                           Diff. (%) from ss




                        -0.5                                                    -0.5
                                                                                                             b
                                                                                                             t
                                                                                                               = g
                                                                                                                 t
                         -1                                                                -1
                                                                                                             b
                                                                                                             t
                                                                                                                  g
                                                                                                                  t
                        -1.5                                                    -1.5                         e
                                                                                                             t
                                                                                                               & b
                                                                                                                 t
                                                                                                                   = g
                                                                                                                     t

                         -2                                                                -2
                                  10   20 30     40   50                                           10   20 30         40   50
                                       Periods                                                          Periods


   Note: This figure plots the impulse responses to a one-standard-deviation negative TFP
shock in the baseline model with Ramsey-efficient policies when (i) only uniform tax on banks'
assets (tb =tg ) is available (solid lines); (ii) only differentiated taxes on banks' brown (tb ) and
green (tg ) assets are available (dotted lines); (iii) emissions tax (te ) and a uniform tax on
banks' assets (tb =tg ) are available (dashed lines).




                                                                                                        43
                                          Online Appendices

A      Details on banks' optimization problem

     We formulate the banker's optimization problem in terms of choosing the value of total
                                                                                   Qg   g
                                                                                     t Sj,t
portfolio, Wj,t  Qg  S g
                    t j,t + Qb b
                              S
                             t j,t , and the portfolio share of green assets, s g
                                                                                t   Wj,t
                                                                                            . Using
these definitions and the flow of funds constraint (5) to replace deposits Dj,t , we can express
the evolution of bank's net worth (6) as
                                                                      
                                          b               b
                                        Rk,t +1 - 1 + t Rt +          
                                   g           b            g b g
             Nj,t+1 =      +      Rk,t +1 - Rk,t+1 - t - t Rt st +       Wj,t + Rt Nj,t .     (A1)
                                                        g 2
                                                                      
                                            -    (sg
                                                   t - s ) Rt
                                                                      
                                              2



    The banker's optimization problem in recursive form then becomes:

                     Vj,t = maxg Et {[(1 -  ) Mt,t+1 Nj,t+1 + Mt,t+1 Vj,t+1 ]} ,              (A2)
                               Wj,t ,st


subject to the incentive constraint (7) and the evolution of net worth (A1).

    We guess and later verify that the value function is linear in net worth Nj,t ,

                                               Vj,t = t Nj,t ,                                (A3)

where t is the time-varying coefficient common across banks. It is convenient to define the
variables:
                          b                b
                            t  Et t+1 Rk,t+1 - 1 + t Rt
                                                       b
                                                              ,                       (A4)

                        g
                        t  Et t+1
                                              g
                                             Rk,t       b       g   b
                                                  +1 - Rk,t+1 - t - t Rt     ,                (A5)

                                             t  Et [t+1 Rt ] ,                                (A6)

where t+1  Mt,t+1 (1 -  + t+1 ) can be interpreted as the banker's effective stochastic
discount factor. b t is the expected discounted (tax adjusted) excess return on brown assets
relative to deposits, and g t is the expected excess return on green assets relative to brown
assets. t is the expected discounted cost of raising an additional unit of deposits.

    Using the definitions (A4)-(A6), the conjecture (A3) , and (A1), we can rewrite the Bellman




                                                     44
equation (A2) as

                                                 t  g
                   Vj,t = maxg     b    g g
                                   t +  t st -     (st - sg )2 Wj,t + t Nj,t .            (A7)
                        Wj,t ,st                 2

The incentive constraint (7) then becomes,

                                     t  g
                       b   g g
                       t + t st -      (st - sg )2 Wj,t + t Nj,t  Wj,t .                  (A8)
                                     2

The Lagrangian function for this problem is

                                   t  g
            £t =     b   g g
                     t + t st -      (st - sg )2 Wj,t + t Nj,t (1 + t ) - t Wj,t ,        (A9)
                                   2

where t is the Lagrange multiplier on the incentive constraint (A8). The first order optimality
conditions with respect to Wj,t and sg
                                     t are:


                                                   t  g
                          (1 + t ) b    g g
                                   t +  t st -       (st - sg )2 = t ,                   (A10)
                                                   2

                               (1 + t ) [g        g    g
                                         t - t  (st - s )] Wj,t = 0,                     (A11)
                          t  g
       t    b    g g
            t +  t st -     (st - sg )2 Wj,t + t Nj,t - Wj,t      = 0, with t  0.        (A12)
                          2
                        g g   t     g   g 2
Denote by t  b    t + t st - 2 (st - s ) the average excess return on bank's portfolio net of
                                                       t
asset management costs. From (A10) we have t = -        t
                                                          . The incentive constraint (A8) binds
whenever t > 0, or when 0 < t < . In our realistic parametrization of the model, the
incentive constraint always binds in a local region of the steady state. Therefore, the amount
of assets intermediated is limited by bank's equity capital,

                                                  t
                                        Wj,t =        Nj,t .                             (A13)
                                                  - t

The first order optimality condition with respect to sg
                                                      t determines the portfolio composition,


                                                 g
                                          sg
                                           t =
                                                   t
                                                     + sg .                              (A14)
                                                 t 

Equation (A14) is the same as equation (12) in Section 2 of the main text. Note that since both
g                                         g
 t and t depend on aggregate variables, st is common across all banks; therefore, t does not
depend on individual bank-specific characteristics either. Using (A13) we can then verify our



                                                 45
conjecture that
                                               t                    t
                       Vj,t = t Nj,t = t           Nj,t + t Nj,t =      Nj,t ,                (A15)
                                               - t                  - t
                                                      t
                                               t =         .                                  (A16)
                                                     - t
Imposing (A16) in (A13) and aggregating over all banks yields equation (11) in the main text.



B     Full set of equilibrium conditions

                                                              1
                                    1+L          1+L        1+L
                     Lt =     Lb
                               t           + (Lg
                                               t)                 ,                            (B1)
                                                    -
                                             L1+ 
                               Ct+1 -         t+1
                                             1+
                  Mt,t+1 =                          -   ,                                      (B2)
                                            L1+ 
                                   Ct -      t
                                            1+

                      1 = Et (Mt,t+1 Rt ) ,                                                    (B3)
                      i        -L           L
                     wt =     Lt         Li
                                          t     , for i = {g, b},                              (B4)
                                  g g
                    Wt = Qb  b
                          t St + Qt St ,                                                       (B5)
                            Qb  b
                             t St
                     sg
                      t =         ,                                                            (B6)
                             Wt
                     b           b           b
                     t = Et t+1 Rk,t+1 - 1 + t Rt                     ,                        (B7)
                     g
                     t = Et t+1
                                            g
                                           Rk,t       b       g   b
                                                +1 - Rk,t+1 - t - t Rt                    ,    (B8)
                     t = Et [t+1 Rt ] ,                                                        (B9)
                   t+1 = Mt,t+1 (1 -  + t+1 ) ,                                               (B10)
                                      t  g
                    t =  b      g g
                          t +  t st -   (st - sg )2 ,                                         (B11)
                                      2
                           t
                    t =          ,                                                            (B12)
                          - t
                            t
                   Wt =          Nt ,                                                         (B13)
                          - t
                     g   g
                    st = t + sg ,                                                             (B14)
                         t 
                                                      
                                           i       i i
                   Nt+1 =                 Rk,t +1 Qt St - Rt Dt + 
                                                                                    Qi  i
                                                                                     t St ,   (B15)
                               i={g,b}                                    i={g,b}

                                                                       g
                     Dt = (1 + tb )Qb  b        g   g g
                                    t St + (1 + t )Qt St +             (s - sg )2 Wt - Nt ,   (B16)
                                                                      2 t


                                                        46
                                                                                                                 Y
                                      1                 Y -1                          1              Y -1        Y -1
                   Yt =           b   Y
                                               Ytb      Y
                                                               + 1-               b   Y
                                                                                            (Ytg )   Y
                                                                                                                        ,                      (B17)
                                                                       i              1-i
                   Yti = [1 - d (Xt )] At Kti-1                              Li
                                                                              t             , for i = {g, b} ,                                 (B18)
                                           1
                                b Yt       Y
                    pb
                     t =                        ,                                                                                              (B19)
                               Ytb
                                                         1
                                           b             Y
                                1 -  Yt
                   pg
                    t =                                        ,                                                                               (B20)
                                   Ytg
                   Xt = X Xt-1 + et + erow
                                       t ,                                                                                                     (B21)
                    et = (1 - µt ) Ytb ,                                                                                                       (B22)
                   Zt = 1 µ    b
                           t Yt ,
                            2
                                                                                                                                               (B23)
                                            Ytb b                                                                 -1
                    b
                   wt = 1 - b                   pt -  1 µ    e
                                                         t - t (1 - µt )
                                                          2
                                                                                                         Ytb             ,                     (B24)
                                            Lbt
                                      1-          2 -1
                   te = Ytb                1 2 µt      ,                                                                                       (B25)
                               b Yt
                                    b
                                                   2                                                    -1
                                  b
                                Kt-1
                                           pb          e
                                            t - 1 µt - t (1 - µt )                               Ytb             + 1 -  b Qb
                                                                                                                           t
                  b
                 Rk,t   =                                                                                                           ,          (B26)
                                                                              Qb
                                                                               t-1

                    g                       pg
                                             t Yt
                                                 g
                   wt = (1 - g )                   ,                                                                                           (B27)
                                             Lgt
                                pg Y g
                            g Kt t
                                g  + (1 -  g ) Qg
                                                t
                  g               t-1
                 Rk,t =                                                ,                                                                       (B28)
                                           Qg
                                            t-1
                                                                   2
                            i               Iti                                   Iti                   Iti
                   Qi
                    t   =1+                      -1                    + i             -1                    +
                            2              Iti-1                                 Iti-1                 Iti-1
                                                                                             2
                                                    i    Iti+1                    Iti+1
                        - Et      Mt,t+1                       -1                                 , for i = {g, b} ,                           (B29)
                                                          Iti                      Iti
                  Kti = 1 -  i Kti-1 + Iti , for i = {g, b} ,                                                                                  (B30)
                Qi  i    i i
                 t St = Qt Kt , for i = {g, b} ,                                                                                               (B31)
                                                                                                             2
                                                                                  i        Iti                               g
                   Yt = C t +                   Iti + Zt +                                      -1               Iti +       (s - sg )2 Wt .   (B32)
                                                                                  2       Iti-1                             2 t
                                      i={g,b}                          i={g,b}



    Given government policies (te , tb , tg ) and exogenous total factor productivity (At ), a com-
petitive equilibrium is described by the stochastic sequences of endogenous variables Jt 
                                                                                                               g                 g
[ Li     i i        i   i    i    i      i i                                                                                 b
    t , Kt , It , Yt , St , wt , Rk,t , Qt , pt i=g,b , Ct , Mt,t+1 , Lt , Yt , Zt , µt , et , Xt , Nt , Wt , st , Dt , Rt , t , t ,
t , t , t , t+1 ] that satisfy the system of equations B1-B32.

                                                                                 47
C      The Ramsey-efficient policy problem

    For a given set of available instruments (e.g., only te ; only tb = tg ; tb and tg ; te and
tb = tg ) the Ramsey planner solves:
                                                                                          1+
                                                                                               1- 
                                                                       1+L         1+L   1+L
                                                                    Lb       + (Lg
                                                    
                                                                                                  
                                                                                 t)
                                                                                                  
                                                 
                                                        t 1 C t -
                                                                     t                          
                  max                       E0                                                  ,
                                                                                               
 {Jt , and a given set of instruments}t=0                1-                  1+
                                                  t=0
                                                                                                  
                                                                                             (C1)
subject to the constraints of the competitive equilibrium (i.e., equations B1-B32). As is common
in the literature, we take the `timeless perspective' approach to implement the solution to the
Ramsey problem; The policymaker is able to commit to a state-contingent dynamic policy
announced in time 0. We implement the solution in Dynare.



D       Transition Risk ­ Alternate Policy Timing Assump-
tions

In this section, we present more simulations extending the simulations exploring transition risk
from Section 4, though we vary the assumptions about the timing of the policies.

    Appendix Figure A3 contrasts the abrupt implementation of an exogenous carbon tax to a
gradual, ramp-up approach, which is typically recommended by IAMs like DICE. A surprise
carbon tax is introduced in period 5. Under the gradual simulation, the tax rate starts low and
increases linearly to the efficient level (30.5 dollars per ton) by period 25 and permanently stays
at that efficient level thereafter. The experiment illustrates that gradual "ramp-up" causes a
milder recession and avoids the sudden drop in output caused by the abrupt tax increase. The
decrease in green capital is much less severe under the gradual tax, and the level of green capital
rises above the original steady-state level much more quickly.

    In the next simulation, presented in Appendix Figure A4, we consider how the preannounce-
ment of a carbon tax, rather than its sudden implementation, affects the results. In these sim-
ulations, the carbon tax of 30.5 dollars per ton is announced in period 5 (unexpectedly), but
it does not take effect until period 10. Because asset prices are forward looking, the negative
effects of the announcement on asset prices, banks' net worth, and investment are immediate,
albeit milder than in the baseline scenario. The recession is milder with the pre-announcement,
and green production and capital also fall by less.

                                                            48
    Both of the previous sets of simulations explore how the timing of the carbon tax can
affect the transition and possibly alleviate the threat of a recession. Of course, the timing of
climate policy is often constrained by political economy elements, so a gradual implementation
might be an inferior solution to implementing macroprudential policy, which allows for abrupt
implementations as well. Climate damages are also higher with gradual implementation, in
terms of eventual temperature increase.

    In the final set of simulations that we explore here, we instead investigate the timing of the
macroprudential policies. In the results presented in the main text and presented in Figure 2,
the macroprudential policy is in place before the carbon tax is enacted, and the initial steady
state of the simulations with the macroprudential policy is the steady state that includes that
policy. In Appendix Figure A5 we instead introduce the macroprudential policies at the same
time as the introduction of the carbon tax (period 5). In these simulations, the magnitudes of
the macroprudential policies are identical to those in Figure 2, though the timing differs. These
figures demonstrate that these simultaneous macroprudential policies do not have a substantial
effect on alleviating a recession caused by a carbon tax ­ the change in aggregate output is
barely moved by the introduction of these macroprudential policies, though the decrease in
aggregate investment lasts for much less time. Because these simultaneous macroprudential
policies are relatively ineffective, we also simulate an alternate set of simultaneous macropru-
dential policies, presented in Appendix Figure A6 in which the tax on brown assets is not as
high as it is in the base case. Under this set of policies, Appendix Figure A6 demonstrates
that the macroprudential policies are quite effective at ameliorating the recession ­ aggregate
investment immediately increases, and aggregate output begins to rise immediately after its
initial decline. These simulations suggest that even when macroprudential financial policies are
implemented simultaneously as climate policy, they can still be designed in such a way that
mitigate the transition risk.



E     Sensitivity Analysis

Here we present the results from sensitivity analyses varying two parameters that control the
degree of distortions due to financial frictions. Figure A7 shows how the second-best steady-
state carbon tax varies when we exogenously change the parameters  (Panel (a)) and  (Panel
(b)). We vary banks' transfer parameter  from its baseline value to higher values and the agency
problem parameter  from its baseline to lower values. The parameter  is the banks' transfer
parameter; a higher  means that exogenous transfers from households to banks increase, which
directly increases banks' net worth. Banks can thus intermediate more capital to the economy.

                                               49
The base case calibrated value of  is 0.003. As we increase this parameter, it reduces the
steady-state distortion in allocations coming from the financial frictions. When  is about
0.008, the second-best emissions tax is the same as the first-best tax ($30.5 per ton), meaning
that the inefficiencies from the financial friction have been eliminated.

    The parameter  is the agency problem parameter; a lower  means that incentives to divert
funds for banks are lower, so depositors are willing to lend more to the banks. As a result,
banks can extend more credit to the economy. The base case calibrated value of  is 0.3409.
As we reduce this parameter, it reduces the distortion from financial frictions. Again, there is
a low enough value for  (about 0.13) for which the second-best emissions tax is the same as
first-best tax.




Additional Tables and Figures

                             Table A1: Steady state: Additional variables
                       No financial frictions                           Financial frictions
                       No policy  e                      No policy     e
                                                                          b = g b = g               e & b = g
  Consumption          1.082       1.093                 1.038     1.046 1.075       1.075          1.093
  Green output         0.850       0.862                 0.795     0.804 0.840       0.845          0.862
  Brown output         0.676       0.675                 0.630     0.629 0.668       0.663          0.675
  Green investment     0.254       0.257                 0.221     0.223 0.248       0.251          0.257
  Brown investment     0.170       0.168                 0.147     0.146 0.166       0.163          0.168
  Labor in green prod. 0.272       0.273                 0.263     0.264 0.270       0.271          0.273
  Labor in brown prod. 0.212       0.211                 0.205     0.204 0.211       0.211          0.211
  Climate damages      0.053       0.047                 0.052     0.047 0.053       0.053          0.047

    Note: This table shows the steady state values of selected variables in the economies with and without
financial frictions under different policy scenarios. All variables are in arbitrary model units, except for climate
damages are a fraction of output.




                                                        50
                              Figure A1: Transition to a low carbon economy: Additional variables

                                          (a) Emissions tax                                      (b) Aggregate labor                                          (c) Green production
                                     40                                                      0                                            0.05

           Dollars per ton of CO 2
                                     30




                                                               % dev. from ss




                                                                                                                       % dev. from ss
                                                                                 -0.2                                                                    0

                                     20

                                                                                 -0.4                                                   -0.05
                                     10


                                     0                                           -0.6                                                         -0.1
                                           5   10 15 20   25                                       5   10 15 20   25                                             5   10 15 20     25
                                               Periods                                                 Periods                                                       Periods
                                      (d) Brown production                                  (e) Price of brown assets                                    (f) Price of green assets
                                     0                                                       0                                                           1

                                                                                                                                                         0
        % dev. from ss




                                                                           % dev. from ss




                                                                                                                                        % dev. from ss
                            -0.5                                                            -1
                                                                                                                                                         -1

                                     -1                                                     -2
                                                                                                                                                         -2          Financial Frictions
                                                                                                                                                                     No Financial Frictions
                                                                                                                                                         -3
                            -1.5                                                            -3
                                           5   10 15 20   25                                       5   10 15 20   25                                             5   10 15 20     25
                                               Periods                                                 Periods                                                       Periods


    Note: This figure plots the transition dynamics of additional variables in response to the same path of the
emissions tax as in Figure 1.




                                                                                                         51
Figure A2: Transition to a low carbon economy with macroprudential policy:
                                 Additional variables

                                             (a) Emissions tax                                       (b) Aggregate labor                                          (c) Green production
                                       40                                                        0                                                           0
             Dollars per ton of CO 2
                                                                                                                                            -0.02
                                       30




                                                                   % dev. from ss




                                                                                                                           % dev. from ss
                                                                                     -0.2
                                                                                                                                            -0.04
                                       20
                                                                                                                                            -0.06
                                                                                     -0.4
                                       10
                                                                                                                                            -0.08

                                       0                                             -0.6                                                         -0.1
                                               5   10 15 20   25                                       5   10 15 20   25                                             5   10 15 20   25
                                                   Periods                                                 Periods                                                       Periods
                                            (d)Brown production                                 (e) Price of brown assets                                    (f) Price of green assets
                                       0                                                         0                                                           1

                                                                                                                                                             0
          % dev. from ss




                                                                               % dev. from ss




                                                                                                                                            % dev. from ss
                              -0.5                                                              -1
                                                                                                                                                             -1
                                       -1
                                                                                                -2
                                                                                                                                                             -2          No Macroprud.
                              -1.5                                                                                                                                       Macroprud.
                                                                                                                                                             -3
                                                                                                -3
                                               5   10 15 20   25                                       5   10 15 20   25                                             5   10 15 20   25
                                                   Periods                                                 Periods                                                       Periods


    Note: This figure plots the transition dynamics of additional variables in response to the emissions tax
introduction in the economies with and without macroprudential policy.




                                                                                                           52
      Figure A3: Transition dynamics: Abrupt versus gradual "ramp-up" approach

                                     (a) Emissions                                  (b) Aggregate investment                               (c) Aggregate output
                             0                                                       0                                                0


                            -10                                                    -0.5
           % dev. from ss




                                                                  % dev. from ss




                                                                                                                   % dev. from ss
                                                                                                                                    -0.2

                            -20                                                      -1

                                                                                                                                    -0.4
                            -30                                                    -1.5


                            -40                                                      -2                                             -0.6
                                     5   10 15 20    25                                    5   10 15 20       25                              5   10 15 20       25
                                         Periods                                               Periods                                            Periods
                                  (d) Banks' net worth                                    (e) Green capital                                  (f) Brown capital
                             0                                                     0.15                                               0

                             -2                                                     0.1
                                                                                                                                    -0.5
           % dev. from ss




                                                          % dev. from ss




                                                                                                                   % dev. from ss
                             -4                                                    0.05
                                                                                                                                     -1
                             -6
                                                                                     0
                             -8                                                                                                     -1.5          Abrupt
                                                                            -0.05
                                                                                                                                                  Gradual
                            -10
                                                                                   -0.1                                              -2
                                     5   10 15 20    25                                    5   10 15 20       25                              5   10 15 20       25
                                         Periods                                               Periods                                            Periods


    Note: This figure plots the transition dynamics in response to an unanticipated introduction of the perma-
nent emissions tax of about 30 dollars per ton of CO2 , gradually introduced over 20 periods, in the economy
with financial frictions.




                                                                                               53
   Figure A4: Transition dynamics: Immediate versus pre-announced implementation

                                     (a) Emissions                                  (b) Aggregate investment                               (c) Aggregate output
                             0                                                       0                                              0.2


                            -10                                                    -0.5                                               0
           % dev. from ss




                                                                  % dev. from ss




                                                                                                                   % dev. from ss
                            -20                                                      -1                                             -0.2


                            -30                                                    -1.5                                             -0.4


                            -40                                                      -2                                             -0.6
                                     5   10 15 20    25                                    5   10 15 20       25                              5   10 15 20       25
                                         Periods                                               Periods                                            Periods
                                  (d) Banks' net worth                                    (e) Green capital                                  (f) Brown capital
                             0                                                     0.15                                               0

                             -2                                                     0.1
                                                                                                                                    -0.5
           % dev. from ss




                                                          % dev. from ss




                                                                                                                   % dev. from ss
                             -4                                                    0.05
                                                                                                                                     -1
                             -6
                                                                                     0
                             -8                                                                                                     -1.5          Immediate
                                                                            -0.05
                                                                                                                                                  Pre-announced
                            -10
                                                                                   -0.1                                              -2
                                     5   10 15 20    25                                    5   10 15 20       25                              5   10 15 20       25
                                         Periods                                               Periods                                            Periods


     Note: This figure shows the transition dynamics in response to an introduction of a permanent emissions
tax of about 30 dollars per ton of CO2 , which is announced in period 5 but does not go into effect until period
10, in the economy with financial frictions.




                                                                                               54
         Figure A5: Transition dynamics: Simultaneous macroprudential policies

                                     (a) Emissions                                  (b) Aggregate investment                                  (c) Aggregate output
                             0                                                      0                                                  0.5

                            -10
           % dev. from ss                                                   -0.5




                                                          % dev. from ss




                                                                                                                  % dev. from ss
                                                                                                                                         0
                            -20
                                                                                    -1
                            -30
                                                                            -1.5                                                       -0.5
                            -40

                            -50                                                     -2
                                    5   10 15 20     25                                   5   10 15 20       25                                 5   10 15 20        25
                                        Periods                                               Periods                                               Periods
                                  (d) Banks' net worth                                   (e) Green capital                                      (f) Brown capital
                             0                                                      10                                                   0
           % dev. from ss




                                                                   % dev. from ss




                                                                                                                      % dev. from ss
                             -5                                                     5                                                   -5



                            -10                                                     0                                                  -10
                                                                                                                                                     No Macroprud.
                                                                                                                                                     Macroprud.
                            -15                                                     -5                                                 -15
                                    5   10 15 20     25                                   5   10 15 20       25                                 5   10 15 20        25
                                        Periods                                               Periods                                               Periods


    Note: This figure plots transition dynamics in response to an unanticipated introduction of the permanent
emissions tax of about 30 dollars per ton of CO2 , along with a simultaneous introduction of macroprudential
policies of the same magnitude as those presented in Figure 2.




                                                                                              55
        Figure A6: Transition dynamics: Simultaneous macroprudential policies ­
                                 Alternate magnitudes

                                     (a) Emissions                         (b) Aggregate investment                                        (c) Aggregate output
                             0                                             2                                                    0.5


                            -10                                            1
           % dev. from ss




                                                          % dev. from ss




                                                                                                         % dev. from ss
                                                                                                                                      0
                            -20                                            0


                            -30                                            -1                                              -0.5


                            -40                                            -2
                                    5   10 15 20     25                          5   10 15 20       25                                       5   10 15 20        25
                                        Periods                                      Periods                                                     Periods
                                  (d) Banks' net worth                          (e) Green capital                                            (f) Brown capital
                            10                                             6                                                          0

                             5                                                                                                        -2
                                                                           4
           % dev. from ss




                                                          % dev. from ss




                                                                                                                     % dev. from ss
                             0
                                                                                                                                      -4
                                                                           2
                             -5
                                                                                                                                      -6
                                                                           0                                                                      No Macroprud.
                            -10
                                                                                                                                      -8          Macroprud.
                            -15                                            -2
                                    5   10 15 20     25                          5   10 15 20       25                                       5   10 15 20        25
                                        Periods                                      Periods                                                     Periods


    Note: This figure plots transition dynamics in response to an unanticipated introduction of the permanent
emissions tax of about 30 dollars per ton of CO2 , along with a simultaneous introduction of macroprudential
policies of the magnitudes  b = 0.0022 and  g = -0.0022.




                                                                                     56
                                        Figure A7: Second-best steady-state emissions tax:
                                       Sensitivity to parameters controlling financial frictions

                                           (a) Emissions tax                                                          (b) Emissions tax
                              31                                                                          31


                              30                                                                          30


                              29                                                                          29
     Dollars per ton of CO2




                                                                                 Dollars per ton of CO2
                              28                                                                          28


                              27                                                                          27


                              26                                                                          26


                              25                                                                          25


                              24                                                                          24
                                   3   4       5       6       7                                               0.15   0.2       0.25      0.3
                                                                   × 10-3                                                    

    Note: This figure plots the second-best steady-state value of the emissions tax when varying either the
banks' transfer parameter ( ) or the agency problem parameter () from their base-case values of 0.003 and
0.3409, respectively.




                                                                            57
                                   Figure A8: The Ramsey-efficient dynamic emissions tax:
                                                   Additional variables

                                 (a) Aggregate labor                                               (b) Consumption                                            (c) Green production
                          -0.1                                                            0                                                  -0.2

                          -0.2                                                                                                               -0.4
         % dev. from ss




                                                             % dev. from ss




                                                                                                                           % dev. from ss
                                                                               -0.5
                          -0.3                                                                                                               -0.6

                          -0.4                                                                                                               -0.8
                                                                                          -1
                          -0.5                                                                                                                          -1

                          -0.6                                                 -1.5                                                          -1.2
                                  10   20 30     40     50                                        10   20 30     40   50                                        10    20 30       40   50
                                       Periods                                                         Periods                                                        Periods
                                 (d) Brown production                                          (e) Price of brown assets                                     (f) Price of green assets
                          -0.2                                                            2                                                             2

                          -0.4
                                                                                          0                                                             0
         % dev. from ss




                                                                         % dev. from ss




                                                                                                                                       % dev. from ss
                          -0.6
                                                                                          -2                                                            -2
                          -0.8

                                                                                          -4                                                            -4           Financial Frictions
                           -1
                                                                                                                                                                     No Financial Frictions
                          -1.2                                                            -6                                                            -6
                                  10   20 30     40     50                                        10   20 30     40   50                                        10    20 30       40   50
                                       Periods                                                         Periods                                                        Periods


     Note: This figure plots the impulse responses of additional variables to the same TFP shock as in Figure
3 under the Ramsey-efficient emissions tax policy in the economies (i) with financial frictions (solid lines) and
(ii) without financial frictions (dashed lines).




                                                                                                       58
Figure A9: Ramsey-efficient dynamic policies under different sets of instruments:
                                Additional variables

                             (a) Aggregate labor                                               (b) Consumption                                            (c) Green production
                      -0.1                                                            0                                                  -0.2

                      -0.2                                                                                                               -0.4
     % dev. from ss




                                                         % dev. from ss




                                                                                                                       % dev. from ss
                                                                           -0.5
                      -0.3                                                                                                               -0.6

                      -0.4                                                                                                               -0.8
                                                                                      -1
                      -0.5                                                                                                                          -1

                      -0.6                                                 -1.5                                                          -1.2
                              10   20 30     40     50                                        10   20 30     40   50                                        10   20 30         40   50
                                   Periods                                                         Periods                                                       Periods
                             (d) Brown production                                          (e) Price of brown assets                                     (f) Price of green assets
                      -0.2                                                            1                                                             1

                      -0.4
                                                                                      0                                                             0
     % dev. from ss




                                                                     % dev. from ss




                                                                                                                                   % dev. from ss
                      -0.6
                                                                                      -1                                                            -1
                                                                                                                                                                    b
                                                                                                                                                                    t
                                                                                                                                                                      = g
                                                                                                                                                                        t
                      -0.8
                                                                                                                                                                    b
                                                                                                                                                                    t
                                                                                                                                                                           g
                                                                                                                                                                           t
                                                                                      -2                                                            -2
                       -1                                                                                                                                           e & b = g
                                                                                                                                                                    t   t   t

                      -1.2                                                            -3                                                            -3
                              10   20 30     40     50                                        10   20 30     40   50                                        10   20 30         40   50
                                   Periods                                                         Periods                                                       Periods


   Note: This figure plots the impulse responses of additional variables to the same TFP shock as in Figure 4
under Ramsey-efficient policies with different sets of available instruments.




                                                                                                   59
