                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       THE WORLD MANAGEMENT SURVEY AT 18:
                          LESSONS AND THE WAY FORWARD

                                          Daniela Scur
                                         Raffaella Sadun
                                        John Van Reenen
                                          Renata Lemos
                                         Nicholas Bloom

                                      Working Paper 28524
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28524


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2021




Daniela Scur is the lead author, and subsequent order of names were randomized. We thank
Margaret Stevens, an anonymous referee and the participants of the authors' workshop in Oxford
for their helpful feedback, and Fabiano Dal Ri for excellent research assistance. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Daniela Scur, Raffaella Sadun, John Van Reenen, Renata Lemos, and Nicholas
Bloom. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The World Management Survey at 18: lessons and the way forward
Daniela Scur, Raffaella Sadun, John Van Reenen, Renata Lemos, and Nicholas Bloom
NBER Working Paper No. 28524
March 2021
JEL No. L2

                                         ABSTRACT

Understanding how differences in management "best practices" affect organizational outcomes
has been a focus of both theoretical and empirical work in the fields of management, sociology,
economics and public policy. The World Management Survey (WMS) project was born almost
two decades ago with the main goal of developing a new systematic measure of management
practices being used in organizations. The WMS has contributed to a body of knowledge around
how managerial structures, not just managerial talent, relates to organizational performance. Over
18 years of research, a set of consistent patterns have emerged and spurred new questions. We
will present a brief overview of what we have learned in terms of measuring and understanding
management practices and condense the implications of these findings for policy. We end with an
outline of what we see as the path forward for both research and policy implications of this
research programme.

Daniela Scur                                    Renata Lemos
Cornell University                              World Bank
Dyson School of Applied Economics               1850 I Street NW
and Management                                  Washington, DC 20433
Ithaca, NY 14853-6201                           and Center for Economic Performance,
dscur@cornell.edu                               London School of Economics
                                                rlemos@worldbank.org
Raffaella Sadun
Harvard Business School                         Nicholas Bloom
Morgan Hall 233                                 Stanford University
Soldiers Field                                  Department of Economics
Boston, MA 02163                                579 Serra Mall
and NBER                                        Stanford, CA 94305-6072
rsadun@hbs.edu                                  and NBER
                                                nbloom@stanford.edu
John Van Reenen
Department of Economics
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London, WC2A 2AE
United Kingdom
and NBER
j.vanreenen@lse.ac.uk
1        Introduction
Social scientists have studied the importance of managers and of management practices for over
a century, and today armed with large and representative datasets are confident that management is
crucial for organizational performance. Understanding how differences in the adoption of management
"best practices" affect organizational outcomes has been a focus of both theoretical and empirical
work in the fields of management, sociology, economics and public policy. Earlier efforts relied
primarily on case studies, but over the past two decades we have seen an explosion of new datasets
and computing power that allow for careful measurement of these practices across a range of
organizational types.
        The World Management Survey (WMS) project was born almost two decades ago with the main
goal of developing a new systematic measure of management practices being used in organisations.
Since 2002, we have been building the largest cross-country dataset including manufacturing and
retail firms, schools and hospitals, and we have provided assistance to other teams looking to use
the methodology in numerous other industries. To date, our dataset includes over 13,000 firms and
4,000 schools and hospitals, spanning over 35 countries.1 Other teams using the WMS methodology
have collected data on government bureaucracies [Rasul and Rogger, 2018, Rasul et al., 2018],
universities [McCormack et al., 2014], primary healthcare facilities and many more. The methods
and availability of WMS data is open to all, and at time of writing over 5,000 researchers have
downloaded the public dataset for research projects and benchmarking exercises.
        The WMS has contributed to a body of knowledge around how managerial structures, not
just managerial talent, relates to organizational performance. A series of stylized facts have taken
form over the past eighteen years of research, both elucidating the robust positive performance-
management relationship, understanding how to improve measurement (such as the more recent
Management and Organizational Practices Surveys) and raising a number of important questions
about mechanisms driving the diversity of management practices. We present a brief overview of
what we have learned in terms of measuring and understanding management practices and condense
the implications of these findings for policy in the form of a simple table: a "management policy
toolkit". We end with an outline of what we see as the path forward for both research and policy
implications of this research programme.


2        What have we learned thus far
We start by taking stock of what we have learned from the WMS about measurement and the key
relationships between management and performance.
    1
        At time of writing, the latest publicly available dataset includes 35 countries.




                                                               1
2.1      Measurement
2.1.1      Original WMS

Prior to the development of the WMS, research on management was often focused on small (and
often, non-representative) numbers of firms in single countries. Case studies remain extremely
popular, and while much can be learned from these "clinical studies" for formulating theories and
considering mechanisms, it is hard to generalize from them. The typical case study has a sample
size of one and is inherently selected. The goal of the WMS project is to systematically collect
data on the types of practices used at thousands of organisations, across industries, under different
settings and over time, while maintaining comparability.
       The original WMS was set up as an interview-based survey tool, where highly trained interviewers
engaged a middle manager in a semi-structured conversation about the day-to-day practices followed
at their establishment [Bloom and Van Reenen, 2007]. The respondent managers were those who
were senior enough in their establishment to have decision powers, but not too senior so as to be
detached from the day-to-day running of the establishment. For example, manufacturing plant
managers, retail shop managers, hospital department nurse managers and school principals or
head teachers. It is set up as an interview, and the questions although structured, are mostly
open-ended so the manager being interviewed is not guided towards what a high or low scoring
answer might be. The advantage of this is that it avoids the manager simply giving the answer she
thinks the interviewer wants to hear. The conversation follows a set of broad practices spanning
operations/monitoring, target setting and people/incentive management practices. Each broad
sector has between 18 and 20 topics and each is scored on a scale of 1 (little to no structure/"weak
practices") to 5 (well-structured/"best practices").
       The main benefit of this methodology is the many steps ingrained in the data collection process
that yield high quality data. As independent interviewers assign the scores, it is feasible to build a
comparable dataset across countries and industries that mitigates biases borne out of self-response.
For example, common issues such as the mood of the manager, cultural expectations dictating
"right or wrong" answers, different understanding of the question text and survey fatigue are not
as salient in this method. The method is double blind on the side of the interviewees, but also the
interviewers who will not typically know anything about the organization in advance. The average
WMS response rate is usually between 40 and 50 percent, which is extremely high considering that
many firms surveys typically get far lower response rates.2
       The main drawback, however, is the cost. Running a full survey usually costs an average of
$300 to $500 per interview. This is because running a full wave of the original survey entails
large fixed costs and even larger personnel costs. The fixed costs include a large room equipped
with desks, chairs, computers, phones, headsets as well as the survey software, calling plans and
   2
    For example, Altig et al. [2020], Ben-David et al. [2013], Bloom et al. [2019b], Bartik et al. [2020] where response
rates in firms survey range from 0.1% to 13%.




                                                           2
other phone charges. The personnel costs are also substantial. As the interviews are run on the
phone, it requires recruitment and training of interviewers who can understand and internalize the
methodology well enough to ask open questions, quickly synthesize the manager's answers to ask
follow up questions and make a judgement of the score the answers warrant. They also need to
have good phone manners and charisma to keep managers engaged in the interview for at least
45 minutes, with only a promise of a report in return. As such, these are not easy workers to
recruit and warrant high wages. For each 5 interviewers, there is also the additional cost of a
calibration supervisor who listens to a large share of calls and scores alongside the interviewer for
later comparison (this process is called "double scoring").3
       The high cost of this method is the main constraint to expanding the sample size. With an eye
to scalability, other methods have arisen that are closer to traditional survey approaches of fixed
scripts and closed answers and require minimal training or supervision. We briefly describe them
in turn, and summarize the pros and cons of the various methods in Figure 1.

2.1.2      Semi-closed, closed and self-respondent methods

The Management and Organizational Practices Survey (MOPS) was born out of a partnership with
the US Census Bureau, where a new module for the Annual Survey of Manufacturers in reference
year 2010 included a set of questions that roughly mirrored those that the WMS measured. The
module was sent to over 40,000 establishments across the United States and achieved an 85%
response rate [Bloom et al., 2019a].4 Since then, similar exercises have been replicated in Australia,
China, Colombia, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Japan, Mexico, the Netherlands, Pakistan and the
UK. The main benefit of this method is the scalability and potentially lower cost of operations,
though a major drawback is the difficult of comparing these management scores across countries
(e.g. we can easily compare management scores from the Office of National Statistics across UK
firms, but less easily to management scores from the Census on US firms). When done in partnership
with government data agencies (such as the US Census, Mexico's INAGI, or Pakistan's State Bank
and Bureau of Statistics), however, it can be powerful for large national sample sizes and has a
major benefit of additional linkages with other administrative datasets.
       Two intermediate approaches sit between the self-respondent census-style method and the
original phone WMS with open-ended questions. One is to use phone or hand delivery of closed-
ended questionnaires with the goal of mitigating low response rates. This was the approach in
Bloom et al. [2012c] to survey Eastern European and Eurasian firms via the phone, the second
wave of the Pakistan MOPS included hand delivery of the questionnaires. The benefit is that the
level of training and monitoring required of interviewers is lower, enabling surveys to be conducted
in difficult to reach areas in person or by phone.
   3
     The WMS trainers have also trained multiple waves across years, and help back-score a random set of surveys to
further help with calibration.
   4
     Answering this survey is mandatory in the United States.




                                                        3
      Another intermediate approach is to keep the same set of open-ended questions but use a much
more detailed scoring grid that almost reaches a checkbox-based scoring rubric. This method is
particularly useful in developing countries, as it allows for finer measurement of the often-thicker
lower tail of badly managed establishments. Additionally, this method does not necessarily require
leveraging highly trained interviewers to collect data: the scoring rubric is detailed enough to
remove room for interpretation. As such, the method is dubbed the "Development WMS". It was
piloted with primary schools in Andhra Pradesh (see Lemos et al. [2021] for full details), and
subsequently applied in Puerto Rico, Colombia, Mexico, Haiti, Pakistan and Tanzania.5

2.1.3      Leveraging existing non-WMS questionnaires

A more recent approach looks to leverage existing large datasets that include questions on the
management topics being measured by the WMS. For example, in education, standardized tests
are often administered to all schools within a country, or at least to a representative sample with
appropriate weights available to researchers as part of the database. These standardized tests
usually also feature a principal questionnaire (and sometimes student and teacher questionnaires
as well) including questions that reflect some of the topics surveyed in the WMS. Leaver et al.
[2019] developed the method using data from the OECD's Programme for International Student
Assessment (PISA) as well as the Brazilian Prova Brasil and validated the scores against the WMS
existing dataset. These Education Survey Management Indices (ESMI) allow for a comparison
across a much larger number of countries and schools, though the downside is that questionnaires
sometimes change over time rendering comparisons more challenging.

2.1.4      Caveats

While different methods solve different shortcomings of the original methodology, they all still share
some caveats that are important to highlight.

What is "good management"? The focus of the WMS questions (and indeed the topics in
these alternative indices) are based on a set of practices that were ex-ante likely to be causal
determinants of better performance. The design was based on a consensus of many consultants
and industry experts on what core factors were important in the efficiency of a good or service
that a firm was delivering. While this has been verified to be true empirically, the measure does
not purport to encompass the entire spectrum of "what is management". It does include fairly
non-controversial topics where there is a consensus in terms of "good" and "bad" practices, from
having a reasonable number of key performance indicators and keeping track of them regularly to
having a system in place to identify which workers are performing well and which ones need help
to improve.
  5
      The set of questions used in Pakistan, Tanzania and Puerto Rico were a smaller subset from the original 20.




                                                          4
       Our WMS management evaluation, however, leaves out aspects such as innovation, finance,
pricing, marketing, and opening and closing decisions (among many others). In the public sector,
it leaves out topics like funding strategies, management of school safety and of student socio-
emotional development. While these remain crucial for the success of these organizations, they are
less straightforward to judge on a strictly increasing scale as the rest of the management practices
included in the indices.6 Further, the monotonic scale means we may miss some crucial variation
in informal practices that managers may carry out in formally constrained environments, such as
heavily unionized firms or public organizations like schools or hospitals.
       At its core is the question of whether these "basic" practices are complements or substitutes
with other more "strategic" aspects. It may well be that a particular type of firm, say, one focused
on the design of highly innovative products, would do worse with strict targets and metrics at
every step of production. On the other hand, efficient data collection and value mapping coupled
with appropriate incentives could make an R&D lab more efficient at churning innovative products.7
From the worker side, on the one hand, a focus on efficiency and formality in targets could make for
a stressful working environment, but on the other hand perhaps formal indicators and transparent
performance evaluations attract good workers and minimize discriminatory practices.8
       These are all important empirical questions. While not part of the core measurement, some of
these aspects are measurable in other ways and we review the evidence of the relationship between
basic management practices and various organizational and productivity outcomes in the next
section.

Is "good management" universal?                   Another concern with the focus of the questions covered
in these indices is that they are culturally biased towards "Anglo Saxon" values or types of practice
that would fail to reflect a real existing relationship with performance. Over the years of data
collection across a large number of culturally diverse countries, we have found that this is not a
major issue. First, we implement methodological steps to ensure interviewers have exposure to firms
from multiple countries by interviewing firms in their target country as well as other countries for
which they have the language skills.9 Second, the practices measured are fairly core and "simple"
(that is, not strategic), such that they are arguably less susceptible to cultural differences. Third, we
can empirically test whether the relationship between these practices and performance is different
across countries (it is not), and whether multinational firms belonging to different home countries
have different practices when operating in foreign countries (they generally do not).
   6
      To be sure, there are now new initiatives looking to explore these less straightforward aspects, including a World
Strategy Survey and an Educational Financial Management Survey.
    7
      For example, IDEO is a design firm that is known for its well-defined routines for design thinking [Brown, 2008].
    8
      Indeed, the limited evidence we have on this suggests firms with better management practices have better work-
life balance, including higher-wages, lower employee turnover and better subjective work-life balance survey responses
(e.g. Bloom et al. [2009]).
    9
      For example, many interviewers would also interview firms in the UK or the US alongside interviewing firms in
Ethiopia or Japan.




                                                           5
       To be sure, the best test of whether these measures help explain useful and interesting variation
across establishment is matching the data with external measures that we care about (productivity,
profitability, innovation, worker welfare, wage inequality, etc.) and verifying the direction of the
relationship. We review the main stylized facts we and other researchers have found in the next
section.

2.2      Main stylized facts
2.2.1      Management varies across and within countries and sectors

The original WMS method yields individual measures ranging from 1 to 5 across 18 different topics
in manufacturing, 19 in retail, 21 in hospitals and 23 in schools. We briefly describe the topics
and provide a set of example questions in Tables 3 to 6. As the questions are naturally correlated,
they are usually aggregated into the "overall" management index (including all questions) or into
sub-indices of the questions covering each of the portions of the questionnaire (lean operations,
monitoring, target-setting and people management).10 The standard way of combining the management
questions used in most papers is simply standardizing each question, taking the average of the set of
relevant questions, and then standardizing the average. The index value varies slightly depending
on how it is constructed, but as we will review in the next section, the aggregation method does
not seem to matter much for the strength of the management-performance correlation.
       Exploring the questions and their relationship with each other can be interesting in itself. A
factor analysis of the 18 manufacturing questions yields one principal component that explains
most of the variance and also loads positively on all questions, suggesting that if a firm scores
highly on one practice, it is likely to score highly on all other practices, too (Table 1). This can be
interpreted as a latent variable of "good management". The second factor explains much less of the
variation, but it has interesting loadings: opposite signs for general operations questions and people
management questions. We repeat this exercise for public hospitals and public schools, and the
patterns are strikingly similar. Both samples also display a strong first factor that explains a large
share of the total variance, and a second factor with opposite sign loadings approximately divided
along general operations and people management lines. The one exception is public hospitals, where
a third factor also emerges that loads positively on lean operations and people management, and
negatively on monitoring and target setting. The general pattern suggests that across all sectors
there are some clear lines of specialization in general operations versus people management. This
could be reflecting the strength of labour regulations across countries, as some tend to be more
restrictive (such as France) relative to others (such as the US).
       Looking across countries, our WMS manufacturing data shows substantial differences in the
average management practices index across countries as well as within countries. Across countries,
management scores seem to track closely with levels of development (Figure 2). The United States
  10
    For some purposes, aggregating all the non-people management questions into "general operations" is appropriate.
For example, in Bloom et al. [2015b] or in Cornwell et al. [2020].



                                                         6
has the highest average management score followed by other high-income countries such as Japan,
Sweden and Canada. Southern European countries such as Spain and Greece have lower average
scores, similar to upper-middle-income countries such as Chile and Mexico. Emerging economies
such as India and China are next, with the African countries in our sample coming last on the
ranking. As the survey eligibility sets the minimum firm size at 50 employees, this is not driven
by low-income countries having smaller firms. In fact, the size of the circles corresponds to the
relative median firm size within the country and they are similar to each other across the sample
of countries.11 But this simple ranking masks substantial within-country heterogeneity.
      Figure 3 plots firm level kernel density curves for the 35 countries of the two sub-indices of
management, operations (including core operations, monitoring and target-setting) and people
management. Two distinguishing features of the score leader, the United States, are that it has
an unusually thin left tail of low scoring firms, and the distributions of operations and people
management are not too different from each other. It is worth highlighting that even in the
countries that are closer to the bottom of that average ranking, there are firms that are able to
adopt these practices and do well, so while it is unlikely that something structurally blocks these
practices from being implemented, there certainly are barriers to their diffusion.
      We find a mostly similar pattern in the public sector (schools and hospitals), though the United
States is not the leader in the management of public schools. Figure 4a shows the ranking for
hospitals and Figure 4b shows the ranking for schools. While each industry has a set of industry-
specific "core operations" questions, there is a large set of overlapping questions covering monitoring,
target-setting and people management practices. Figure 5a shows the distribution of scores within
each of the countries for which we have all three sectors. On average, scores for hospitals are lower
relative to manufacturing, and schools are lower than hospitals in all countries in our sample. The
deficit is similar across the operations management and people management questions, too. In
all, variation across countries is interesting to observe and important to document. But does this
difference in management practices matter?

2.2.2      Management matters

There is a large literature documenting the importance of management practices in organizations,
much of which will be reviewed in the papers in this issue. As such, we will focus on the lessons
we learned from the WMS (and WMS-like) measures. The various management indices have been
used to explore the relationship between management and establishment performance (productivity,
student achievement, mortality rates), as well as other organizational outcomes (work-life balance,
wage inequality).

Firms The vast majority of studies using the WMS measures are not randomized control trials
(RCTs), but rather use non-experimental regressions with cross-sectional or panel data. Figure
 11
      We have substantially fewer countries in the retail dataset, but the pattern is consistent.



                                                            7
6 shows the average value of each of six performance outcomes across the deciles of the main
management measure. The relationship is monotonically positive: firms in the higher deciles of
management have higher productivity, operating profit, output growth, exports, Research and
Development expenditures and patents [Bloom et al., 2019a]. This positive relationship has been
consistently verified across a number of studies and settings. Figure 7 summarizes the coefficients
and confidence intervals from these studies.
       It is reassuring that the core correlation is robust to so many different (and demanding)
specifications and contexts. The range of specifications include firms in all available countries and
running OLS regressions in levels with the cross-sectional data as well as fixed effects regressions
with panel data. Much of the pooled country analysis comes from semi-public performance data
from public reports data aggregators such as Bureau van Dijk. This could mean a selection bias
towards countries with strong reporting requirements (as in Europe), but a number of papers also
match the WMS data to country-specific confidential administrative datasets and continue to find
the same patterns.12 The core management-performance results for the WMS data with matching
public performance data is robust to this aggregation, or alternative ones using factor analysis or
the more recent Anderson [2008] index.13
       Still, non-experimental evidence has limits, including the omnipresent omitted variable bias and
reverse causality issues. Even in panel data analysis including time-invariant fixed effects, estimates
could be susceptible to time-variant unobservables that are correlated with both management and
performance. In cases like this, RCT evidence can be a powerful complement to broad-based
correlational evidence and Bloom et al. [2013] is an example of this. They started with a set of
textile manufacturers in India (a simple technology that is easy to compare across firms), and
divided them into two groups: one that was provided with high quality management consulting to
help them adopt the type of modern management practices measured by the WMS (the treatment
group), and another that was not provided with consulting help but only data collection visits (the
control group). The experiment showed a causal effect of adopting these practices on productivity
that mirrored the magnitudes seen in the correlational work: one standard deviation increase in
management quality led to approximately 10% increase in productivity. A subsequent follow-up
several years after the experiment found that the impacts were lasting: while about half of the
practices originally adopted were still in use, they had spread across untreated plants within the
same firm -- though notably not across firms [Bloom et al., 2020b].
       But productivity is not the only thing management practices affect. Researchers have also
found a positive relationship between management practices and family friendly policies and work-
life balance [Bloom et al., 2009], energy efficiency [Bloom et al., 2010], good hiring and firing
decisions as well as within-firm wage inequality [Cornwell et al., 2020, Bender et al., 2018, Song
  12
     For example, Lemos and Scur [2019] and Cornwell et al. [2020] for Brazil, Bloom et al. [2019a] for the US, and
Heyman et al. [2019] for Sweden.
  13
     Meagher [2013] use Bayesian techniques with WMS data from the UK, US, France and find that there is some
convexity in this relationship for high scores.



                                                        8
et al., 2018] and tax planning [Bilicka and Scur, 2020].

Public sector          The positive relationship between management and performance is also present
in the public sector. In hospitals, better management practices were correlated with better patient
outcomes (survival rates and lower length of stay) [Bloom et al., 2015c, 2020a]. In for-profit
nursing homes, better managed is associated with lower likelihood of bad performance (although
this does not hold in not-for-profit nursing homes. In schools, there is again a positive relationship
between management practices and student test scores [Bloom et al., 2015b, Lemos et al., 2021],
in both public and private schools. In university departments, McCormack et al. [2014] finds
better management is correlated with better teaching scores and research outcomes. In government
services (the post office), better management is correlated with higher efficiency at the county level
[Chong et al., 2014]. In bureaucracies, Rasul and Rogger [2018] find that while the autonomy
of bureaucrats is positively linked to completion rates of engineering projects, incentives and
monitoring are not. As our focus is primarily on the lessons for the private sector, we abstain
from a longer discussion on the public sector here and direct readers to Valero [2021] and Ali et al.
[2021].


3         Potential policy directions
More generally, if we accept that there is a causal relationship between productivity and better
management, there is also a macro effect of improving management and that matters for governments
and government policy. Bloom et al. [2016] estimate that management accounts for, on average,
about a third of the gap in total factor productivity (TFP) between the United States and other
countries in the sample.14 Further, we have growing evidence that managers and management
practices matter in the delivery of public sector services as well [Finizia, 2020, Bloom et al., 2015b,
Rasul et al., 2018]. So what we have learned about what this means for government policy on
management practices?
         There is much evidence about the "drivers" of management practices, so we pull this research
together in policy relevant ways. We imagine that a policy maker has a budget for management-
related policies and wants advice on how the funds could be best used. We put together a "policy
toolkit" summarized in Table 2. These are our subjective judgements of the literature on a core
set of common policies, which we justify in the sections below.
         In column 1, we split policies into "structural" which are not usually specifically targeted on
management, but where research has produced evidence suggesting an indirect effect on management
(generally, by reducing market frictions) and "direct" which are policies more clearly targeted
on management. The rows for structural policies are competition, trade/FDI, education, labor
    14
    For some countries, like Portugal and Italy, management can account for as much as half the difference in TFP,
while for countries like Japan and Sweden it accounts for much less, closer to 10% of the gap.




                                                        9
regulation and governance. For direct policies, they are training (which we divide into consulting
vs. formal classroom) or informational interventions. These are within-organization incremental
changes rather than full system-wide reforms, focused on improving organizational or manager-
specific skills and practices.
       Column 2 of Table 2 includes our judgement of the strength of the evidence available for the
effectiveness of each type of policy. Our decision of awarding low, medium or high is based on a
combination of quantity, quality and credibility of research papers and research designs.15 Broadly,
a ranking of low (L) refers to a body of evidence that primarily constitutes of cross-sectional
correlational evidence. A ranking of medium (M) indicates that the evidence includes research
designs with panel data, showing differences across time and some accounting of organizational
fixed effects. A ranking of high (H) indicates that the evidence is arguably causal, with research
designs including natural experiments or randomized control trials. We discuss a set of specific
papers below, but our ranking takes into account consistency and conclusiveness of results in the
literature, as well as whether it extends across contexts in determining the ultimate "strength" of
the evidence.
       Column 3 of Table 2 scores the net benefit of the policy, taking into account the overall benefits
for firms minus the costs incurred by the government. In the spirit of focusing on the implications
for management improvements, we abstract from making broader welfare statements that would
need to take into account possible spillover effects from management. In addition, we focus only
on the impact of management and the other potential benefits from these policies (e.g. general
education can improve productivity and growth).
       Column 4 of Table 2 considers the difficulty of implementing these policies. While some might
have high net benefits, they might be "costly" in terms of political capital and thus quite difficult to
implement. Our implementation difficulty assessment is based on a combination of the likelihood
of push-back from interest groups or policy recipients, the financial cost of implementing a policy,
and the coordination requirement to get a policy enacted (including cross-departments or across
countries). A ranking of low (L) suggests we expect the policy to be a combination of politically
uncontroversial, relatively cheap, and easy to coordinate. Medium (M) suggests we expect there
would be some challenges to implementing the policy, though they would be tractable. For example,
the policy would require some coordination, allocation of sizeable funds and/or there is some
likelihood of pushback. A ranking of hard (H) suggests we expect there to be severe challenges
to implementation, either from expected push-back from powerful groups, prohibitive costs of
implementation or extreme coordination requirements.
       Column 5 considers the time frame of when the expected effects would start materializing after
the policy has been enacted and fully implemented. A short time frame refers to policies that would
yield results within one year, a medium time frame refers to results between one and five years,
  15
     To be sure, we are not assessing the quality of the research papers on the topic, but rather how useful the evidence
is for the question at hand. Excellent papers sometimes can provide only limited or weak evidence on a particular
topic.



                                                           10
and a long time frame refers to longer than five years.

3.1      Structural policy types
Product Market Competition                  Competition has long been recognized as an important driver
of productivity, where organizations either improve their offerings to survive or exit the markets
they operate in [e.g. Syverson, 2004, Galdón-Sánchez and Schmitz, 2002]. Policies include removing
regulatory barriers to entry for new firms and protections for badly run incumbents. One mechanism
through which competition affects productivity is management [van Reenen, 2011, Syverson, 2011].
In particular, Bloom and Van Reenen [2007] used three indicators of competition to show a
strong positive relationship between higher competition and higher management scores: (i) trade
openness,16 (ii) a Lerner index, where high values suggest tough competition17 , (iii) the number of
perceived direct competitors reported in the WMS interview. The relationship has also been found
in the healthcare sector, where Bloom et al. [2015c] find a positive causal effect of competition
on hospital management in the UK. In our data, we consistently find that there is a positive and
significant correlation between number of perceived competitors and management scores across
manufacturing, hospitals and schools.18 Overall, there is substantial strength in the evidence pool
for this policy lever.
       There is a very high net benefit of policies that spur competition, five out of five widgets
in our ranking, as the cost is low and the benefit very high. We see it as a policy that has a
medium difficulty of implementation as there may be some special interest groups that would push
against dismantling protectionist barriers, but these actors are often in relatively weaker coalitions
of unproductive firms [e.g. Parente and Prescott, 1999]. The time frame is "medium", as we would
expect the effect would take at least one year to start materializing, but no more than five years.

Trade and Foreign Direct Investment Trade and openness is a related policy, in that exposure
to more free trade and open markets yields heightened competition.                         In addition, there may
be benefits in terms of wider export markets, better inputs and the transplantation of better
management through the affiliates of multinationals. Bloom et al. [2015a] use the timing of China's
accession to the World Trade Organization to estimate the (positive) causal impact of trade-induced
competition on management both within firms and through reallocating employment towards more
productive and better managed firms. Bloom et al. [2020c] show that firms with higher management
scores are more likely to export, have more export destinations, export higher volumes and products
of better quality. Atkin et al. [2017] randomize access to foreign markets for rug producers and
find a causal evidence of learning-by-exporting, with firms showing improvements in technical
  16
     The measure of trade openness is the ratio of imports to production at the industry-country level.
  17
     The Lerner Index is calculated as the 1 minus the profits/sales of all other firms int he same industry and country,
and high values are suggestive of low long-run profits, which happens in very competitive markets.
  18
     For schools, however, the correlation between management and number of competitors loses significance when
we control for observable characteristics though it remains positive.



                                                           11
efficiency. Verhoogen [2008] finds that higher export share is tied to ISO9000 certification -- a set
of international standards on quality measurement that overlap with a set of questions in the WMS
questionnaire. At the frontier, multinational enterprises (MNE) face competition across the world
and tend to have higher management scores everywhere they operate [Bloom et al., 2012b]. Further,
Heyman et al. [2019] finds that differences in MNE management are an important determinant of
productivity among foreign affiliates. Bloom et al. [2019a] show that multinational entry into US
counties raises the management quality of local incumbent plants using "runner up" counties as
a control group. They argue that these management spillovers appear to operate through the
movement of managers between the entering multinational and local firms. Overall, we find that
this policy lever also has a large body of high-quality evidence, so we rank the strength of evidence
as high.
       In terms of policy net benefit, we rank this as four and a half widgets out of five, as the benefit
is almost as high as competition policy though the cost is likely to be slightly higher. Liberalizing
trade may not carry direct costs, though some FDI incentives such as giving subsidies for foreign
firms to set up factories and create jobs, could incur at least some financial cost. It is, however, a
potentially difficult set of policies to implement as it depends on the strength of lobby and interest
groups, and the set of actors that need to agree for policy to move forward. If enacted, however,
we expect the time frame of these policies to be between one to five years.

General education There is a large literature on how improving the general education levels
have myriad economic benefits. Using the WMS dataset and geocoded firm and university data,
Feng and Valero [2020] find that firms further away from universities employ fewer skilled workers,
and note that management practices are complementary with skills. They suggest the variation in
the price of skills likely drives this relationships.19 Similarly, Bloom et al. [2020a] find that hospitals
closer to universities offering both medical and business courses have better clinical outcomes and
management practices than those further away. Queiró [2018] finds that entrepreneurs with higher
levels of education start firms that are larger at entry and also growth faster. McKenzie and
Woodruff [2017] survey micro and small firms across a set of emerging economies and find that those
firms with owners with higher human capital tended to have better business practices. Further, the
correlation between formal education of shop-floor workers and managers and management score
is still present when the "worker fixed effect" (the characteristics and skills that are specific to the
worker and carried with them from job to job) is accounted for, and is not country-specific: the
relationship was found in both in an European rich economy like Germany [Bender et al., 2018]
and an emerging economy like Brazil [Cornwell et al., 2020]. In all, we rank the strength of the
evidence for this policy type as medium, because the evidence of a positive correlation is consistent
across contexts and fairly good quality, but it lacks clear causal identification.
       The net benefit of this policy is only two widgets out of five because education policy is costly
  19
       Also see Valero [2021].



                                                     12
and the benefits for management practices are not as high as the cost. Implementation is not often
politically controversial, but again as a result of the high cost of improving general education we
rank it as medium difficulty. The time frame is undoubtedly long, as benefits would need to work
their way through school cycles that could take at least five years or longer.

Labour deregulation Rigid labour laws can create barriers to adoption of management best
practices, especially as they relate to people management. Bloom et al. [2019a] provide some of
the best evidence to date, using the Management and Organizational Practices Survey (MOPS)
from the US Census for over 35,000 firms. They show that business environment, as measured
by US right-to-work (RTW) laws which generally weaken labour union power, yield higher use
of incentive management practices. There is also cross-sectional evidence suggesting that labour
market regulation across countries has a negative correlation with people management practices
[Bloom et al., 2012a]. Further, the education sector provides additional correlational evidence
as it often has public and private schools operating under more rigid and flexible labour regimes
(respectively). Lemos et al. [2021] show that the difference in personnel management scores between
public and private schools are larger than the difference in operations management scores, and
drastically larger in emerging economies and developing countries. Overall, we rank the strength of
evidence as a medium because there is at least one paper providing good causal evidence supported
by others with correlational evidence, but the strong evidence comes from one particular context.
   The net benefit is three widgets out of five because it is relatively cheap to adopt, but benefits
seem to be concentrated on a subset of the practices that we are evaluating. It is also difficult
to implement given the complexities associated with labor-market reforms. The time frame of the
policy, if implemented, is likely to be medium term.

Governance      Another relevant type of regulation relates to those that affect firm governance, as
ownership structures and who controls the firm seems to matter for the type of practices adopted
[Bloom and Van Reenen, 2007, Bloom et al., 2015d]. For example, a major policy of this type
involves generous estate tax exemptions for inherited firms. Such policies can likely be credited with
a larger share of second-plus generation family businesses in places such as the UK and Italy. This
matters, as family firms have significantly lower management scores in every country surveyed. In
fact, Lemos and Scur [2019] find that a CEO succession to a family member instead of a professional
manager leads to almost a full standard deviation lower management scores. Bandiera et al. [2015]
show that family firms offer flatter compensation schemes and have lower scores on management
practices related to incentives. Similar to labour deregulation, we rank the strength of the evidence
on this type of policy as a medium because there are a number of papers investigating various
governance structures in correlational studies, but at most one paper with good causal evidence
from multiple countries.
   The net benefit of policies that end privileged tax treatment earns four widgets out of five, as



                                                 13
the policy is cheap -- it could even raise government revenue through higher tax intake -- and
there is a high potential benefit to improving practices. However, the management benefits only
materialize if the incentives succeed in pushing firms to professionalize the ranks of firm governance.
It ranks as a medium to high difficulty of implementation because it will heavily depend on the
political strength of some lobby groups, such as family business owners. If implemented, the time
frame we would expect for policy results would be long term.

3.2     Direct Management policies
We know much less about the micro-level drivers of management practices and it is a fruitful
and active research area. We see the main policy options in this space as falling in three groups:
first, providing managers with training via consulting services. We define these as programs where
trained consultants work with managers in the establishment to identify their main issues and
how to solve them. The second group includes formal management training, via more traditional
classroom-based training that the managers then take back to their firms and apply to their issues by
themselves. The third group includes mixed type of information and benchmarking provision, where
managers are exposed to information that allows them to compare their practices and performance
to that of their peers.

Training: in-firm consulting There is substantial good evidence that in-firm consulting is
highly effective for improving management practices, and we rank the strength of the evidence
as high. Bloom et al. [2013] ran the first randomized control trial of this kind and found that a
treatment of intensive, high quality management consulting yielded large improvements to practices,
many of which were kept even in the long term [Bloom et al., 2020b]. This first experiment was
run with textile firms in India, but the result has been consistent across other contexts including
small and medium firms across a number of different countries and firm types [e.g. Bruhn et al.,
2018, Karlan et al., 2015, Higuchi et al., 2015, Giorcelli, 2019, Nam et al., 2020].
   The policy net benefit is three widgets out of five, as the evidence suggests the benefits are very
high but the cost can also be high depending on the type of consultants used in the interventions.
We rate the difficulty of implementation as medium to low because such policies are generally seen
as positive and should encounter low resistance, though they do require some financial commitment.
The timeline is certainly short, as we have seen the effects show up fairly consistently within one
year.

Training: formal classroom A related policy tool is providing classroom-based training programs
for managers, though the strength of the evidence for this policy is not as strong as for in-firm
consulting. McKenzie [2021] discusses frontier in management training of small firms in the private
sector in this issue, so will keep our comments brief. Of note are papers that specifically tackle the
different modes of this type of training delivery, such as Iacovone et al. [2019] and Higuchi et al.


                                                  14
[2019]. The primary issue is the large variance in the quality and intensity of the training and the
trainers, which in turn yields mixed results in terms of adoption of practices and the effects on
productivity. Many papers also tend to measure outcomes in the short run, while it has since been
shown that some effects of this type of training shows up in the medium run.
   Unlike in-firm consulting, this type of formal training intervention has made its way into the
public sector. For example, experiments such as Fryer [2017], where an intense management training
program for principals in US public schools yield a marked improvement in student achievement.
In healthcare, Dunsch et al. [2017] run a management training experiment with primary healthcare
centres in Nigeria and find short run effects in adoption of practices as well as intermediate outcomes,
but fail to see long term impacts.
   The net benefit of policies that provide formal classroom training earns two widgets out of five
in our ranking. This is primarily because the cost is uncertain and varies heavily with the intensity
of the program and the quality of the trainers, and the benefits are also uncertain. The difficulty
of implementation is likely to be low, and the time frame is medium-term.

Information and benchmarking Finally, there are a number of interventions that are adjacent
to consulting and strictly formal classroom training. For example, providing information on the
practices of other firms or leveraging the knowledge of local business people as mentors [Brooks
et al., 2018, Cai and Szeidl, 2017]. These seem to be effective in some contexts, but the evidence is
limited. Providing benchmarking information also seems to be effective [Gosnell et al., 2020, Cai
and Wang, 2020], and indeed Bloom et al. [2013] report that "lack of knowledge" was an often cited
reason for failing to initiate improvements to their management practices.
   In the WMS questionnaire, the very last question asks the manager to score their establishment
on the quality of their management practices on a scale of 1 (worst) to 10 (best). The question is
set up to allow for the most honest assessment from the manager: the interviewer is clear that the
reported score is meant to evaluate the average quality of the structures and practices and exclude
the managers themselves, and the question comes at the end of at least one hour of discussing the
practices they are meant to finally evaluate. The majority of managers over-estimate the level of the
practices in their establishments, and this is particularly salient in the public sector establishments.
   In all, the evidence on this type of policy initiative is still in its early stages. Our assessment
of the strength of the evidence is low, not because of the quality of the existing papers but rather
because of the limited scope in terms of context and small quantity of the existing research. For
example, evidence from a large-scale program in India providing a mix of information and targeted
support to improving school performance plans shows no impact on management practices nor
student achievement [Muralidharan and Singh, 2020]. A similar program in Mexico, however,
shows positive results on student test scores [de Hoyos et al., 2017]. In the net benefit we rank it
at three widgets out of five, mainly because the cost of providing information is often next to zero
and the benefit is potentially high (though uncertain). The difficulty of implementing its policies



                                                  15
is low and the expected time frame is medium-term.


4     Conclusion
The last nearly two decades have seen the WMS dataset expand by a factor of twenty, and the
number of researchers using this data is over 5,000.20 The first decade was primarily spent honing
the measurement methods and amassing an arsenal of data with a focus on showing the various
facets of the management and productivity relationship. In the second decade we started to see
papers focusing on outcomes other than productivity, including energy efficiency, IT use and work-
life balance. At the end of this second decade, the outcomes have expanded even further. Papers
now in circulation explore the relationship between management practices and wage inequality,
discrimination, tax avoidance, and more.
    We also see an important set of papers pushing further on this idea of the manager vs.
management, and the WMS very specifically focuses on the "technology" of it absent the manager.
But the manager is the often the implementing party, and especially as hard technology starts
changing, the job of the manager and the role of these partially office-based practices is also going
to change. And finally, there is a question also on understanding the lack of adoption and to the
extent that many of these practices are beneficial, why so many organizations fail to adopt them.
    In terms of policy work, much has been done on structural drivers such as product market
competition, foreign direct investment and regulation (even if the policy here is hard to do), but
there is still much room for work on the "soft" type of drivers [Azulai et al.] and considering the
effect of training, education, incentives in public vs private sector. Going into this more micro-level
setting will take a large set of projects across various contexts to help us understand the frictions
in each context. This is a fruitful area of research that we hope will continue to grow and develop.
  20
     A list of the over 170 projects approved for special data access are listed on our website, and the public anonymized
dataset continues to be accessible to all interested researchers: www.worldmanagementsurvey.org




                                                           16
5   Tables and Figures

                            Table 1: Factor Analysis: management questions

                                     Manufacturing                   Public hospitals            Public schools
                                    Factor 1   Factor 2        Factor 1   Factor 2   Factor 3   Factor 1   Factor 2
Overall operations
Adoption of lean                     0.7521     -0.2944         0.4716    -0.4525     0.4387
Rationale for lean                   0.6898     -0.2883         0.5657    -0.4143     0.309
Hospital standardization                                        0.6166    -0.2356     0.1513
Hospital use of human resources                                 0.6145     -0.227     0.1453
Standard instructional process                                                                   0.6089    -0.3457
Personalization of learning                                                                      0.7544    -0.1454
Data-driven planning                                                                             0.7402    -0.0209
Educational best practices                                                                       0.7269    -0.1527
Continuous improvement               0.7699     -0.2287         0.6755    -0.2262     0.0579     0.7411    -0.1582
Performance tracking                 0.7691     -0.2664         0.6942    -0.0749    -0.2772     0.7433    -0.2851
Review of performance                0.7845     -0.2199         0.7361      -0.14    -0.3428     0.7525    -0.2858
Performance dialogue                 0.7904     -0.2087         0.7287    -0.0481    -0.3066      0.781    -0.2216
Consequence management               0.7423     -0.0765         0.6823    -0.0487     -0.375     0.7286     -0.052
Type of targets                      0.7151     -0.0634         0.6842     0.0746    -0.1241     0.7418    -0.1326
Interconnection of goals             0.7641     -0.0487         0.6848    -0.0496    -0.1569     0.7589     0.0166
Time horizon of goals                0.7021     -0.0517          0.63      0.0178    -0.0524     0.7564    -0.0509
Goals are stretching                 0.6637     -0.0098         0.6771    -0.0253    -0.0949     0.7606    -0.0344
Clarity of goals                     0.601       0.1125         0.5889     0.1219     0.0242     0.7355     0.1542

People management
Talent mindset                       0.656       0.2759         0.5892     0.2843     0.2821     0.6783     0.3687
Incentives and appraisals            0.5767      0.4075         0.5001     0.4784     0.0694     0.5558      0.274
Dealing with poor performers         0.4978      0.3606          0.547     0.3591     0.0614     0.6049     0.2954
Developing good performers           0.6525      0.3765         0.6325     0.3448      0.176     0.6477     0.4129
Employee value proposition           0.6684      0.2953         0.4792     0.3976     0.2591     0.4945     0.5207
Retaining talent                     0.4413      0.4867         0.6301     0.0222     0.1999     0.7418     0.1791
Eigenvalue                          8.48471      1.2507        7.83918    1.30441     1.0429    9.99207    1.22163
% total variance                    0.4714       0.0695         0.392     0.0652      0.0521    0.4996      0.0611
Number of observations              12,209       12,209         1,125      1,125      1,125      1,326       1,326


Note: This table reports the results of conducting factor analysis on the World Management Survey sample for
 each of manufacturing firms, public hospitals and public schools. All questions from the three respective surveys
 are listed on the first column, and where the cell is blank the question does not exist for that particular survey.
 The questions from continuous improvement to retaining talent are common across all surveys. The questions of
 adoption of lean and rationale for lean are "common" across manufacturing and hospitals, though the scoring for
 each is sector-specific. Only the first two factors are listed because, for all three sectors, the third-plus factors
 had eigenvalues lower than one.




                                                          17
                                   Table 2: Management Policy Toolkit

Policy type                         Strength of         Policy Net benefit            Difficulty of          Time frame
                                      evidence              (out of 5)              implementation
Structural
Competition                                H                                                  M                 medium
Trade and FDI                              H                                                  L                 medium
Education                                  M                                                  M                    long
Labour Deregulation                        M                                                  L                 medium
Governance                                 M                                                M/L                    long

Direct
Training - consulting                      H                                                  H                   short
Training - formal classroom                M                                                  H                 medium
Information/benchmarking                  L/M                                                 H                 medium
Note: This table is the summary of our (highly subjective) judgements of the literature on a core set of common
 policies. Column 1 splits policies into "structural" (policies that not usually specifically targeted on management,
 but where research has produced evidence suggesting an indirect effect on management) and "direct" (policies
 more clearly targeted on management). Column 2 includes our judgement of the strength of the evidence
 available for the effectiveness of each type of policy. Our decision of awarding low, medium or high is based on
 a combination of quantity, quality and credibility of research papers and research designs. Broadly, a ranking of
 low (L) refers to a body of evidence that primarily constitutes of cross-sectional correlational evidence. A ranking
 of medium (M) indicates that the evidence includes research designs with panel data, showing differences across
 time and some accounting of organizational fixed effects. A ranking of high (H) indicates that the evidence is
 arguably causal, with research designs including natural experiments or randomized control trials. Column 3
 scores the net benefit of the policy, taking into account the overall benefits for firms minus the costs incurred by
 the government, in widgets out of five. Column 4 considers the difficulty of implementing these policies. While
 some might have high net benefits, they might be "costly" in terms of political capital and thus quite difficult
 to implement. Our implementation difficulty assessment is based on a combination of the likelihood of push-
 back from interest groups or policy recipients, the financial cost of implementing a policy, and the coordination
 requirement to get a policy enacted (including cross-departments or across countries). Column 5 considers the
 time frame of when the expected effects would start materializing after the policy has been enacted and fully
 implemented. A short time frame refers to policies that would yield results within one year, a medium time frame
 refers to results between one and five years, and a long time frame refers to longer than five years.




                                                        18
                  Table 3: World Management Survey Questions: Core Operations

  Question topic                        Information collected
  Manufacturing
  Adoption of modern practices          What aspects of manufacturing have been formally
                                        introduced, including just-in-time delivery from suppliers,
                                        automation, flexible manpower, support systems, attitudes,
                                        and behavior?
  Rationale for adoption )              Were modern manufacturing techniques adopted just
                                        because others were using them, or are they linked to
                                        meeting business objectives like reducing costs and improving
                                        quality?
  Hospitals
  Adoption of modern practices          What is the typical patient journey (or flow) through the
                                        hospital? How closely located are wards, theatres, diagnostic
                                        centers and consumables? How often do you run into
                                        problems with the current layout and pathway management?
  Rationale for adoption                What was the rationale for improving the patient pathway?
                                        How often do you challenge/streamline the pathway? What
                                        factors led to the adoption of these practices?
  Standardization of processes          How standardized are the main clinical processes? How clear
                                        are they to staff? What tools and resources do staff regularly
                                        employ? How do managers monitor protocol adherence?
  Good use of human resources           What happens when different areas become busier than
                                        others? How do you know which tasks are best suited to
                                        different staff? What kind of procedures do you have to
                                        assist staff flow and coordination?
  Schools
  Data driven planning and              How is data used to inform planning and student transitions?
  transitions                           What drove the move towards more data-driven planning and
                                        tracking?
  Standardization of processes          How standardized are the instructional planning processes
                                        in the school? What tools and resources do teachers use
                                        to ensure consistent quality? How do leaders monitor and
                                        ensure consistency of quality cross classrooms?
  Personalization of instruction        How much does the school identify and accommodate
                                        individual student needs? How do leaders ensure teachers
                                        are effective in personalizing instruction within classrooms?
                                        How are parents and students engaged?
  Instructional best practices          How do leaders and teachers learn about instructional
                                        best practices? How do leaders encourage adoption and
                                        knowledge sharing across teachers? How do leaders ensure
                                        new practices are being used?
                                                    19
Note: This table lists the core operations topics covered in the World Management Survey questionnaires. The
 column "question topic" outlines the broad topic being measured. The last column includes a more detailed
 explanation of the types of follow-up questions that are asked of the manager to garner the information required
 for scoring. The set of questions on core/lean operations are the only set of questions that are industry-specific.
          Table 4: World Management Survey Questions: Monitoring and target-setting

Question topic                          Information collected
Manufacturing, hospitals and schools
Process problem documentation           Are process improvements made only when problems arise,
                                        or are they actively sought out for continuous improvement
                                        as part of normal day-to-day processes?
Performance tracking                    Is tracking ad-hoc and incomplete, or is performance
                                        continually tracked and communicated to all staff?
Performance review                      Is performance reviewed infrequently and only on a
                                        success/failure scale, or is performance reviewed continually
                                        with an expectation of continuous improvement?
Performance dialogue                    In review/performance conversations, to what extent are the
                                        purpose, data, agenda, and follow-up steps (like coaching)
                                        clear to all parties?
Consequence management                  To what extent does failure to achieve agreed objectives carry
                                        consequences, which can include retraining or reassignment
                                        to other jobs?
Target balance                          What type of goals does the organization have? Are
                                        they uni-dimensional (say, only financial for firms, or only
                                        government-assigned for public sector)? Is there a balance of
                                        targets?
Target interconnection                  Are goals based on "shareholder value"? Are goals cascaded
                                        down the organization in a way that works through units
                                        and ultimately is connected to individual performance
                                        expectations?
Target time horizon                     Do leaders focus mainly on the short term, or do they
                                        understand short-term targets as a "staircase" toward the
                                        main focus on long-term goals?
Target stretching                       Are goals too easy to achieve, especially for some
                                        "protected/special" areas of the organization, or are goals
                                        demanding but attainable for all areas?
Performance clarity                     Are performance measures ill-defined, poorly understood,
                                        and private, or are they well-defined, clearly communicated,
                                        and made public?

Note: This table lists the monitoring and target-setting management topics covered in the World Management
 Survey questionnaires. The column "question topic" outlines the broad topic being measured. The last column
 includes a more detailed explanation of the types of follow-up questions that are asked of the manager to garner
 the information required for scoring. This set of questions are common to all industries.




                                                      20
              Table 5: World Management Survey Questions: People and incentives

Question topic                          Information collected
Manufacturing, hospitals and schools
Managing human capital                  How do leaders show that attracting talent is important
                                        for the organization? To what extent are senior managers
                                        evaluated and held accountable for attracting, retaining, and
                                        developing talent throughout the organization?
Rewarding high performance              To what extent are people in the organization rewarded
                                        equally irrespective of performance level, or is performance
                                        clearly related to accountability and rewards?
Fixing poor performers                  Are poor performers rarely removed, or are they retrained
                                        and/or moved into different roles or out of the company as
                                        soon as the weakness is identified?
Promoting high performers               Are people promoted mainly on the basis of tenure, or does
                                        the organization actively identify, develop, and promote its
                                        top performers?
Attracting human capital                Do competitors offer stronger reasons for talented people to
                                        join their organizations, or does a firm provide a wide range
                                        of reasons to encourage talented people to join?
Retaining human capital                 Does the organization do relatively little to retain top talent,
                                        or does it do whatever it takes to retain top talent when they
                                        look likely to leave?

Note: This table lists the people management topics covered in the World Management Survey questionnaires.
 The column "question topic" outlines the broad topic being measured. The last column includes a more detailed
 explanation of the types of follow-up questions that are asked of the manager to garner the information required
 for scoring. This set of questions are common to all industries.




                                                      21
                    Table 6: World Management Survey Questions: Leadership

Question topic                          Information collected
Hospitals
Clearly defined accountability          What is the role of clinicians in improving performance and
                                        achieving targets? How are individual clinicians responsible
                                        for delivering targets? Does this apply to cost targets as well
                                        as quality targets? How do clinicians take on roles to deliver
                                        improvements?
Schools
Leadership vision                       What is the school's vision for the next five years? Do
                                        teachers/staff know and understand the vision? Who are
                                        they stakeholders for the school and how is the vision
                                        communicated? How are they engaged in setting the vision?
Clearly defined accountability          Who is accountable for delivering on school targets? How are
                                        individual school leaders held responsible for targets? What
                                        authority do you have to impact factors that are important
                                        for delivering on the targets?
Clearly defined roles                   How are the responsibilities of the school leader defined?
                                        How are responsibilities distributed across teachers and staff?
                                        How are roles defined? How are they linked to student
                                        performance?

Note: This table lists the leadership topics covered in the World Management Survey questionnaires for schools
 and hospitals. These questions are not part of the manufacturing surveys. The column "question topic" outlines
 the broad topic being measured. The last column includes a more detailed explanation of the types of follow-up
 questions that are asked of the manager to garner the information required for scoring.




                                                     22
          Figure 1: Measuring management: a summary of WMS-related methodologies




Note: This figure summarizes the main features, the pros and cons of the three primary styles of surveys that use
 (or are inspired by) the World Management Survey methodology.




                                                      23
                   Figure 2: Management and GDP per capita: manufacturing




Note: The y-axis is the country average management score from the World Management Survey (2004-2014). The
 x-axis is the log of the 2003-2013 average GDP per capita based on PPP from the IMF World Economic Outlook
 tables. Circle sizes represent median firm size.




                                                   24
                                                                          Figure 3: Distribution of management across countries


                     1 United States                 2 Japan              3 Germany             4 Sweden               5 Canada              6 France            7 Great Britain      7 Northern Ireland       8 Australia
                1
                .5
                0




                             9 Italy               10 Singapore            11 Poland            12 Mexico         13 New Zealand            14 Portugal       15 Republic of Ireland       16 Spain             17 Chile
                1
                .5
      Density
                0




                         18 China                   19 Greece              20 Turkey           21 Argentina            22 Brazil            23 Vietnam              24 Colombia            25 India            26 Kenya
                1
                .5
                0
25




                         27 Nigeria                28 Nicaragua           29 Myanmar           30 Zambia              31 Tanzania           32 Ghana                33 Ethiopia        34 Mozambique               Total
                1
                .5
                0




                     1   2     3       4   5   1     2   3   4    5   1    2   3   4   5   1    2   3   4     5   1    2   3   4    5   1    2   3   4    5     1    2   3   4    5    1   2   3   4   5   1   2    3      4   5

                                                                                                        Management Score
                                                                                   Operations, Monitoring, Targets                                            People



     Note: This figure shows the distribution of the management scores across the 35 countries in the main 2004-2014 sample of the World Management Survey
      (2004-2014). The solid line represents the average operations management scores (including 12 questions on lean operations, monitoring and target setting)
      and people management scores (including the 6 questions related to incentives and personnel management).
                                                             Figure 4: Management and GDP per capita: public sector

                                                                                     (a) Hospitals


                                                   3.5
                Average Management Practices Score



                                                                                                                                  US
                                          3




                                                                                                                        UK
                                                                                                                     Sweden
                                                                                                                                  Germany
                                                                                                                      Italy
                              2.5




                                                                                                                                    Canada
                                                                                                                                  France

                                                                                                            Brazil
                      2




                                                                                      India
                                                                                                              High income country
                                                                                                              Middle income country
                                    1.5




                                                         6            7            8            9                     10               11
                                                                            Log of GDP per capita (PPP)


                                                                                     (b) Schools
                                             3.5
          Average Management Practices Score
                                    3




                                                                                                                                  UK
                                                                                                                     Sweden   US
                                                                                                                         Canada
                        2.5




                                                                                                                       Germany



                                                                                                   Brazil
                2




                                                                                                                          Italy
                                                                                                 Mexico
                                                                                          Colombia
                                                                             India                           High income country
                                                                                                             Middle income country
                              1.5




                                                         6           7             8            9                    10                11
                                                                            Log of GDP per capita (PPP)

Note: The y-axis is the country average management score from the World Management Survey. Panel (a) includes scores
 from the WMS Hospitals survey, carried out in 2008-2009 for the US, Canada, UK, Sweden, Germany, Italy and France;
 2012 for India and 2013 for Brazil. Panel (b) includes scores from the WMS Education survey, carried out in 2008-2010 for
                                                            26
 the US, Canada, UK, Sweden, Germany and Italy; 2012 for India; 2013 for Brazil; 2014 for Colombia and Mexico. Data for
 Colombia collected with Artur Harker, see Bermudez and Harker [2016]. Data for Mexico collected with Rafael de Hoyos.
 The x-axis is the log of the 2003-2013 average GDP per capita based on PPP from the IMF World Economic Outlook tables.
                                  Figure 5: Distribution of management across sectors

                                                      (a) Overall management score


                     .6
                     .4
           Density
                     .2
                     0




                              1                   2                 3                                 4                  5
                                                             Management Score

                                             Manufacturing                          Hospitals              Schools


                                                  (b) Operations and people scores


                                       Operations                                                   People
                                                                               .6
                    .5
                    .4




                                                                               .4
                    .3
          Density




                                                                     Density
                    .2




                                                                               .2
                    .1
                    0




                                                                               0




                          1       2          3         4        5                   1       2          3         4   5
                                      Management Score                                          Management Score


                                         Manufacturing               Hospitals                         Schools
Note: This figure shows the distribution of the management scores across the 8 countries for which the World Management
 Survey has data across the three sectors: Brazil, Canada, Germany, India, Italy, Sweden, UK and US. Panel (a) plots
 the distribution for the overall management score for the set of questions that are common across sectors (questions on
                                                           27
 monitoring, target-setting and people management). Panel (b) plots the distribution of the operations management score
 (including questions on monitoring and target-setting) and people management scores. The solid lines represent the sample
 of manufacturing firms, the dashed lines represent the sample of hospitals and the dotted lines represent the sample of
 schools.
                                                        Figure 6: Management and performance
28




     Source: Figure replicated from Bloom et al. [2019a], Figure 2. Notes from original figure: "The management score is the unweighted average of the score
       for each of the 16 questions, where each question is first normalized to be on a 0­1 scale. The sample in panels A, B, and F is all [management and
       organizational practices survey, MOPS] observations with at least 10 non-missing responses to management questions and a successful match to [Annual
       Survey of Manufacturers, ASM], which were also included in ASM tabulations, have positive value added, positive employment, and positive imputed
       capital in the ASM. The sample in panels C, E, and F only uses observations where we have 2010 MOPS management data. `Exit rate' indicates whether
       a plant alive in 2011 had exited the economy by 2015. In panels E and F, we also condition on non-missing RD or patents requests count in the BRDIS
       survey. Management deciles are recalculated for the different samples. The figures are unweighted."
                         Figure 7: Management and organizational performance

                                                  .04
                    Ln(productivity) (A)                             .15
                    Ln(productivity) (B)                .077
                    Ln(productivity) (C)                  .088
                    Ln(productivity) (D)                                         .21
                    Ln(productivity) (E)                .071
                    Ln(productivity) (F)           .048
                   Ln(productivity) (G)
                                                                                   .23
                Student test scores (H)                   .09
               Student value added (I)            .046
                School reactivation (J)                             .14
                 University ranking (K)
                                                                            .19
          Heart attack survival rate (L)                                               .24*
          Heart attack survival rate (M)                                                        .31
                Speed of treatment (N)
                                                                           .18
                Project completion (O)

                                             0                 .1            .2                .3          .4        .5

                                                 Firms              Education                 Healthcare        Public

                                            Legend: details of papers listed

Paper     Coverage                         Outcome                                Reference                         Specification
  A       Cross-country mfg firms          Log of productivity                    Bloom and Van Reenen [2007]       Table 1, Col 4
  B       Cross-country mfg firms          Log of productivity                    Bloom et al. [2016]               Table 3, Col 2
  C       Cross-country family firms       Log of productivity                    Lemos and Scur [2019]             Table 1C, Col 1
  D       Brazilian mfg firms              Log of productivity                    Cornwell et al. [2020]            Table B2, Col 3
  E       US mfg firms                     Log of productivity                    Bloom et al. [2019a]              Table 1, Col 2
  F       Swedish mfg firms                Log of productivity                    Heyman et al. [2019]              Table 8, Col 2
  G       German mfg firms                 Log of productivity                    Bender et al. [2018]              Table 4, Col 5
  H       Cross-country high schools       Student test scores                    Bloom et al. [2015b]              Table 2, Col 3
  I       India primary schools            Student value added                    Lemos et al. [2021]               Table 5B, Col 1
  J       Haiti schools                    School reactivation                    Adelman et al. [2020]             Table 2, Col 5
  K       UK universities                  University ranking                     McCormack et al. [2014]           Table 6, Col 3
  L       Cross-country hospitals          Survival (heart attack)**              Bloom et al. [2020a]              Table 2, Col 4
  M       US hospitals                     Survival (heart attack)**              Chandra et al. [2016]             Table 3, AMI
  N       US addiction centers             Speed of treatment**                   McConnell et al. [2009]           Table 3, Col 1
  O       Nigerian civil service           Project completion rate                Rasul and Rogger [2018]           Table 4, Col 4

Note: This is a non-exhaustive list of papers that have correlated management with a productivity outcome
 for each type of organization. It is meant as a snapshot example of papers that use the World Management
 Survey methods (or similar) to measure management practices across industries and contexts. `Mfg' is short for
 manufacturing. Productivity outcomes are coefficients that have sales or value added as the dependent variable
 but control for factor inputs (at a minimum capital and labor), such that the interpretation is the relationship
 between management and total factor productivity (TFP). Note that to improve readability we multiplied three
 of the coefficients by -1 such that all coefficients presented here have a "positive is better" interpretation. These
 are marked with ** on the list: the original papers that have coefficients where negative means a better outcome
 are: (L) and (M) risk-adjusted heart attack mortality rate, (O) days to treatment. The value for paper (M),
 marked with a * on the plot, does not have confidence intervals because it is a pair-wise correlation between the
 heart attack mortality rate. For paper (O), the coefficient refers to managerial autonomy and not a management
 score.                                                   29
References
M. Adelman, J. Barón, and R. Lemos. Managing shocks in education: Evidence from hurricane
  matthew in haiti. Mimeo, 2020.

A. J. Ali, J. Fuenzalida, M. Gomez, and M. J. Williams. Four lenses on people management in the
  public sector: An evidence review and synthesis. Oxford Review of Economic Policy, forthcoming,
  2021.

D. Altig, J. M. Barrero, N. Bloom, S. J. Davis, B. H. Meyer, and N. Parker. Surveying business
  uncertainty. Journal of Econometrics, 2020.

M. L. Anderson. Multiple inference and gender differences in the effects of early intervention: A
  reevaluation of the abecedarian, perry preschool, and early training projects. Journal of the
  American Statistical Association, 103(484):1481­1495, 2008.

D. Atkin, A. K. Khandelwal, and A. Osman. Exporting and Firm Performance: Evidence from a
  Randomized Experiment. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132(2):551­615, 02 2017.

M. Azulai, I. Rasul, D. Rogger, and M. J. Williams. Can training improve organizational culture?
  experimental evidence from ghana's civil service.

O. Bandiera, L. Guiso, A. Prat, and R. Sadun. Matching firms, managers, and incentives. Journal
  of Labor Economics, 33(3):623­681, 2015.

A. W. Bartik, M. Bertrand, Z. Cullen, E. L. Glaeser, M. Luca, and C. Stanton. The impact of
  covid-19 on small business outcomes and expectations. Proceedings of the National Academy of
  Sciences, 117(30):17656­17666, 2020.

I. Ben-David, J. R. Graham, and C. R. Harvey. Managerial Miscalibration. The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 128(4):1547­1584, 09 2013.

S. Bender, N. Bloom, D. Card, J. Van Reenen, and S. Wolter. Management practices, workforce
  selection, and productivity. Journal of Labor Economics, 36(S1):S371­S409, 2018.

N. Bermudez and A. Harker. Factors associated with the quality of school management practices:
  an empirical analysis for colombia. Documentos de trabajo egob, universidad de los andes, 2016.

K. Bilicka and D. Scur. Organizational capacity and firm profitability. Mimeo, 2020.

N. Bloom and J. Van Reenen. Measuring and Explaining Management Practices Across Firms and
  Countries. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(4):1351­1408, 11 2007.

N. Bloom, T. Kretschmer, and J. V. Reenen. Work-Life Balance, Management Practices and
  Productivity, pages 15­54. University of Chicago Press, September 2009.


                                                30
N. Bloom, C. Genakos, R. Martin, and R. Sadun. Modern Management: Good for the Environment
  or Just Hot Air? The Economic Journal, 120(544):551­572, 05 2010.

N. Bloom, C. Genakos, R. Sadun, and J. Van Reenen. Management practices across firms and
  countries. Academy of Management Perspectives, 26(1):12­33, 2012a.

N. Bloom, R. Sadun, and J. Van Reenen. Americans do it better: Us multinationals and the
  productivity miracle. American Economic Review, 102(1):167­201, February 2012b.

N. Bloom, H. Schweiger, and J. Van Reenen. The land that lean manufacturing forgot? Economics
  of Transition and Institutional Change, 20(4):593­635, 2012c.

N. Bloom, B. Eifert, A. Mahajan, D. McKenzie, and J. Roberts.         Does Management Matter?
  Evidence from India. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(1):1­51, 2013.

N. Bloom, M. Draca, and J. Van Reenen. Trade Induced Technical Change? The Impact of Chinese
  Imports on Innovation, IT and Productivity. The Review of Economic Studies, 83(1):87­117, 09
  2015a.

N. Bloom, R. Lemos, R. Sadun, and J. Van Reenen. Does management matter in schools? The
  Economic Journal, 125(584):647­674, 2015b.

N. Bloom, C. Propper, S. Seiler, and J. Van Reenen. The Impact of Competition on Management
  Quality: Evidence from Public Hospitals. The Review of Economic Studies, 82(2):457­489, 01
  2015c.

N. Bloom, R. Sadun, and J. Van Reenen. Do private equity owned firms have better management
  practices? American Economic Review, 105(5):442­46, May 2015d.

N. Bloom, R. Sadun, and J. Van Reenen. Management as a technology? Working Paper 22327,
  National Bureau of Economic Research, June 2016.

N. Bloom, E. Brynjolfsson, L. Foster, R. Jarmin, M. Patnaik, I. Saporta-Eksten, and J. Van Reenen.
  What drives differences in management practices? American Economic Review, 109(5):1648­83,
  May 2019a.

N. Bloom, P. Bunn, S. Chen, P. Mizen, P. Smietanka, and G. Thwaites. The Impact of Brexit on
  UK Firms. NBER Working Papers 26218, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc, Sept.
  2019b.

N. Bloom, R. Lemos, R. Sadun, and J. Van Reenen. Healthy business? managerial education and
  management in health care. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 102(3):506­517, 2020a.

N. Bloom, A. Mahajan, D. McKenzie, and J. Roberts. Do management interventions last? evidence
  from india. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 12(2):198­219, April 2020b.


                                               31
N. Bloom, K. Manova, J. Van Reenen, S. T. Sun, and Z. Yu. Trade and management. The Review
  of Economics and Statistics, 0(ja):1­44, 2020c.

W. Brooks, K. Donovan, and T. R. Johnson. Mentors or teachers? microenterprise training in
  kenya. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 10(4):196­221, October 2018.

T. Brown. Design thinking. Harvard business review, 86:84­92, 141, 07 2008.

M. Bruhn, D. Karlan, and A. Schoar. The impact of consulting services on small and medium
  enterprises: Evidence from a randomized trial in mexico. Journal of Political Economy, 126(2):
  635­687, 2018.

J. Cai and A. Szeidl. Interfirm Relationships and Business Performance. The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 133(3):1229­1282, 12 2017.

J. Cai and S.-Y. Wang. Improving management through worker evaluations: Evidence from auto
  manufacturing. Working Paper 27680, National Bureau of Economic Research, August 2020.

A. Chandra, A. Finkelstein, A. Sacarny, and C. Syverson. Health care exceptionalism? performance
  and allocation in the us health care sector. American Economic Review, 106(8):2110­44, August
  2016.

A. Chong, R. La Porta, F. Lopez-de Silanes, and A. Shleifer. Letter Grading Government Efficiency.
  Journal of the European Economic Association, 12(2):277­298, 04 2014.

C. Cornwell, I. M. Schmutte, and D. Scur. Building a productive workforce: the role of structured
  management. Management Science, (forthcoming), 2020.

R. de Hoyos, V. A. Garcia-Moreno, and H. A. Patrinos. The impact of an accountability intervention
  with diagnostic feedback: Evidence from Mexico. Economics of Education Review, 58(C):123­
  140, 2017.

F. A. Dunsch, D. K. Evans, E. Eze-Ajoku, and M. Macis. Management, supervision, and health
  care: A field experiment. Working Paper 23749, National Bureau of Economic Research, August
  2017.

A. Feng and A. Valero. Skill-Biased Management: Evidence from Manufacturing Firms. The
  Economic Journal, 130(628):1057­1080, 01 2020.

A. Finizia. Managers and productivity in the public sector. Mimeo, 2020.

R. G. Fryer. Management and student achievement: Evidence from a randomized field experiment.
  Working Paper 23437, National Bureau of Economic Research, May 2017.




                                               32
J. E. Galdón-Sánchez and J. Schmitz, James A. Competitive pressure and labor productivity:
  World iron-ore markets in the 1980's. American Economic Review, 92(4):1222­1235, September
  2002.

M. Giorcelli. The long-term effects of management and technology transfers. American Economic
  Review, 109(1):121­52, January 2019.

G. K. Gosnell, J. A. List, and R. D. Metcalfe. The impact of management practices on employee
  productivity: A field experiment with airline captains. Journal of Political Economy, 128(4):
  1195­1233, 2020.

F. Heyman, P.-J. Norbäck, and R. Hammarberg.        Foreign direct investment, source country
  heterogeneity and management practices. Economica, 86(342):362­395, 2019.

Y. Higuchi, V. H. Nam, and T. Sonobe. Sustained impacts of Kaizen training. Journal of Economic
  Behavior & Organization, 120(C):189­206, 2015.

Y. Higuchi, E. P. Mhede, and T. Sonobe. Short- and medium-run impacts of management training:
  An experiment in tanzania. World Development, 114:220 ­ 236, 2019.

L. Iacovone, W. F. Maloney, and D. J. Mckenzie. Improving management with individual and
  group-based consulting: Results from a randomized experiment in colombia. Technical report,
  The World Bank, 2019.

D. Karlan, R. Knight, and C. Udry. Consulting and capital experiments with microenterprise
  tailors in ghana. Journal of Economic Behavior Organization, 118:281 ­ 302, 2015.

C. Leaver, R. Lemos, and D. Scur.        Measuring and Explaining Management in Schools:
  New Approaches Using Public Data. CEP Discussion Papers dp1656, Centre for Economic
  Performance, LSE, Oct. 2019.

R. Lemos and D. Scur. The ties that bind: Implicit contracts and the adoption of management
  technology in the firm. Technical report, CEPR Discussion Paper, 2019.

R. Lemos, K. Muralidharan, and D. Scur. Personnel management and school productivity: Evidence
  from india. Working Paper 28336, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2021.

K. J. McConnell, K. A. Hoffman, A. Quanbeck, and D. McCarty. Management practices in
  substance abuse treatment programs. Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment, 37(1):79 ­ 89,
  2009.

J. McCormack, C. Propper, and S. Smith. Herding Cats? Management and University Performance.
  The Economic Journal, 124(578):F534­F564, 03 2014.



                                              33
D. McKenzie. Small business training to improve management practices in developing countries: Re-
  assessing the evidence for "training doesn't work. Oxford Review of Economic Policy, forthcoming,
  2021.

D. McKenzie and C. Woodruff.        Business practices in small firms in developing countries.
  Management Science, 63(9):2967­2981, 2017.

K. J. Meagher. Evidence on the non-linear impact of management. Working paper, 2013.

K. Muralidharan and A. Singh. Improving public sector management at scale? experimental
  evidence on school governance india. Working Paper 28129, National Bureau of Economic
  Research, November 2020.

V. H. Nam, N. T. T. Anh, and D. Q. Hung. Kaizen for Small- and Medium-Sized Enterprises in
  Vietnam, pages 247­267. Springer Singapore, Singapore, 2020.

S. L. Parente and E. C. Prescott. Monopoly rights: A barrier to riches. American Economic Review,
  89(5):1216­1233, December 1999.

F. Queiró. Entrepreneurial Human Capital and Firm Dynamics. GEE Papers 00116, Gabinete de
  Estratégia e Estudos, Ministério da Economia, Dec. 2018.

I. Rasul and D. Rogger. Management of bureaucrats and public service delivery: Evidence from
  the nigerian civil service. The Economic Journal, 128(608):413­446, 2018.

I. Rasul, D. Rogger, and M. Williams. Management, organizational performance, and task clarity:
  Evidence from ghana's civil service. Working paper, November 2018.

J. Song, D. J. Price, F. Guvenen, N. Bloom, and T. von Wachter. Firming Up Inequality. The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 134(1):1­50, 10 2018.

C. Syverson. Market structure and productivity: A concrete example. Journal of Political Economy,
  112(6):1181­1222, 2004.

C. Syverson. What determines productivity? Journal of Economic Literature, 49(2):326­365, 2011.

A. Valero. Education and management practices. Oxford Review of Economic Policy, forthcoming,
  2021.

J. van Reenen. Does competition raise productivity through improving management quality?
  International Journal of Industrial Organization, 29(3):306­316, 2011.

E. A. Verhoogen. Trade, Quality Upgrading, and Wage Inequality in the Mexican Manufacturing
  Sector. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(2):489­530, 05 2008.



                                                34
