                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 A NEW SPATIAL HEDONIC EQUILIBRIUM IN THE EMERGING WORK-FROM-HOME
                             ECONOMY?

                                         Jan Brueckner
                                        Matthew E. Kahn
                                          Gary C. Lin

                                      Working Paper 28526
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28526


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2021




We thank Kangoh Lee, Andrii Parkhomenko and participants in the Syracuse University
Conference on Urban Economics for helpful comments. The usual disclaimer applies. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Jan Brueckner, Matthew E. Kahn, and Gary C. Lin. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
A New Spatial Hedonic Equilibrium in the Emerging Work-from-Home Economy?
Jan Brueckner, Matthew E. Kahn, and Gary C. Lin
NBER Working Paper No. 28526
March 2021
JEL No. R14,R23

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper studies the impacts of work-from-home (WFH) in the housing market from both
intercity and intracity perspectives. Our results confirm the theoretical prediction that WFH puts
downward pressure on housing prices and rents in high-productivity counties, a result of workers
starting to relocate to cheaper metro areas during the pandemic without forsaking their desirable
jobs. We also show that WFH tends to flatten intracity house-price gradients, weakening the price
premium associated with good job access.


Jan Brueckner                                   Gary C. Lin
Department of Economics                         Department of Economics
UCI                                             Johns Hopkins University
3151 Social Science Plaza                       3100 Wyman Park Drive
Irvine, CA 92697                                Baltimore, MD 21211
jkbrueck@uci.edu                                clin126@jhu.edu

Matthew E. Kahn
Department of Economics
Johns Hopkins University
3100 Wyman Park Drive
Baltimore, MD 21211
and NBER
mkahn10@jhu.edu
           A New Spatial Hedonic Equilibrium in the Emerging
                     Work-from-Home Economy?
                                                   by
                    Jan K. Brueckner, Matthew E. Kahn and Gary C. Lin



1. Introduction
    Cities differ in their abilities to attract workers and firms. A city such as San Francisco has
an advantage in attracting workers over a city like Detroit because of its desirable attributes,
including warmer winters and milder summers, less air pollution, and lower average crime levels.
Dispersion in productivity also leads to differences in cities' abilities to attract workers. Some
locations have a productive advantage over others because of a dense spatial concentration of
jobs, creating agglomeration economies, or a favorable industry mix. Housing costs and wages
adjust across space to arbitrage away these advantages. In a spatial hedonic equilibrium, where
price signals and city characteristics are linked, high productivity leads to high rents and high
wages, whereas high amenities are associated with high rents but lead to low wages.
    In this paper, we explore how the spatial hedonic equilibrium is affected by the introduction
of a work-from-home (WFH) option. Since a WFH-induced shift in the equilibrium alters the
connection between where people live and what they earn and pay for housing, it is of utmost
importance to understand its nature. To this end, we model WFH as an unbundling technology
that allows an individual to live in one city and work in another. Breaking the link between
workplace and residence allows for spatial arbitrage opportunities that were not available in the
past. Workers in expensive, high-productivity places can move to cheaper, low-productivity
areas while keeping their original productive jobs through remote work. The media is full of
anecdotal evidence of such relocations (see Bindley, 2020), although firm statistical evidence
has yet to be presented. Another possibility, less anticipated in popular discussions, is that
WFH allows workers to move to high-amenity places without changing jobs. Both types of
relocations have price effects, leading to a new spatial hedonic equilibrium.
  We thank Sofia Franco, Kangoh Lee, Andrii Parkhomenko, Weihua Zhao and participants in the Syracuse
University Conference on Urban Economics for helpful comments. The usual disclaimer applies.


                                                    1
    To highlight these new possiblities, we develop a simple Rosen-Roback model with homo-
geneous workers.1 When cities differ only in productivities and WFH is introduced, workers
move to cheap, low-productivity places while telecommuting to their original jobs, matching
the anecdotal evidence. This residential relocation causes housing prices to fall in produc-
tive places and rise in the disadvantaged cities that receive the WFH migrants. By contrast,
when cities differ only in amenities, workers move to high amenity areas under WFH while
keeping their jobs in low-amenity cities. Housing prices then rise in the advantaged, high-
amenity places while falling in disadvantaged cities, a pattern opposite to the one in the
differential-productivity case. Underlying both outcomes are two key features of the new he-
donic equilibrium: wage equalization across cities, which must occur when people can work
anywhere; and a disconnect between a city's population and employment levels, which are no
longer equal. In the differential-amenity case, wage equalization means that housing prices do
all the work in equalizing utilities (yielding stronger capitalization of amenities), whereas in the
differential-productivity case, wage equalization implies that housing prices are also equalized.
The resulting hedonic equilibria are novel, with features not previously seen in Rosen-Roback
models.
    While these patterns show the possible intercity effects of WFH, intracity effects may
emerge as well. Workers who remain in their original city under WFH are likely to maintain
some physical connection to the workplace, commuting to it occasionally rather than com-
pletely severing the physical link. For such workers, WFH lowers commuting costs without
reducing them to zero, thereby lowering the value of access to the CBD. From the standard
urban model, lower-valued access implies a reduction in the city's housing-price gradient, with
prices under WFH falling more slowly than before moving away from the CBD (the job-access
premium thus falls).
    In the empirical section of the paper, we present evidence for both our intercity and intracity
hypotheses, relying on the growth of WFH during the pandemic year of 2020. We harmonize
information from several sources, using house-price and rent data from Zillow and productivity
and amenity measures from Albouy (2016). Using Dingel and Neiman's (2020) industry-level
 1 See Rosen (1979) and Roback (1982).



                                                 2
index of job shares in occupations that allow WFH, we create a county-level measure of WFH
potential. The measure equals a weighted average of their industry indices, with the weights
equal to industry employment shares in the county.
    First, consistent with our intercity model, we show that the annual changes in both house
prices and rents between 2019 and 2020, when the COVID-19 pandemic spurred WFH, are
lower in high-productivity counties with high WFH potential. A placebo test shows that these
same effects were not present in previous years, when WFH played a smaller role. Second,
using monthly data, we show that high productivity and high WFH potential lead to lower
levels of county house prices and rents in the months following December 2019. These results,
which are based on monthly price and rent levels, reinforce the previous results using annual
price changes between 2019-2020 at at finer temporal level. In contrast to these supportive
results, we find no support for the model's prediction of falling prices and rents in low-amenity
cities with high WFH potential. This outcome matches the pattern of popular speculation
about WFH effects, which never mentions the possibility of workers moving toward better
amenities under WFH.
    Third, to test our intracity hypothesis of a declining house-price gradient under WFH, we
combine Zillow data at the zip-code level with data from Lee and Lin (2018). We compute
monthly metro-area price gradients and show that high WFH potential in the metro area's
central county is associated with a flattening of the price gradient during 2020, as expected.2
    We recognize the growth of WFH was not the only force affecting house-price behavior in
our focal year of 2020: the effects of the pandemic-induced recession were also present. How-
ever, the house-price effects of the recession at the national level have been hardly noticeable,
presumably because job losses were concentrated among lower-income workers (many of whom
were unable to work from home). While prices may have been supported by lower job losses in
  2 After our price-gradient work was complete, we became aware of a new paper by Gupta et al. (2021) that
carries out a very similar exercise. They investigate changes in intracity price and rent gradients between 2019
and 2020 and use the results to compare expectations about real-estate price growth between suburbs and
the central cities, relying on changes in the price-to-rent ratio. While we present similar price-gradient results
(though for a larger collection of metro areas), our main focus is on the intercity effects of WFH. Ouazad (2020)
also finds evidence of increased suburbanization during 2020, but he argues that long-run population growth
across cities is more strongly associated with local fundamentals, such as local productivity, than short-run
shocks, including disasters and pandemics.


                                                        3
high-WFH-potential counties, these effects should have been positive, not negative like those
that we predict and find empirically. As a result, we believe that our hypothesis tests are
credible despite the coincidence of the recession and the growth of WFH.
   Our paper relates to a burgeoning literature on the impact of telecommuting and remote
work on the US economy. Early research by Rhee (2008) and Safirova (2002) has been com-
plemented by the recent studies of Althoff et al. (2020), Bartik et al. (2020), Brynjolfsson et
al. (2020), and Dingel and Neiman (2020). Within this literature, our work is most closely
related to Delventhal and Parkhomenko (2020), Delventhal, Kwon, and Parkhomenko (2020),
and Larson and Zhao (2017), who build quantitative spatial models to explore the local labor
market effects of telecommuting and WFH. Our simpler theoretical model and reduced-form
empirical approach adds to the insights from their models. Our work is also connected to
Davis, Ghent, and Gregory (2021), who estimate the elasticity of substitution between office
and home work, relying on a theoretical model.
   The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 develops our theoretical predictions, while section
3 discusses the empirical model and data. Section 4 presents our results, section 5 offers
perspective on the findings. Section 6 presents our conclusions.


2. Theory
   2.1. Intracity analysis
   The intracity effects of WFH can be analyzed in a straightforward fashion using results
from the standard monocentric-city model, which predicts that the price p per square foot of
housing declines as the distance x to the CBD increases. A key parameter in that model is
the annualized round-trip commuting cost per mile, denoted t. Letting x denote the distance
to the CBD from a worker's residence, his annual commuting cost would thus equal tx. Under
WFH, commuters make fewer trips per year to the CBD, going to the central workplace
only occasionally rather than on each workday. As a result, the commuting-cost parameter
t falls, reflecting fewer CBD trips. As first shown by Wheaton (1974) (see also Brueckner,
1987; Duranton and Puga, 2015), the reduction in t affects the spatial pattern of housing
prices and population densities. As population decentralizes in the response to the decline in

                                              4
t, p falls near the city center and rises in the suburbs, with the p contour thus rotating in
a counterclockwise fashion around some central point. The price gradient therefore falls in
absolute value, reflecting the reduced benefits of CBD access.3
      These outcomes occur in the long run as the city is reconfigured in response to lower
commuting costs, expanding spatially and becoming less dense in the center. To derive short-
run effects when the housing stock is fixed, the slope formula p(x)/x = -t/q (x) < 0 can
be used, where q (x) is the pre-WFH dwelling size at distance x. With q (x) held fixed, the
WFH-induced decline in t makes this slope less negative, thus reducing the magnitude of the
price gradient, just as in the long-run case.4

      2.2. Intercity analysis

      2.2.1. Intercity model and equilibrium conditions
      The intercity model has two cities, denoted s (San Francisco) and d (Detroit), with equal
fixed land areas that together accommodate a total population of 2N .5 The wage in city i is
given by w(Li , i ), i = s, d, where Li is employment and i is a shift parameter that raises
worker productivity and thus the wage (w > 0). Since this wage function is just the downward-
sloping inverse demand curve for labor, wL < 0. Without WFH, a city's employment level
equals its population Ni , so that the wage is given by w(Ni , i ). Labor productivity is higher
in city s than in city d (s  d ), and the cities also differ in the amenities Ai they offer, with
As  Ad. City s is thus the high-productivity, high-amenity city.
      Consumer utility in city i is given by the quasi-linear function u(ei, qi , Ai ) = Ai + ei + v (qi),
where qi is housing (land) consumption and ei is non-housing consumption.6 With units of
measurement for amenities and e chosen appropriately, their linear utility coefficients are the
  3
    Lock-down policies during the pandemic inhibited full enjoyment of central-city amenities, providing another
reason for a drop in the benefits of central access. Another pandemic-related effect that amplifies the effects of
WFH is a desire to move away from high-density areas within cities, where contagion is more of a threat.
  4 This slope formula actually requires optimal adjustment of q (x) and thus will not hold exactly when the
lower t alters q (x)'s optimal value. However, as long as the post-WFH optimal q (x) is close to the fixed
pre-WFH value, the formula will hold approximately.
  5 Rental income from the city's land flows to absentee landowners. Also, note that replacing fixed land areas
with an upward-sloping housing supply function would have no effect on the ensuing results.
  6 Remote work is assumed to have no effect on housing demand. The empirical study of Stanton and Tiwari
(2021) recognizes, however, that the houses of remote workers may need be larger to offer adequate office space.


                                                        5
same and equal to unity. Letting pi denote the unit housing price in city i, the consumer budget
constraint is ei = w(Ni , i ) - pi qi , which allows utility to be rewritten as Ai + w(Ni , i ) +
v (qi) - pi qi . The last two terms represent "net housing utility" (v minus housing cost), which
can be written as a function H (Ni ) of population that decreases with Ni due to the positive
effect of population on the housing price.7 Thus,


                          utilityi = Ai + w(Ni , i ) + H (Ni ),                 i = s, d.                        (1)


Since both the wage and net housing utility decrease with Ni , utility also decreases with
population.
    In the equilibrium without WFH, the consumer utility expression in (1) is equalized be-
tween the two cities via migration. The non-WFH equilibrium condition is then

                                                         
       As + w(Ns , s ) + H (Ns ) = Ad + w(Nd , d ) + H (Nd ),                                  (Non-WFH) (2)


where the asterisks denote non-WFH equilibrium values. An immediate implication of this
               > N  , so that city s is larger than city d, reflecting its amenity and productivity
condition is Ns   d

advantages.8 With city s larger, its housing price is then higher than in city d (p     
                                                                                   s > pd ).

    Now suppose that WFH becomes feasible. Since an individual can now work in either
city regardless of where he or she lives, equilibrium requires indifference between the two work
locations, which in turn implies equalization of wages. As a result, w(Ls , s) = w(Ld , d ) must
hold, where Ls and Ld are the employment levels in the two cities, which no longer need to
be the same as the city populations. With wages the same for everyone, they drop out of the
equilibrium condition (2), which is replaced by


                                     As + H (Ns ) = Ad + H (Nd ),                                    (WFH) (3)
  7 To derive the H function and its properties, city land areas are normalized at unity, yielding q = 1/N .
                                                                                                    i     i
The housing first-order condition (v (qi ) = pi ) then yields H (Ni ) = v(qi ) - pi qi = v(1/Ni ) - v (1/Ni )(1/Ni ),
which is decreasing in Ni . This conclusion follows because differentiation yields H (Ni ) = (1/Ni3 )v (1/Ni ) < 0,
an expression proportional to minus the positive derivative of pi = v (1/Ni ) with respect to Ni .
  8 Suppose instead that the two cities had identical populations, both equal to N . Then, given A > A and
                                                                                                        s      d
s > d , the LHS of (2) would be larger than the RHS. Since both sides of (2) are decreasing in population,
                                                                                                        
an increase in Ns  along with a corresponding decrease in Nd     makes them equal, yielding Ns     > Nd  .


                                                         6
where the Ns and Nd are the city populations under WFH. As in the non-WFH case, city s is
larger than d under WFH (with As > Ad, Ns must exceed Nd to equate the two sides of (3)).
Since Ns > Nd , the housing price in city s is again higher than in city d (ps > pd ), canceling
its amenity advantage.
    An implicit assumption under WFH is that a worker's productivity at a given workplace
is unaffected by residential relocation to a different city. The popular discussion of WFH
sometimes argues otherwise, with work that is physically remote from colleagues viewed as
possibly less productive, thus commanding lower pay.9

    2.2.2. Comparing the WFH and non-WFH equilibria
    To compare the WFH and non-WFH equilibria, the first step is to rewrite (2) and (3) as


                                                            
              As - Ad + H (Ns ) - H (Nd ) = w(Nd , d ) - w(Ns , s )                         (Non-WFH) (4)

              As - Ad + H (Ns ) - H (Nd ) = 0                                                     (WFH) (5)


From comparison of (4) and (5), the following conclusion emerges:10


                                                                         
                       Ns > (<) Ns           as      w(Nd , d ) > (<) w(Ns , s).                            (6)


In other words, WFH leads to an increase (decrease) in the population of city s when its wage
without WFH is lower (higher) than the non-WFH wage in city d.
                                   ,  ) - w (N  ,  ) is ambiguous in general, making it impos-
    Unfortunately, the sign of w(Nd  d        s   s
                                                    using (6). The source of the ambiguity is
sible to carry out a general comparison of Ns and Ns
that city s has dual advantages over city d, in both amenities and productivity. However, if city
s only has a single advantage, in either productivity or amenities, then definitive conclusions
can be reached, as follows.
  9 Firms might also cut pay if remote workers face a lower cost of living. See Buhayar (2020).
 10 To verify (6), note that the LHS of (4) is positive if w (N  ,  ) > w (N  ,  ), and that its magnitude must
                                                               d   d        s   s
be reduced to zero to satisfy the WFH condition in (5). Since H < 0, this reduction requires an increase in Ns
                                                                                                             
with Nd falling in step, yielding Ns > Ns . Reversing this argument, w (Nd , d ) < w (Ns , s ) implies Ns < Ns .


                                                       7
    City s has higher productivity. Suppose that As = Ad while s > d , so that the only
advantage of city s is higher productivity. Then (4) becomes


                                                              
                          H (Ns ) - H (Nd ) = w(Nd , d ) - w(Ns , s ).                                      (7)


        > N  holds from above, the LHS of (7) is negative given H < 0, implying negativity
Since Ns   d
                        ,  ) < w(N  ,  ). From (6), this inequality in turn implies N <
of the RHS and thus w(Nd  d       s   s                                              s
  , so that the population of city s drops under WFH, with city d's population rising. Since
Ns
H (Ns ) = H (Nd ) must hold by (5) when amenities are equal, these population changes end up
equating the populations of the two cities, so that Ns = Nd = N . Equal populations in turn
imply equality of housing prices, with ps = pd , so that prices drop in city s and rise in city
d (ps < p           11 Residents of both cities thus earn equal wages and pay equal prices,
         s , pd > pd ).

ensuring equal utilities.
    WFH breaks the link between employment and population levels, with employment exceed-
ing population in city s (as outward-migrants keep their jobs) and falling short of population
in city d. These conclusions follow because the WFH employment levels Ls and Ld lead to
equal wages (w(Ls , s ) = w(Ld , d )), implying Ls > Ld given wN < 0, w > 0 and thus
Ls > Ns = N = Nd > Ld .
    Because of these changes, WFH leads to a new hedonic equilibrium in the economy. Prior to
WFH, both the wage and the price of housing were higher in city s than in city d, signaling the
productivity difference between the cities. With WFH breaking the employment-population
link, wages and prices are then equated between the cities, so that market signals no longer
reveal the intercity productivity differential.
    City s has higher amenities. Suppose instead that As > Ad holds while s = d = ,
                                                                      
so that the only advantage of city s is better amenities. Since Ns > Nd from above and
            , ) > w(N  , ) is satisfied, with (6) then implying N > N  . Therefore,
wN < 0, w(Nd         s                                           s   s

the population of city s expands under WFH, with residents relocating from city d. This
 11 Howard (2020) shows that migration into a city creates a beneficial construction boom. While fixed land
areas in our model rule out such an effect, a more detailed framework could capture this positive effect of WFH.


                                                       8
population shift raises the housing price in city s and lowers it in city d, so that ps > ps and

pd < pd . Since city d's outward migrants keep their jobs, city d's employment under WFH

exceeds its population, while employment falls short of population in city s. These conclusions
follow because, when city s has only an amenity advantage, the wage equalization condition
w(Ls , ) = w(Ld , ) implies equalization of employment, or Ls = Ld = N . Since Ns > Nd , it
follows that Ns > Ls = N = Ld > Nd .
    Prior to WFH, city s had a higher housing price and a lower wage than city d, reflecting the
standard outcome in the Roback (1982) model when cities differ only in amenities. Together,
these differences served to offset the amenity advantage of city s. With wages being equalized
under WFH, housing prices must do all the work in equalizing utilities, requiring a larger
price differential than before. Therefore, in the new hedonic equilibrium, the role of wages
disappears while that of housing prices is accentuated.
    Summarizing yields


    Proposition 1. When city s has both productivity and amenity advantages relative to
    city d, changes in the spatial hedonic equilibrium under WFH are ambiguous. But
    (i) when city s has only a productivity advantage, population and the housing price fall
    (rise) in city s (in city d) under WFH. Employment exceeds (falls short of) population
    in city s (in city d).

    (ii) when city s has only an amenity advantage, population and the housing price rise
    (fall) in city s (in city d) under WFH. Employment falls short of (exceeds) population
    in city s (in city d).

Note that the population changes in part (i) of the proposition match up with media anecdotes
about migration out of high-productivity cities. But the effects in the amenity case (part (ii)),
which are exactly the opposite of those in part (i), have not been anticipated in any of the
popular discussion of WFH.12
    A final question concerns the wage changes experienced by the residents of the two cities
under WFH. When the only advantage of city s is higher productivity, the previous results
        > N < L , which implies that w (N  ,  ) could be larger or smaller than w (L ,  ),
yield Ns   s   s                         s   s                                      s  s

12 The existence of the opposing outcomes in Proposition 1 shows why unambiguous results cannot be derived
when city s has both productivity and amenity advantages.


                                                   9
                      ,  ) and w (L ,  ). Therefore, the original residents of city s could
and similarly for w(Nd  d          d  d

earn more or less under WFH, with same conclusion holding for the original residents of city
                                                                     > N = L implies
d. However, when the only advantage of city s is higher amenities, Ns       s
    , ) < w(L , ), with w (N  , ) > w(L , ) holding for city d. Therefore, the original
w(Ns         s              d          d

residents of city s (city d) earn a higher (lower) wage under WFH. Summarizing yields

   Proposition 2.
   (i) When city s has only a productivity advantage, its original residents could earn
   either a higher or lower wage under WFH, with the same conclusion holding for the
   original residents of city d.
   (ii) When city s has only an amenity advantage, its original residents earn a higher
   wage under WFH, with the original residents of city d earning a lower wage.

   Given the preceding results, the intuition underlying the effects of WFH is clear. When
city s has only a productivity advantage, workers can escape its high housing price by moving
to city d while keeping their productive city-s jobs, a movement that causes the population in
city s to fall short of employment. By equalizing populations, this shift eliminates the housing
price differential between the cities, mirroring the equalization of wages. When city s has only
an amenity advantage, wage equalization under WFH means that city-d workers can move to
enjoy the higher amenity level without the previous wage sacrifice, keeping their city-d jobs.
This movement causes population in city s to exceed employment and pushes up the housing
price enough to exactly cancel the utility benefit from the amenity differential.

   2.2.3. WFH and blight
   Without WFH, the low housing price and small population of the disadvantaged city might
lead to a blighted housing stock (Glaeser and Gyourko (2005)). By raising city d's population
and housing price, WFH could partially reverse this blighted condition.13 WFH could thus offer
a partial cure for blight in depressed cities as people relocate there from more expensive areas
without forsaking their original jobs. This conclusion is demonstrated in additional analysis
that is available on request. In the modified model, housing consumption is equal to aq , where
a  1 is a quality factor chosen by the developer. Quality a equals 1 when housing is new but
13 City s is assumed to have only a productivity advantage.



                                                   10
declines with age, a decline that can be retarded by maintenance investment, more of which
is undertaken when the housing price is high. Assuming both cities start off without WFH
and with new housing in period 0, quality in city d by period 1 will have declined more than
in city s given p                        
                 d < ps , yielding ad < as and the emergence of blight in city d (asterisks now

denote period-1, non-WFH values). However, with WFH beginning in period 2, the population
shift toward city d and consequent price increase will create greater incentives for maintenance
investment than in city s. The upshot is that ad/a        
                                                  d > as/as will hold, so that the change in

housing quality between periods 1 and 2 is more favorable in city d than in city s, indicating
a lessening of blight.14


3. Empirical Model and Data

    3.1. Overview
    As explained in the introduction, our empirical work explores both the intracity and in-
tercity effects of WFH. Since the intercity regressions are the most straightforward, they are
presented first. To make the transition from the theoretical predictions to the empirics, recall
that in the model, jobs are homogeneous and can all be done remotely. In reality, however,
WFH is possible for some jobs and not for others. Therefore, the model's prediction (Propo-
sition 1-i) that house prices fall in high-productivity cities must take into account the WFH
potential of a city's jobs. Accordingly, the variable used to test this hypothesis is the inter-
action variable PROD × WFH, where WFH measures work-from-home potential and PROD
measures productivity, both at the county level. If house prices decline when both productivity
and WFH potential are high, then this interaction variable should have a negative coefficient.
Similarly, the prediction (Proposition 1-ii) that house prices fall in low-amenity cities must
also be conditioned on WFH potential through use of an interaction variable. Letting QOL
(quality-of-life) denote the amenity measure, this interaction variable is QOL × WFH, and its
coefficient should be positive under the hypothesis. The data used to construct these variables

14 As before, the tildes denote WFH values. In the modified model, the previous equilibrium conditions are
amended to incorporate housing-quality differences across cities. In addition, particular functional forms are
adopted for utility and the maintenance cost function, with that function reflecting strong decreasing returns
to maintenance expenditure.


                                                     11
are described below.
    To better understand this regression setup, recall that the model predicts the house-price
effects of WFH when cities differ by productivity but not in amenities, and vice versa, with
the effects being ambiguous when producitivity and amenities both differ. The empirical coun-
terpart to this comparative exercise is to investigate the price effect of productivity holding
amenities constant or the effect of amenities holding productivity constant. But our regressions,
which include both productivity and QOL measures, achieve exactly this goal, given that the
regression coefficients have a ceteris paribus interpretation. A second point to bear in mind is
that, while the model predicts an absolute drop in prices in high-productivity cities with high
WFH potential, the empirical goal is only to show that price changes were smaller in such
cities, recognizing that prices may also have responded to additional forces.
    While these regressions focus on the annual 2019-2020 house-price change as well as the
change in rents, another month-based regression shows the effect of WFH potential and pro-
ductivity on the levels of house prices and rents in each month of a 48-month window around
December 2019. We expect a high WFH potential to depress monthly house prices and rents
after December 2019 in high-productivity counties, which implies a declining pattern of the
monthly WFH × PROD coefficients over this period.
    To investigate the intracity effects of WFH, we again use monthly house price data, now
measured at the zip-code level, and first regress prices on distance to the metro-area CBD,
generating a price gradient for each MSA in each month of the same 48-month window. The
estimated gradients are then used in a second-stage regression that relates their monthly mag-
nitudes to the WFH potential of the metro area's central county. We expect the monthly
coefficients relating the price gradients to WFH potential to increase over the months follow-
ing December 2019, indicating less-negative values. This exercise borrows data from Lee and
Lin (2018).

    3.2. Data on WFH potential
    We measure WFH potential by combining 2018 data from County Business Patterns (the
most recent data available) with the industry-level remote work index constructed by Dingel
and Neiman (2020). For each NAICS3 industry, they measure the share of employment in

                                               12
occupations that can be done from home based on occupational characteristics from the US
Department of Labor's Occupation Information Network (O*NET). Intuitively, an industry
has a higher WFH potential if much of its employment is in occupations that require low levels
of face-to-face interaction, if work involves low levels of physical effort, and if it relies less on
information and communication technologies, such as e-mail. The WFH potential of county
c is the employment-weighted average of WFH potentials for the county's industries (denoted
by WFHj for industry j ):

                                    WFHc =             sjcWFHj ,                                 (8)
                                                 j J


where sjc is the employment share of industry j in county c. Table 1 shows the counties with
the highest and lowest WFH potentials among the 100 largest counties. High-WFH-potential
counties are concentrated in the finance and insurance hubs of the Northeast corridor as well
as in the tech hubs of California. Low WFH potential counties are relatively less populous and
more likely to be located in the South and the West.

    3.2. Housing data
    Our source of county-level house price and rent data is Zillow. House prices are measured
using the Zillow Home Value Index, which gives selling prices for typical for houses and con-
dominiums in a geographic area, and rents are measured by the Zillow Observed Rent Index,
which captures asking rents for representative units, but whose coverage of the country is less
extensive than that of the price index. These Zillow datasets are monthly time series, which
we aggregate to the yearly level for the price- and rent-change regressions. In addition, the
rent data, which are available at the zip-code level, are aggregated to the county level.

    3.3. Amenity and productivity data
    In addition to housing prices, critical to our analysis are measures of local amenities and
productivity. We source these key variables from Albouy (2016). He builds a Rosen-Roback
model to generate hedonic estimates of QOL and productivity at the metropolitan statistical
area (MSA) level. We assign these MSA-level estimates to counties based on 1999 metro area
standards. An implicit assumption in our approach is that cross-county differences in amenities

                                                 13
and productivity are small enough that MSA values can be assigned.15

    3.4. Other data
    We supplement the main datasets with information on the share of the population with a
college degree,16 the Wharton Residential Land-Use Regulatory Index (WRLURI), measured
for the county's MSA (Gyourko, Saiz and Summers, 2008), and a measure of terrain ruggedness,
equal to the percent of the MSA land area with slope greater than 15 degrees (both measures
are taken from Albouy, 2016). In addition, to capture the impacts of changing employment on
house prices, the price-change regression includes a variable known as the Bartik "instrument,"
which equals the weighted average of 2019-2020 sectoral employment changes at the national
level, with the weights equal to county-level sectoral job shares.17 Census-division fixed effects
are also included.
    The metro-area county sample includes 792 counties. However, Zillow rents are available
for only 269 counties, yielding a smaller sample for the rent regressions. Summary statistics
for the regression variables over the larger sample are shown in Table 2, and Figure 1 shows a
point scatter of WFH potentials and productivity for major MSAs, with the values expressed
as deviations from medians.18 The figure shows that WFH potential and productivity are
positively correlated (at the county level, the correlation equals 0.33).

    3.5. Estimating equations
    Our first set of intercity regressions, which focus on the change in the annual average house
price between 2019 and 2020 , are variants of the following estimating equation:


   log Pc = 0 + 1 PRODc × WFHc + 2 QOLc × WFHc + 3 PRODc + 4 QOLc

                       + 5 WFHc + Zc  +              c,                                                   (9)
15 We use the term MSA to refer to metro areas whose designation is either MSA or CMSA (the latter are
the largest MSAs).
 16 This share is the average county share of the college educated over the period 2014-2018 from the American
Community Survey.
 17 National employment changes are between the second quarters of 2019 and 2020 (the latest available quarter
in the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages). Local shares are from County Business Patterns 2018.
 18 MSA WFH values are found by averaging across component counties. Note that Detroit is shown as a
high-productivity city, in contrast to its status in the model of Section 2.


                                                     14
where c indexes counties, P denotes the house price and  logP is the annual 2019-2020 change,
Z denotes the controls, and         is the error term. The hypothesis that price changes are smaller
in high-productivity, high-WFH-potential counties implies 1 < 0. Conversely, the hypothesis
that prices changes are smaller in low-QOL, high-WFH-potential counties implies 2 > 0. In
estimating (8), the standard errors are clustered at the MSA level. The same regression is also
run with the change in rents as the dependent variable.
   To allow the interaction coefficients in (9) to differ depending on whether the county has
below- or above-median productivity or QOL, the interaction portion of (9) is rewritten as



         1 low PRODc × PRODc × WFHc + 2 high PRODc × PRODc × WFHc

                + 3 low QOLc × QOLc × WFHc + 4 high QOLc × QOLc × WFHc ,                           (10)



where low PROD (high PROD) are dummies indicate that a county has a below (above)
median value of PROD, with the QOL dummies defined analogously. We present regressions
based on both (9) and (10).
   The monthly price-level regression, also used to test for intercity WFH effects, takes the
following form:



     log Pct = c +                  t(WFHc × PRODc × gt ) + t (WFHc × gt )
                              t

                                  + t(PRODc × gt ) + t (QOLc × gt ) + (Zc × gt )t       +   ct ,   (11)


where c is a county fixed effect, t denotes months, and the gt 's are month dummies.19 Note
that the right-hand variables in (11) are constant over time but that the specification allows
their price effects to vary by month. Observe also that the simpler WFH interaction structure
of (9) is used, with the QOL interaction also suppressed (as explained further below). This
same regression is also run using rent as the dependent variable.
19 The Bartik instrument is omitted from the controls in this regression.



                                                     15
    Turning to the intracity empirical analysis, the first stage estimates MSA-specific price
gradients, one for each month (using the same 48-month window as the price-level regressions).
Thus, for each metro area m and month t, we separately estimate the following equation:


                 log Pmzt = µmt + mt log DISTANCEmz + Xmz mt + mzt ,                                          (12)


where m denotes the metro area (MSA), z is the zip code, and t is the month. DISTANCE
denotes the distance from the zip-code centroid to the metro CBD, and X is a set of controls.20
Note that all coefficients in (12) vary with the metro area and month.
    In the second stage, the estimated distance coefficient mt from (12) is regressed on the
WFH potential of the metro area's principal-city county, allowing for month-specific coeffi-
cients:

                         mt =              t (W F Hm × gt ) + m + gt + mt ,                                   (13)
                                       t

where m is a metro-area fixed effect.21 We expect the t coefficient to rise across months,
indicating flattening of the price gradient in metro areas with high-WFH-potential principal-
city counties as time progresses.

    3.6. Identification issues
    Since the monthly price-level regressions in (11) use county fixed effects while the monthly
gradient regressions in (13) use metro-area fixed effects, omitted variable bias is unlikely to
be an issue in these regressions. In generating the annual price-difference estimating equation
in (9), analogous county fixed effects in the underlying price equations are differenced out.
While one could argue that unobserved factors affecting the county price changes could still
 20 The control variables are zip-code-level measures of (log) distance to nearest river, distance to nearest
lake, distance to nearest coastline, average annual precipitation between 1971 and 2000, minimum temperature
in January, maximum temperature in July, average slope, log population density, and log average household
income, all drawn from Lee and Lin (2018). Their data are measured at the census tract level, and we use a
crosswalk supplied by HUD to map tracts to zip codes. Note that while house size should ideally be a control
in such a regression (so that it has price-per-square-foot interpretation), this variable is not available. However,
inclusion of income helps offset this omission since it is generally a strong determinant of house size.
 21 When there are multiple principal-city counties in a metro area, we use the population-weighted average of
the gradients from these counties.


                                                        16
lead to bias, the fact that the focal variables are interaction terms appears to greatly limit the
possibility of correlation with the equation's error term, thus limiting any concerns.


4. Empirical results

    4.1. Regressions using price and rent changes
    Table 3 shows the estimation results for the 2019-2020 price-change regressions (columns
1-4) and for the regressions using the change in the change in rents as dependent variable
(columns 5-8). Column 1 of Table 3 shows that the PROD × WFH coefficient is significantly
negative in the price-change regression based on the specification in (9). This result confirms
the prediction that 2019-2020 house-price changes were smaller in high-productivity counties
with high WFH potential. However, the WFH × QOL coefficient is insignificant, disconfirming
the prediction of small house-price changes in low-amenity counties with high WFH potential.
Apparently, the expectation that WFH encouraged workers in such counties to move to high-
amenity places, depressing county house prices, is not borne out. As noted in the introduction,
none of the popular commentary of WFH impacts has anticipated such an effect, possibly
foreshadowing our empirical finding.
    The regression in column 2 of Table 3 follows specification (10), where the interaction
coefficients are allowed to differ according the magnitude of PROD or QOL. As can be seen,
the coefficient of high PROD×PROD×WFH is significantly negative while that of low PROD×
PROD × WFH is insignificant, indicating that the PROD × WFH effect in column 1 is driven
by WFH impacts in the highest-productivity counties. This finding provides even stronger
confirmation for the predictions of the model than the results in column 1. Mirroring the
estimates in column 1, neither of the QOL interaction coefficients in column 2 is significant.
    With QOL interaction effects absent, the regressions in columns 3 and 4 exclude these
variables. As can be seen, the PROD × WFH coefficient remains significant in column 3,
while the high PROD interaction remains significant in column 4. The coefficient magnitudes
in the corresponding regressions are also very close.
    The individual level coefficients of the interacted variables show a significantly positive
PROD effect on the 2019-2020 house-price change in columns 1 and 3, which disappears when

                                               17
the productivity interaction effects are split according to high and low PROD values (columns 2
and 4). While the QOL level effect is always insignificant, the WFH level effect is significantly
positive in columns 2 and 4. Note, however, that the signs of these level coefficients are
not predicted by the theory. Instead, the theory says that the effect of WFH potential on
price changes should be smaller in higher-productivity counties and larger in counties with
higher QOL, implying negative and positive signs, respectively, for the associated interaction
coefficients but with no implication for the level coefficients.
    Among the control variables, the WRLURI coefficients are significantly positive in each
of the columns 1­4, naturally indicating larger price changes in counties with greater land-
use regulation. The college-education coefficient is always significantly negative, showing that
2019-2020 price changes were lower in highly educated counties, a result that is less transparent.
Unexpectedly, the Bartik coefficient is insignificant in each of these columns, as is the terrain-
slope coefficient.
    The rent-change regressions in columns 5­8 of Table 3 show an interaction-coefficient pat-
tern similar to that in columns 1­4, confirming predicted rent impacts in counties with high pro-
ductivity and high WFH potential. The difference is that the low PROD × PROD × WFH coef-
ficients in columns 6 and 8 are significantly negative along with the high PROD×PROD×WFH
coefficients, showing that the WFH effect on rents is also felt in some counties with below-
median productivity. Among the level coefficients, all PROD coefficients are significantly pos-
itive in columns 5­8, as in columns 1­4, while the WFH levels coefficients are now uniformly
negative and significant, a pattern opposite to that the earlier columns. In addition, the QOL
level coefficients are significantly negative in columns 7 and 8. The theory again provides no
predictions as to the signs of these level coefficients. As for the control variables, the WRLURI
coefficients become insignificant in columns 5-8, although the college education coefficients
remain significantly negative in these columns.22 In addition, the Bartik coefficients become
 22 To further discount possible bias from omitted factors, we experimented with adding two additional controls,
whose presence has little effect on the other coefficients. They are the log of total COVID-19 cases per capita
in 2020 and a dummy indicating whether the metro area experienced riots or violent demonstrations in 2020.
The COVID data are taken from from the New York Times (https://github.com/nytimes/covid-19-data),
and the riot information is from https://acleddata.com/ special-projects/us-crisis-monitor/. The
COVID coefficient is significantly negative in both the price-change and rent-change regressions, a sensible


                                                      18
significantly positive in columns 5-8, showing that a favorable employment change has a posi-
tive effect on the 2019-2020 rent change. The terrain-slope coefficients remain insignificant.
    Table 4 presents robustness checks, focusing only on the specification containing the single
PROD × WFH interaction. Column 1 shows the results for the price-change regression when
metro-area counties other than the county containing the area's prinicipal city are dropped,
reducing the sample size to 378. The interaction coefficient remains significantly negative.
Column 2 shows the effect of aggregating to the MSA level, which reduces the number of ob-
servations to 236. The information loss inherent in this aggregation eliminates the significance
of the PROD × WFH coefficient, whose t-statistic drops to 1.5, although the sign remains
negative. Column 3 provides a placebo test by replacing the 2019-2020 house-price change
by the 2018-2019 price change. Since WFH took off only in 2020, we would expect to see
no WFH effect on house prices between 2018 and 2019, and this expectation is confirmed by
the insignificant coefficient of PROD × WFH in column 3. A regression using the 2017-2018
price change also yields an insignificant interaction coefficient. Therefore, our placebo tests
are successful, showing no WFH effects where they should not be present.
    Columns 4­6 of Table 4 show robustness checks when the rent change is the dependent
variable, and the results are similar to those in columns 1­3. The interaction coefficient
remains significantly negative when non-principal-city counties are excluded (column 4), and
the coefficient becomes insignificant with aggregation to the MSA level (column 5, where the
sign is now positive). The placebo test is again successful, with a regression using the 2018-
2019 change in rents yielding an insignificant interaction coefficient. Table 4 thus shows that
our results are fairly robust.23

    4.2. Monthly price-level regressions
    The results of estimating the monthly price-level and rent-level regressions in (11) are
shown in Figure 2. The figures graph the monthly magnitude of the PROD × WFH interaction

outcome, and the riots coefficient is significantly positive in the price-change regressions but not in the rent-
change regressions, conclusions that are less transparent.
 23 Additional regressions using the change in the price-to-rent ratio (a measure of future price growth) as
dependent variable show no WFH effect. Thus, prices and rents declined in step under WFH, leaving their
ratio unchanged.


                                                       19
coefficients relative to the coefficient for December 2019, which is normalized to zero. As shown,
the regressions cover the period from 35 months prior to December 2019 through the end of
2020. The solid curve shows the estimated PROD × WFH coefficients, while the dotted lines
show the 95% confidence bounds. As can be seen, the magnitude of a county's PROD × WFH
interaction variable has no effect on the monthly level of either housing prices or rents prior to
December 2019, with the confidence bands covering the horizontal axis. But after December
2019, house prices and rents in counties with a large interaction value dropped significantly
relative to their levels in this benchmark month, as predicted by the theory. This conclusion
follows since the confidence bounds lie below the horizontal axis after the benchmark month.24
    The results in Figure 2 reinforce the conclusions of the price- and rent-change change
regressions at a more disaggregated level. The finding that monthly prices and rents fell
following the benchmark month in counties with high productivity and high WFH potential
matches the finding that average 2020 prices were lower than average 2019 prices in such
counties.

    4.3. Monthly price-gradient regressions
    The first step in exploring the effect of WFH potential on house-price gradients is estimation
of monthly price gradients at the MSA level. Zillow house-price data at the zip-code level in the
sample MSAs are used rather than county-level data, so as to provide more spatial variation
in prices. The resulting regressions yield a large number of price gradients across metro areas
(of which there are 120) and months, and the mean value is negative (equal to -0.108), as
predicted by the urban model.
    Table 5 shows price-gradient regressions for the New York-Newark-Bridgeport CMSA for
the months of December 2019 and 2020. We find that zip-code-level home prices in the New
York metro area have a strong negative association with distance to the CBD in both periods.
Furthermore, the table shows a flattening of the intracity price gradient over the year between
these two months.
 24 The widening of confidence band moving away from the benchmark month appears to be a consequence of
the clustering of the coefficient standard errors by metro area. If robust standard errors are used instead, this
widening disappears, as shown in Figure A1 in the appendix.


                                                       20
    The second-stage regression relates the estimated gradients to the WFH potential of the
principal county of the metro area. The theory predicts that price gradients should have
flattened (becoming less negative) in metro areas with high WFH potential, implying a positive
coefficient for the WFH variable. Note that the metro area's productivity or amenities play
no role in this prediction.
    Following the structure of Figure 2, the results are shown in Figure 3, which graphs the
magnitude of the estimated monthly WFH coefficients over the same monthly window. The
coefficients are again normalized, with the December 2019 value set at zero, and confidence
bounds are again shown as dotted curves. As can be seen in the figure, WFH potential has no
effect on a metro area's price gradient in the months prior to December 2019. This conclusion,
which is relative to the gradient in the benchmark month, follows because the confidence bands
cover the horizontal axis prior to that month. After the benchmark month, however, the
WFH coefficient becomes significantly larger than its benchmark value, as predicted, with the
confidence bands no longer covering the horizontal axis.25 Therefore, price gradients in counties
with high WFH potential flattened (becoming less negative) relative to their benchmark value
in the months following December 2019. This conclusion complements our evidence on the
intercity effects of WFH by showing that the value of CBD access fell in metro areas with high
WFH potential, leading to a smaller price premium for central locations.

5. A new spatial hedonic equilibrium?
    In the initial hedonic equilibrium, the high-productivity city in the theoretical model
started out with high wages and high housing prices, while the disadvantaged, low-productivity
city had low wages and prices. These differences served to equate utilities between the two
cities. In the model, the onset of WFH initiated a movement to a new hedonic equilibrium, with
housing prices falling in the high-productivity city as residents relocated to its low-price coun-
terpart (raising prices there) while keeping their original jobs. By documenting price and rent
decreases in high-productivity cities with high WFH potential, our empirical results appear to
show the beginnings of such an equilibrium shift. But with WFH being a recent phenomenon,
25 As seen in Figure A2 in the online appendix, when robust rather than clustered standard errors are used,
the confidence band covers the horizontal axis following the benchmark month except at the very end of 2020.


                                                    21
it appears that the economy still has a long way to go before reaching the new predicted equi-
librium, where wages within high-WFH-potential occupations are equalized across locations
and the house-price premium in high-productivity cities wanes or disappears. Our empirical
results suggest, though, that we may headed in this direction, with market signals of intercity
productivity differences becoming muted or vanishing entirely, in stark contrast to predictions
of models in the Rosen-Roback tradition.26
    While the model also predicts that WFH will spur movement out of low-amenity cities
toward nicer locations, our empirical results show no evidence of this kind of relocation so
far. Unlike in the model, moving between cities may be difficult in the short run without a
well-paid, high-productivity job, and since such jobs tend to be located in cities with favorable
amenities,27 there may be little opportunity for low-to-high-amenity relocations in the short
time span of our data. However, as the passage of time reduces migration frictions, we may see
evidence of migration out of low-amenity areas, provided that they have high WFH potential.
Such movements, which drive up housing prices in high-amenity cities, will serve to strengthen
the capitalization of amenities in the housing market, as shown in the model.28
    While we have not empirically explored the wage impacts of WFH (see Proposition 2), it is
useful to ask what such an investigation would look like. The crucial equilibrium condition in
the model is wage equalization, which occurs for all workers since jobs are homogeneous. But an
empirical study would recognize that equalization would obtain only for jobs that can be done
remotely. The empirical implication is that, once a WFH equilibrium has been reached, wages
for jobs with high WFH potential should be independent of the place of employment and thus
independent of city characteristics. Empirically, one could test this prediction by regressing
the average wage on city characteristics, including amenities and productivity, along with the

26 In a pre-WFH world with different size households, the high wages in high-productivity cities would be
worth more to a two-earner household than to a single-earner household, drawing the former households more
strongly to such places. But once WFH equalizes wages across workplaces, this location preference would
disappear. Note, however, that a world with variation in the number of earners per household would require a
new theoretical analysis. For a demonstration of how locational benefits can vary with the number of earners,
see Gyourko and Tracy (1991, Table 4).
 27 The sample correlation between PROD and QOL is 0.35.
 28 Note that this stronger capitalization will hurt retirees who move to high-amenity locations at the end of
their working life.


                                                     22
WFH potential of the city's jobs as well as WFH interaction terms. The prediction would be
that the effects of these characteristics on wages (acting both through level and interaction
terms) would become weaker as WFH potential rises, disappearing entirely if all the city's jobs
can be done remotely. Another related way of testing the wage-equalization hypothesis would
be to regress an intercity occupational wage-dispersion measure on the WFH potential of the
occupation, with a negative coefficient expected. In other words, occupations with high WFH
potential should exhibit low wage dispersion across cities. This kind of empirical work should
wait, however, for the effects of the WFH to fully play out across the economy.


6. Conclusion
    This paper has studied the impacts of WFH in the housing market from both intercity and
intracity perspectives. Our results confirm the theoretical prediction that WFH puts downward
pressure on housing prices in high-productivity counties, a result of workers starting to relocate
to cheaper metro areas during the pandemic without forsaking their desirable jobs. We also
show that WFH tends to flatten intracity house-price gradients, weakening the price premium
associated with good job access. In carrying out our tests, we do not attempt to measure
population movements between cities or suburbanization trends within cities, both of which
should ultimately be tied to the price effects we measure. After the WFH phenomenon has
gained a stronger foothold, however, such relocation trends should be visible in population data
and could be a subject for additional study. While the paper is thus being written somewhat
"early in the game," our results indicate that the price effects of WFH are already apparent.
    The WFH effects we identify have important economic incidence implications driven by
the housing market. Our empirical results show that WFH imposes capital losses on real estate
owners in high-productivity cities, while renters in such cities tend to gain. The reverse effects
are predicted to occur in low-productivity cities. While these impacts are tied by the model to
intercity migration, intracity effects (due to relocation within cities) will tend to hurt owners
and benefit renters in central cities, while having the reverse effects in the suburbs. Also on the
intracity level, the reduction in commuting costs due to WFH may also strengthen suburban-
flight responses to disamenities such as crime and high central-city taxes (Cullen and Levitt,

                                                23
1999; Mieszkowski and Mills, 1983).
    Possible public-sector impacts of WFH include downward pressure on the property tax rev-
enue of local governments (via lower housing prices) in places disfavored by WFH: central cities
and high-productivity metro areas. Another public-sector effect is a possible strengthening of
interjurisdictional tax competition (Wilson, 1999) as migration between jurisdictions becomes
easier. This same tendency can also limit the market power of local public-sector unions, who
may settle for lower pay as WFH limits their ability to extract tax revenue from increasingly
footloose residents (Brueckner and Neumark, 2014; Diamond, 2017). Overall, WFH will have
a host of effects that researchers should continue to track as time progresses.




                                               24
                         Table 1. County Rankings of Work-from-Home Potential


Ranking             County                                   MSA                            WFH potential

   1                New York County, NY                      New York, NY                          0.5147
   2                Fairfax County, VA                       Washington, DC                        0.5118
   3                District of Columbia, DC                 Washington, DC                        0.4942
   4                San Francisco County, CA                 San Francisco, CA                     0.4900
   5                Santa Clara County, CA                   San Francisco, CA                     0.4884
   6                Suffolk County, MA                       Boston, MA                            0.4682
   7                Middlesex County, MA                     Boston, MA                            0.4676
   8                Fulton County, GA                        Atlanta, GA                           0.4500
   9                Hennepin County, MN                      Minneapolis, MN                       0.4366
  10                Collin County, TX                        Dallas, TX                            0.4224
   .
   .                .
                    .                                        .
                                                             .                                        .
                                                                                                      .
   .                .                                        .                                        .
  91                Fresno County, CA                        Fresno, CA                            0.2900
  92                El Paso County, TX                       El Paso, TX                           0.2864
  93                Snohomish County, WA                     Seattle, WA                           0.2817
  94                Hidalgo County, TX                       McAllen, TX                           0.2788
  95                Lee County, FL                           Fort Myers, FL                        0.2781
  96                San Bernardino County, CA                Los Angeles, CA                       0.2774
  97                Kern County, CA                          Bakersfield, CA                       0.2717
  98                San Joaquin County, CA                   Stockton, CA                          0.2687
  99                Clark County, NV                         Las Vegas, NV                         0.2679
 100                Riverside County, CA                     Los Angeles, CA                       0.2574

Note: This table reports county rankings in terms of WFH potential for the 100 largest counties.




                                                    25
                                               Table 2. Summary Statistics


                                                      N         Mean           St. Dev.          Min           Max
Home price, 2020                                     792     244,233.80       147,937.30       58,736        1,427,988
Home price, 2019                                     792     233,481.90       143,371.20      57,392.08      1,413,393
Home price, 2018                                     792     224,900.30       143,268.80      55,022.42      1,396,384
Rent, 2020                                           269      1,631.33          465.23         713.62        4,541.56
Rent, 2019                                           269      1,580.39          477.56         671.00        4,553.26
Rent, 2018                                           269      1,527.53          468.75         637.11        4,458.52
Work-from-Home Potential (WFH)                       792        0.30             0.06           0.18            0.69
Productivity (PROD)                                  792       -0.02             0.11          -0.26            0.29
Quality of Life (QOL)                                792       -0.01             0.04          -0.10            0.18
Pct. MSA land steeper than 15 degrees                792        0.01             0.01           0.00            0.09
Wharton Residential Land-Use Regulation Index        792       -0.13             0.73          -1.76            4.31
Pct. pop. with a college education                   792        0.29             0.11           0.09            0.79

 Note: County-level home prices and rents are based on the Zillow Home Value Index (ZHVI) and Zillow Observed Rent
Index (ZORI), respectively, for all homes and condos/co-ops. Because county-level ZORI is unavailable, we map zip-code-
level ZORI to counties using a HUD crosswalk. Work-from-home potential is based on authors' calculations using 2018
County Business Patterns and the Dingel and Neiman (2020) data. Metro-level productivity, quality of life, land steepness,
and Wharton Residential Land-Use Regulation Index come from Albouy (2016). College population shares come from 2014­
2018 American Community Survey.




                                                           26
                                                                      Table 3. Intercity Regression Results


                                                                                  Dependent variable: Log change in home price or rent, 2019­2020
                                                                              Home price                                                    Rent

                                                             (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)           (5)            (6)            (7)           (8)
     PROD × WFH                                          -0.481                         -0.527                      -0.420                      -0.512
                                                           (0.165)                       (0.164)                     (0.188)                       (0.142)
     QOL × WFH                                             -0.256                                                    -0.393
                                                           (0.253)                                                   (0.459)
     Low PROD × PROD × WFH                                               -0.281                       -0.301                      -0.725                       -0.832
                                                                         (0.204)                      (0.203)                      (0.244)                      (0.209)
     High PROD × PROD × WFH                                             -0.452                       -0.479                       -0.478                       -0.581
                                                                         (0.163)                      (0.159)                      (0.201)                      (0.150)
     Low QOL × QOL × WFH                                                  0.361                                                    -0.232
                                                                         (0.349)                                                   (0.406)
     High QOL × QOL × WFH                                                -0.226                                                    -0.391
                                                                         (0.264)                                                   (0.443)
     PROD                                                 0.128           0.098         0.141          0.104        0.118          0.150        0.145          0.180




27
                                                           (0.057)       (0.060)         (0.056)       (0.059)      (0.067)        (0.074)       (0.052)        (0.058)
     QOL                                                    0.033        -0.053          -0.046       -0.036        -0.012         -0.040       -0.144         -0.150
                                                           (0.095)       (0.095)         (0.030)       (0.031)      (0.183)        (0.159)       (0.045)        (0.044)
     WFH                                                    0.040       0.059            0.041        0.050        -0.116         -0.113        -0.110         -0.109
                                                           (0.025)       (0.022)         (0.024)       (0.022)      (0.023)        (0.023)       (0.022)        (0.022)
     Pct. pop. with a college education                   -0.030        -0.033          -0.029       -0.033        -0.039         -0.037        -0.039         -0.036
                                                           (0.012)       (0.011)         (0.012)       (0.012)      (0.010)        (0.010)       (0.010)        (0.010)
     Pct. MSA land steeper than 15 degrees                 -0.042         0.007          -0.042       -0.004        -0.054         -0.103        -0.065         -0.111
                                                           (0.094)       (0.095)         (0.094)       (0.094)      (0.171)        (0.169)       (0.175)        (0.173)
     Wharton Residential Land-Use Regulation Index        0.006         0.006           0.006         0.006         -0.003         -0.004        -0.003         -0.003
                                                           (0.002)       (0.002)         (0.002)       (0.002)      (0.003)        (0.003)       (0.003)        (0.003)
     Bartik IV 2019-2020                                    0.017         0.004           0.012         0.004       0.180          0.185         0.172          0.176
                                                           (0.058)       (0.056)         (0.057)       (0.057)      (0.075)        (0.077)       (0.074)        (0.075)
     Observations                                            792           792             792          792            269           269             269          269
     Adjusted R2                                            0.127         0.145           0.128        0.137          0.510         0.514           0.510        0.515
     Sample                                                 metro         metro           metro        metro          metro         metro           metro        metro
     SE cluster                                             MSA           MSA             MSA          MSA            MSA           MSA             MSA          MSA

      Note: Outcomes are county-level changes in annual home prices and rents for all homes and condos/co-ops. Home prices and rents are based on the Zillow Home Value
     Index and Zillow Observed Rent Index, respectively. Control variables include census division fixed effects, WFH potential, percent of population with a college educa-
     tion, MSA productivity, MSA quality of life, percent of MSA land steeper than 15 degrees, the Wharton Residential Land-Use Regulation Index, and Bartik instruments.
     The metro county sample includes all counties that are part of an MSA. Standard errors are clustered at the MSA level.  p <0.1;  p <0.05;  p <0.01.
                                                                           Table 4. Robustness Checks


                                                                          Log change in home price                                       Log change in rent
                                                                         2019­2020                   2018­2019                     2019­2020                   2018­2019

                                                                   (1)                 (2)               (3)                 (4)                 (5)               (6)
     PROD × WFH                                                 -0.500               -0.458           -0.284              -0.535                 0.483            0.067
                                                                (0.198)              (0.299)          (0.180)             (0.238)               (0.397)          (0.119)
     PROD                                                       0.129                 0.096            0.086              0.138                -0.259            -0.023
                                                                (0.072)              (0.109)          (0.059)             (0.082)               (0.150)          (0.048)
     QOL                                                        -0.028                0.009          -0.103              -0.079                -0.170            -0.066
                                                                (0.032)              (0.041)          (0.040)             (0.040)               (0.073)          (0.046)
     WFH                                                         0.049                0.093           -0.021             -0.096                 -0.016            0.007
                                                                (0.032)              (0.056)          (0.022)             (0.030)               (0.102)          (0.018)
     Pct. pop. with a college education                        -0.050                -0.039          -0.049              -0.037                 -0.033          -0.046
                                                                (0.017)              (0.022)          (0.013)             (0.015)               (0.046)          (0.010)
     Pct. MSA land steeper than 15 degrees                      -0.062               -0.147           0.180               -0.152               -0.357            -0.097




28
                                                                (0.115)              (0.102)          (0.099)             (0.137)               (0.160)          (0.154)
     Wharton Residential Land-Use Regulation Index              0.006                0.005             0.003              -0.003                 0.003           -0.002
                                                                (0.002)              (0.002)          (0.002)             (0.003)               (0.002)          (0.002)
     Bartik IV 2019­2020                                         0.157                0.177                              0.275                   0.055
                                                                (0.096)              (0.102)                              (0.072)               (0.117)
     Bartik IV 2018­2019                                                                              -0.212                                                     -0.239
                                                                                                      (0.241)                                                    (0.309)
     Observations                                                  378                 236               792                 165                 83                269
     Adjusted R2                                                  0.140               0.178             0.230               0.491               0.481             0.247
     Sample                                                   principal-city          MSA               metro           principal-city          MSA               metro
     SE cluster                                                   MSA                 state             MSA                 MSA                 state             MSA

      Note: Outcomes are county- or MSA-level changes in annual home prices and rents for all homes and condos/co-ops. Home prices and rents are based on the Zillow
     Home Value Index and Zillow Observed Rent Index, respectively. Control variables include census division fixed effects, WFH potential, percent of population with a
     college education, MSA productivity, MSA quality of life, percent of MSA land steeper than 15 degrees, the Wharton Residential Land-Use Regulation Index, and Bartik
     instruments. The metro county sample includes all counties that are part of an MSA. The principal-city county sample includes all counties that contain a principal city
     of an MSA. The MSA sample includes 236 MSAs with non-missing covariates. Standard errors are clustered at the MSA level, except for Columns 2 and 5, which are
     clustered at the state level.  p <0.1;  p <0.05;  p <0.01.
      Table 5. Intracity Zip-Code Home Price Gradients, New York-Newark-Bridgeport, NY-NJ-CT-PA


                                                                Dependent variable: Log home price
                                                             12/2019                           12/2020
                                                               (1)                               (2)
Log dist. to CBD                                            -0.269                            -0.242
                                                              (0.020)                           (0.019)
Log dist. to nearest river                                  0.050                             0.047
                                                              (0.012)                           (0.012)
Log dist. to nearest lake                                   -0.033                            -0.033
                                                              (0.012)                           (0.012)
Log dist. to nearest coastline                              -0.045                            -0.052
                                                              (0.010)                           (0.009)
Avg. annual precipitation 1971­2000                           0.0001                            0.0002
                                                             (0.0002)                          (0.0002)
Max temperature in July                                     -0.127                            -0.123
                                                              (0.014)                           (0.014)
Minimum temperature in January                              0.099                             0.095
                                                              (0.012)                           (0.012)
Average slope                                                  0.002                            -0.001
                                                              (0.003)                           (0.003)
Log population density                                      -0.051                            -0.056
                                                              (0.012)                           (0.012)
Log avg. hhld. income                                       0.854                             0.814
                                                              (0.035)                           (0.035)
Observations                                                   842                                842
Adjusted R2                                                   0.595                              0.584

Note: Home prices are based on the the zip-code-level Zillow Home Value Index for all homes and condos/co-
ops. Zip-code covariates are based on census tract-level data from Lee and Lin (2018), which we map to zip-
codes using a HUD crosswalk.




                                                    29
              Figure 1. Relationship Between WFH Potential and Productivity, MSA




Note: Figure plots the relationship between WFH potential and local productivity for the 15 most populous MSAs
(based 2019 population) in each quadrant.




                                                     30
                                                 Figure 2. Home Price and Rental Rate Dynamics, 2017­2020




31
                                        (a) Price                                                                         (b) Rent
     Note: Figure plots the coefficients and 95 confidence intervals of the event study estimates. Outcomes are the Zillow Home Value Indices and Zillow Observed Rent
     Indices for all homes and condos/co-ops between January 2017 and December 2020. Control variables include county fixed effects, census division-by-year fixed
     effects, and the interactions between month-year dummies with a set of county covariates, including WFH potential, percent of population with a college education,
     MSA productivity, MSA quality of life, percent of MSA land steeper than 15 degrees, and the Wharton Residential Land-Use Regulation Index. Standard errors
     are clustered the MSA level.
                     Figure 3. Intracity Home Price Gradient Dynamics, 2017­2020




Note: Figure plots the coefficients and 95 confidence intervals of the event study estimates. Outcomes are intracity
home price gradients based on authors' calculations. In the first stage, we estimate the intracity home price gradient of
each MSA with at least 30 zip-codes by separately regressing log zip-code Zillow Home Value Index on log distance
to the central business district, a set of exogenous amenities (log distances to nearest lake, river, and coastline; the
average annual precipitation 1971­2000, January minimum temperature, and July maximum temperature), average
slope, and a set of proxies for endogenous amenities (log population density and log average household income). In
the second stage, we estimate an event study equation by regressing the estimated intracity home price gradients on
the interactions of month-year dummies and principal-city counties' WFH potential, controlling for MSA fixed effects
and month-year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered the MSA level.




                                                          32
                                    References


Albouy, David. 2016. "What Are Cities Worth? Land Rents, Local Productivity, and the
  Total Value of Amenities." Review of Economics and Statistics 98(3): 477-487.

Althoff, Lukas, Fabian Eckert, Sharat Ganapani and Conor Walsh. 2020. "The
  City Paradox: Skilled Services and Remote Work," CESifo working paper 8734.

Bartik, Alexander W., Zoe B. Cullen, Edward L. Glaeser, Michael Luca, and
  Christopher T. Stanton. 2020. "What Jobs are Being Done at Home During the Covid-
  19 Crisis? Evidence from Firm-Level Surveys." National Bureau of Economic Research
  working paper 27422.

Bindley, Katherine. 2020. "Tech Workers Take to the Mountains, Bringing Silicon Valley
  With Them." Wall Street Journal, November 1.

Bloom, Nicholas, Steven J. Davis, and Yulia Zhestkova. 2020. "COVID-19 Shifted
  Patent Applications Toward Technologies that Support Working from Home." SSRN Schol-
  arly Paper 3695191.

Brueckner, Jan K. 1987. "The Structure of Urban equilibria: A Unified Treatment of the
  Muth-Mills Model," in: Edwin S. Mills, ed., Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics
  (North-Holland, Amsterdam), Vol. 2, 821-845.

Brueckner, Jan K., and David Neumark. 2014. "Beaches, Sunshine, and Public Sector
  Pay: Theory and Evidence on Amenities and Rent Extraction by Government Workers."
  American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 6(2): 198-230.

Brynjolfsson, Erik, John J. Horton, Adam Ozimek, Daniel Rock, Garima
  Sharma, and Hong-Yi TuYe. 2020. "COVID-19 and Remote Work: An Early Look at
  US Data." National Bureau of Economic Research working paper 27344.

Buhayar, Noah. 2020. "The Work-From-Home Boom Is Here to Stay. Get Ready for Pay
  Cuts." Bloomberg Businessweek, December 18.

Cullen, Julie B., and Steven D. Levitt. 1999. "Crime, Urban Flight, and the Conse-
  quences For Cities," Review of Economics and Statistics 81(2): 159-169.

Davis, Morris A., Andra C. Ghent and Jesse Gregory. 2021. "The Work-at-Home
  Technology Boom and its Consequences," National Bureau of Economic Research working
  paper 28461.

                                          33
Delventhal, Matthew, and Andrii Parkhomenko. 2020. "Spatial Implications of
  Telecommuting." Unpublished paper.

Delventhal, Matthew, Eunjee Kwon, and Andrii Parkhomenko. 2020. "How Do
  Cities Change When We Work from Home." Unpublished paper.

Diamond, Rebecca. 2017. "Housing Supply Elasticity and Rent Extraction by State and
  Local Governments." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 9(1): 74-111.

Dingel, Jonathan I., and Brent Neiman. 2020. `How Many Jobs Can Be Done at
  Home?" Journal of Public Economics 189: article 104235.

Duranton, Gilles, and Diego Puga. 2015. "Urban Land Use." In: J. Vernon Henderson,
  William C. Strange and Gilles Duranton, eds., Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics
  (North-Holland, Amsterdam), Vol. 5, 467-560.

Glaeser Edward L., and Joseph Gyourko. 2005. "Urban Decline and Durable Hous-
  ing." Journal of Political Economy 113(2): 345-375.

Gupta, Arpit, Vrinda Mittal, Jonas Peters and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh. 2021.
  "Flattening the Curve: Pandemic Induced Revaluation of Urban Real Estate." Unpublished
  paper.

Gyourko, Joseph, and Joseph Tracy. 1991. "The Structure of Local Public Finance
  and the Quality of Life." Journal of Political Economy 99(4): 774-806.

Gyourko, Joseph, Albert Saiz, and Anita Summers. 2008. "A New Measure of the
  Local Regulatory Environment for Housing Markets: The Wharton Residential Land Use
  Regulatory Index." Urban Studies 45(3): 693-729.

Howard, Greg. 2020. "The Migration Accelerator: Labor Mobility, Housing and Demand."
  American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 12(4): 147-179.

Larson, William, and Zhao, Weihua. 2017. "Telework: Urban Form, Energy Consump-
  tion, and Greenhouse Gas Implications." Economic Inquiry 55(2): 714-735

Lee, Sanghoon, and Jeffrey Lin. 2018. "Natural Amenities, Neighbourhood Dynamics,
  and Persistence in the Spatial Distribution of Income." Review of Economic Studies 85(1):
  663-694.

Ouazad, Amine. 2020. "Resilient Urban Housing Markets: Shocks vs. Fundamentals."
  arXiv.org preprint 2010.00413.

Mieszkowski, Peter, and Edwin S. Mills. 1993. "The Causes of Metropolitan Subur-

                                            34
  banization." Journal of Economic Perspectives 7(3): 135-47.

Rhee, Hyok-Joo. 2008. "Home-based Telecommuting and Commuting Behavior." Journal
  of Urban Economics 63(1): 198216.

Roback, Jennifer. 1982. "Wages, Rents, and the Quality of Life." Journal of Political
  Economy 90: 1257-1278.

Rosen, Sherwin. 1979. "Wages-based Indexes of Urban Quality of Life." In: Peter Mieszkow-
  ski and Mahlon Straszheim, eds., Current Issues in Urban Economics (Baltimore, Johns
  Hopkins Univ. Press).

Safirova, Elena. 2002. "Telecommuting, Traffic Congestion, and Agglomeration: A Gen-
  eral Equilibrium Model." Journal of Urban Economics 52(1): 26-52.

Stanton, Christopher T., and Pratyush Tiwari. 2021. "Housing Consumption and
  the Cost of Remote Work." National Bureau of Economic Research working paper 28483.

Wheaton, William C. 1974. "A Comparative Static Analysis of Urban Spatial Structure."
 Journal of Economic Theory 9(2): 223-237.

Wilson, John D., 1999. "Theories of Tax Competition." National Tax Journal 52(2): 269-
 304.




                                            35
                     Figure A1. Home Price and Rental Rate Dynamics, Heteroskedasticity-Robust Standard Errors, 2017­2020




36
                                        (a) Price                                                                         (b) Rent
     Note: Figure plots the coefficients and 95 confidence intervals of the event study estimates. Outcomes are the Zillow Home Value Indices and Zillow Observed Rent
     Indices for all homes and condos/co-ops between January 2017 and December 2020. Control variables include county fixed effects, census division-by-year fixed
     effects, and the interactions between month-year dummies with a set of county covariates, including WFH potential, percent of population with a college education,
     MSA productivity, MSA quality of life, percent of MSA land steeper than 15 degrees, and the Wharton Residential Land-Use Regulation Index. Standard errors
     are robust to heteroskedasticity.
      Figure A2. Intracity Home Price Gradients, Heteroskedasticity-Robust Standard Errors,
                                          2017­2020




Note: Figure plots the coefficients and 95 confidence intervals of the event study estimates. Outcomes are intracity
home price gradients based authors' calculations. In the first stage, we estimate the intracity home price gradient
of each MSA with at least 30 zip-codes by separately regressing log zip-code-level Zillow Home Value Index on log
distance to the central business district, a set of exogenous amenities (log distances to nearest lake, river, and coastline;
the average annual precipitation 1971­2000, January minimum temperature, and July maximum temperature), average
slope, and a set of proxies for endogenous amenities (log population density and log average household income). In
the second stage, we estimate an event study equation by regressing the estimated intracity home price gradients on
the interactions of month-year dummies and principal-city counties' WFH potential, controlling for MSA fixed effects
and month-year fixed effects. Standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity.




                                                            37
