                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    NOT TOO LATE: IMPROVING ACADEMIC OUTCOMES AMONG ADOLESCENTS


                                         Jonathan Guryan
                                           Jens Ludwig
                                         Monica P. Bhatt
                                          Philip J. Cook
                                       Jonathan M.V. Davis
                                          Kenneth Dodge
                                          George Farkas
                                        Roland G. Fryer Jr
                                           Susan Mayer
                                          Harold Pollack
                                        Laurence Steinberg


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2021




This paper was made possible by the generous support of the Abbvie, Bank of America, Laura and John
Arnold, Paul M. Angell, Edna McConnell Clark, Crown, Lloyd A. Fry, Joyce, Logan, MacArthur, Polk,
Pritzker-Pucker, Smith Richardson, and Spencer foundations, the Chicago Center for Youth Violence
Prevention, EquiTrust, JPAL-North America, the Illinois Criminal Justice Information Authority, the
city of Chicago, grant number 2012-JU-FX-0019 from the Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency
Prevention, Office of Justice Programs, US Department of Justice, and award number 1P01HD076816
from the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development of the
National Institutes of Health. We are also grateful for operating grants to the University of Chicago
Crime Lab from Susan and Tom Dunn, Ira Handler, and the MacArthur, McCormick and Pritzker-
Pucker foundations. For vital assistance in making this work possible, we thank Chad Adams, Roseanna
Ander, Barbara Byrd-Bennett, Trayvon Braxton, Valerie Chang, Akeshia Craven, Rukiya
Curvey-Johnson, Gretchen Cusick, Aarti Dhupelia, Tony DiVittorio, Mayor Rahm Emanuel,
Wendy Fine,
Jaureese Gaines, Michael Goldstein, Antonio Gutierrez, Craig Howard, Tim Jackson, Barbara
Kelley, Ed Klunk, Timothy Knowles, Tim Lavery, Stig Leschly, Jonathan Lewin, Daniel Lopez,
Julia Quinn, Arnaldo Rivera, Janey Rountree, Alan Safran, Leonetta Sanders, Maitreyi Sistla,
Julia Stasch, Sara Stoelinga, Elizabeth Swanson, Robert Tracy, Karen Van Ausdal, and John
Wolf, as well as the staffs of the Chicago Public Schools system, Match Education, and Saga
Education. Thanks to Jeffrey Broom, Sarah Dickson, Kylie Klein, Stacy Norris, and Jared Sell for
their help in accessing the data we analyze here, and to Nathan Hess, Stephanie Kirmer, Daniel
Kowalski, Khoa Nguyen, Kelsey Reid, Michael Rosenbaum, Catherine Schwarz, Noah Sebek,
Robert Webber, Nathan Weil, and David Welgus for their invaluable contributions to the data
analysis. For useful suggestion we thank seminar participants at New York University and the
Institute for Research on Poverty at the University of Wisconsin. Points of view or opinions in
this document are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the US
Department of Justice, National Institutes of Health or any other funder. Any errors are of
course our own. This RCT was registered in the American Economic Association Registry for
randomized control trials under trial number AEARCTR-0000041. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Jonathan Guryan, Jens Ludwig, Monica P. Bhatt, Philip J. Cook, Jonathan M.V.
Davis, Kenneth Dodge, George Farkas, Roland G. Fryer Jr, Susan Mayer, Harold Pollack, and
Laurence Steinberg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.
Not Too Late: Improving Academic Outcomes Among Adolescents
Jonathan Guryan, Jens Ludwig, Monica P. Bhatt, Philip J. Cook, Jonathan M.V. Davis, Kenneth
Dodge, George Farkas, Roland G. Fryer Jr, Susan Mayer, Harold Pollack, and Laurence Steinberg
NBER Working Paper No. 28531
March 2021
JEL No. H0,I0,I20,I23,I3,J24,Z18

                                           ABSTRACT

There is growing concern that it is too difficult or costly to substantially improve the academic
skills of children who are behind in school once they reach adolescence. But perhaps what we
have tried in the past relies on the wrong interventions, failing to account for challenges like the
increased variability in academic needs during adolescence, or heightened difficulty of classroom
management. This study tests the effects of one intervention that tries to solve both problems by
simplifying the teaching task: individualized, intensive, in-school tutoring. A key innovation by
the non-profit we study (Saga Education) is to identify how to deliver "high-impact tutoring" at
relatively low cost ($3,500 to $4,300 per participant per year). Our first randomized controlled
trial (RCT) of Saga's tutoring model with 2,633 9th and 10th grade students in Chicago public
schools found participation increased math test scores by 0.16 standard deviations (SDs) and
increased grades in math and non-math courses. We replicated these results in a separate RCT
with 2,710 students and found even larger math test score impacts--0.37 SD--and similar grade
impacts. These effects persist into future years, although estimates for high school graduation are
imprecise. The treatment effects do not appear to be the result of a generic "mentoring effect" or
of changes in social-emotional skills, but instead seem to be caused by changes in the instructional
"technology" that students received. The estimated benefit-cost ratio is comparable to many
successful model early-childhood programs.

Jonathan Guryan                                  Monica P. Bhatt,
Northwestern University                          University of Chicago
Institute for Policy Research                    Crime and Education Labs
2040 Sheridan Road                               33 North LaSalle Street
Evanston, IL 60208                               Suite 1600
and NBER                                         Chicago, IL 60602
j-guryan@northwestern.edu                        mbhatt@uchicago.edu

Jens Ludwig                                      Philip J. Cook
Harris School of Public Policy                   Professor Emeritus of Economics
University of Chicago                            Sanford School of Public Policy
1307 East 60th Street                            Duke University
Chicago, IL 60637                                PO Box 90312
and NBER                                         Durham, NC 27708
jludwig@uchicago.edu                             and NBER
                                                 pcook@duke.edu
Jonathan M.V. Davis                Susan Mayer
516 PLC 1285                       Harris School of Public Policy
University of Oregon               University of Chicago
Eugene, OR 97403                   Chicago, IL 60637
jonmvdavis@gmail.com               smayer@uchicago.edu

Kenneth Dodge                      Harold Pollack
Sanford School of Public Policy    University of Chicago
Duke University                    School of Social Service Administration
dodge@duke.edu                     969 East 60th Street
                                   Chicago, IL 60637
George Farkas                      haroldp@uchicago.edu
University of California, Irvine
2070 Education, Mail Code 5500     Laurence Steinberg
Irvine, CA 92697                   Department of Psychology,
gfarkas@uci.edu                    Temple University
                                   1701 N. 13th Street
Roland G. Fryer Jr                 Philadelphia, PA 19122
Department of Economics            lds@temple.edu
Harvard University
Littauer Center 208
Cambridge, MA 02138
rfryer@fas.harvard.edu




                                     1
    I.       INTRODUCTION

         Education is one of the American public's top priorities, but both the data and public

opinion suggest there is room for improvementperhaps especially for adolescents. 1 The failure

to improve schooling outcomes at a pace to keep up with technological change has harmed

economic growth, leading to a dramatic rise in the returns to schooling over time (Goldin and

Katz, 2008). Long-term trends in test scores seem more encouraging for relatively younger than

older students (Hanushek et al., 2020). Furthermore, disparities in achievement test scores

between students who are academically succeeding versus struggling seem to grow rather than

shrink as children progress through school (Cascio and Staiger, 2012). Studies of educational

interventions for teens tend to yield much more disappointing results than of interventions for

young children. 2 And parents of public high school students are notably less satisfied with the

schools their children attend than are parents of elementary-school children. 3

         The relatively disappointing academic outcomes and interventions for teens relative to

younger children has raised the concern that perhaps it is too late to substantially increase human

capital and remediate disparities once children reach adolescence, due to causes that are

fundamental and unavoidable. For example, developmental plasticity declines from early to




1
  See for example https://www.pewresearch.org/politics/2019/01/24/publics-2019-priorities-economy-health-care-
education-and-security-all-near-top-of-list/ and https://news.gallup.com/poll/1612/education.aspx
2
  For young children, examples include Perry Preschool (Schweinhart et al., 2005; Belfield et al., 2006; Heckman et
al., 2010) and Carolina Abecedarian (Campbell et al., 2002; Barnett & Masse, 2007). A number of studies of state-
sponsored universal pre-K programs have used a research design that exploits a regression discontinuity in age (see
for example Gormley & Phillips, 2008). For a discussion of some concerns about that design, and a review of the
evidence on the federal Head Start program, see Ludwig and Phillips (2007) and Gibbs, Ludwig and Miller (2013).
For excellent reviews of the literature for older children see Carneiro & Heckman (2003) or Heckman (2012).
3
  Data from the 2012 National Household Education Survey shows that in public school districts where the district
assigns schools (as opposed to for instance choice districts), 66% of parents with children 5-10 are very satisfied
with the school their child attends compared to 47% of those with children 14-18 (Cheng and Peterson 2017).

                                                         3
middle childhood, although may increase again during adolescence (Shonkoff & Phillips, 2000;

Steinberg, 2014; Bonnie & Backes, 2019). Motivation becomes more challenging as students

age, as reflected by increased prevalence of disruptive behaviors. 4 The growing variability of

academic achievement as children age means the variability of what students need within a given

classroom is also heightened for older children (Cascio and Staiger, 2012). No wonder teachers

report that the two most challenging parts of their job are individualizing instruction and

classroom management. 5 Thus Carneiro and Heckman's (2003, p. 90) pessimistic conclusion:

"The return to [human capital] investment in the young is apparently quite high; the return to

investment in the old and less able is quite low."

        The hypothesis tested in this paper is that the limited success of previous efforts to

improve academic outcomes for adolescents is not because success is impossible, but rather

because of a reliance in the past on the wrong intervention approach, or "technology." 6 In some

sense an instructional technology that works with students of any age has long been known:

intensive tutoring. This method of instruction dates back at least to the 15th century at Oxford.

Randomized experiments comparing tutoring to classroom instruction confirm the former to be




4
  Disciplinary actions in school increase with age (https://nces.ed.gov/programs/raceindicators/indicator_RDA.asp).
This is not just a function of changing disciplinary standards by schools since we also see increases in absences
(https://www2.ed.gov/datastory/chronicabsenteeism.html) and arrests, including for serious offenses where
presumably the discretion of police to arrest a suspect or not is relatively limited.
5
  For example in the School and Staffing Survey (SASS), 43% of new elementary school teachers and 47% of new
secondary school teachers say they felt not at all prepared or only somewhat prepared to deal with classroom
management; 41% of new elementary school teachers and 44% of new secondary-school teachers said they were
unprepared or only somewhat prepared to differentiate instruction. (From original author tabulations of SASS data).
6
  Examples include generally disappointing studies of the Job Corps (Long et al., 1981), Catholic schools, which
may increase graduation but do not seem to increase achievement test scores (Grogger and Neal, 2000, Altonji,
Elder and Taber, 2005), and accountability or school voucher programs (Rouse and Barrow, 2006). Studies of
increased school funding typically document the effects of changes across all grades, which makes it somewhat
difficult to determine the impacts on adolescents specifically (see for example the review in Jackson, 2018).

                                                        4
"the best learning conditions we can devise" (Bloom, 1984, p. 4). The challenge to widespread

implementation has not been a pedagogical problem so much as an economic onethat is, cost.

         The key insight behind the specific educational intervention we study here, developed by

Saga Education, is that being a successful tutor requires fewer specialized skills and less on-the-

job-learning than does classroom teaching.7 This insight expands the applicant pool, and also

means that the people hiredtutors--can be successful right away (rather than the usual three-

year learning curve for classroom teachers8). Saga therefore uses a very different HR model from

regular education: It hires people to tutor for just one year for a modest stipend, as a sort of

public service. Rather than boost teacher quality, which has been a key focus of much education

policy, Saga simplifies what instructors are asked to do by changing the teaching task itself.

         We carried out two separate large-scale randomized controlled trials (RCTs) with

thousands of teens who essentially formed a representative sample of students enrolled in some

of Chicago's (and hence America's) most economically disadvantaged neighborhood schools.

We focused on math because failing core math classes is a driver of dropout in Chicago

(Allensworth and Easton, 2005), because math is so important for success in school and later

earnings (Duncan et al., 2007), and because math skills for school-age children may be more

responsive to school-based interventions than reading skills (e.g. Fryer, 2014, 2017).

         In the first RCT ("study 1"), our research team randomly assigned 2,633 male youths in

summer 2013 who were rising 9th or 10th graders to a treatment group that was offered Saga




7
  At the time we initially started working with Saga tutoring they were part of the Match charter school organization
of Boston, Massachusetts. In 2015, executives from Match Education spun off from Match to form SAGA Innovations,
a national non-profit that aims to bring this tutoring model into traditional public school systems across the country.
SAGA Innovations changed their name to Saga Education in 2019.
8
  See e.g. Rivkin, Hanushek and Kain, 2005; Boyd, Grossman, Lankford, Loeb and Wykoff, 2006; Clotfelter, Ladd
and Vigdor, 2007 and 2010; Goldhaber, 2007; and Kane and Staiger, 2008.

                                                          5
tutoring or a control group that was not. Students were drawn from 12 CPS high schools mostly

on the west and south sides of Chicago. After one year of program participation the intention-to-

treat effect (ITT) on standardized math achievement test scores is 0.08 standard deviations (SD),

and the treatment-on-the-treated (TOT) effect is 0.16 SD. This gain is about what the average

high school student learns in a year, so the intervention (roughly speaking) doubles the annual

math test score gain. 9 These gains in test scores do not appear to be the result of tutors narrowly

teaching to the test; we also see a TOT effect on grades in regular classroom math courses equal

to 0.56 points (on a 0 to 4-point scale), and a decline in math course failures of 49%.

        Motivated in part to see if these results could be replicated at this large scale, in the

summer of 2014 we randomized a separate sample of 2,710 9th and 10th graders ("study 2"). The

TOT effect on math scores after one year is roughly twice as large as in study 1 (0.37 SD). We

also find sizable positive effects on math grades in study 2 similar to the findings for study 1.

        What is the mechanism behind these effects? Given that past efforts to improve meta-

cognition and social-emotional skills for adolescents and young adults have been more

encouraging than efforts to improve academic skills (for example Blattman et al., 2017, Heller et

al., 2017), one might wonder whether tutoringwhich puts youth in close contact with a pro-

social adult every dayis just operating through a generic "mentoring effect." But survey data

show no detectable effects on whether youth report feeling close to or supported by adults in

school or out of school, or on grit, conscientiousness, or locus of control. Nor do we find

evidence consistent with the idea of classroom management being the key mechanism in the

sense that the impacts are no larger in schools where disciplinary incidents in classrooms at




9
 Reardon (2011) finds in the NAEP that the average high school student's scores in reading and math increase by
around 0.6 to 0.7 standard deviations over 4 years, or approximately 0.15-0.18 standard deviations per year.

                                                        6
baseline are more common. We do find gains in whether students like math and care about their

math gradesmediators closely tied to math instruction and achievement specifically.

        We also present suggestive findings consistent with, although certainly not definitive

proof for, better `personalization' of instruction as a relevant mechanism. Some studies find

classroom teachers orient material towards the top third of the classroom (Bloom, 1984), 10 which

would suggest students at the bottom of the baseline achievement distribution might benefit most

from personalized instruction with tutoring. But identification of this pathway is complicated by

signs of potential `floor effects' in the achievement tests administered by CPS. To explore floor

effects (the possibility that students learn more math, but their skills are still below the easiest

items included on a given test) we estimate heterogeneous treatment effects using the machine

learning approach of Athey, Tibshirani and Wager (2019). About one-quarter of the sample have

large gains in math grades, but no gain in math test scores, consistent with floor effects on the

tests. (This could simply reflect increased effort, but we see no signs of that in survey data.)

        We then exploit the fact that we administered our own math tests as well, for which we

have item-level data. When we rank-order items by difficulty and estimate effects for specific

items we see suggestive (but imprecisely estimated) indications that students with below-median

baseline scores gain most on the easiest items, while above-median students gain most on harder

items. This suggestive result is consistent with Duflo et al.'s (2011) finding that personalization

by tracking improved learning outcomes for students in both the top and bottom halves of the

achievement distribution. 11




10
   Previous research suggests there can be mismatches between the developmental needs of youth and their social
environments, also called "stage-environment fit" (see Hunt, 1975; Eccles et al. 1993). The same sort of mismatch
may occur for youths' academic needs as well (see for example, Engel, Claessens and Finch 2012).
11
   See Figlio & Page, 2002 for a similar finding among initially lower-performing students in the US.

                                                       7
         One way to read this study is as a program evaluation of an intervention that substantially

improves learning of adolescents, at a cost of $3,500 to $4,300 per year per student. 12 (By way of

comparison average CPS spending per pupil is about $17,000 per year.) 13 The ultimate cost

effectiveness of the program depends on whether impacts persist and can help students who are

behind get back up to grade level to engage effectively with regular classroom instruction, which

affects whether students need this support consistently or just on a one-time basis. When we look

at 11th grade outcomes, a year or two after tutoring, we see persistent gains in math test scores of

0.22 SD (pooling study 1 and 2) and improved math grades of 0.18 GPA points. The point

estimate for graduation is positive, 1.9 percentage points, but imprecisely estimated; we cannot

rule out declines of up to 4.8 points or gains as large as 8.6 points. Our findings echo Banerjee et

al. (2007)'s study in India of gains from substituting a simpler teaching task for teacher skill. 14

         A second way to read this study is as a test of whether it is really too late to substantially

improve academic outcomes of children who have reached adolescence. We find it is possible to

perhaps double, or even triple, how much math students learn in a year, for something like one-

fifth of the average cost of schooling per pupil per year. These sizable gains are consistent with

studies of `no-excuses' charter schools for high school students, which, interestingly, also often




12
   At the time of this intervention (2013-2015) the per-pupil cost of Saga was approximately $3,800 with a
defensible range of $3,500 to $4,300, as stated. Subsequently Saga has dropped its charge to districts from $3,800
per-pupil (2013-2015) to $3,100 per-pupil (2015-2019) to now $1,800 per-pupil as of the time of release of this
paper by obtaining an AmeriCorps subsidy of $15,000 per fellow and using a blended-learning model, in which the
student:tutor ratio is 4:1 in lieu of 2:1 and students spend half their time on a learning platform, e.g. ALEKS.
13
   This is "operating expenditure" excluding summer school, adult education, capital expenditures and debt.
https://www.illinoisreportcard.com/district.aspx?source=environment&source2=perstudentspending&Districtid=150
16299025
14
   Banerjee et al. (2007) found that assigning third and fourth graders in India who are far behind to receive
instruction in remedial skills for two hours per day in a classroom of 15-20 students (who are thus fairly
homogenous in academic level) increased test scores by around 0.60 SD. The instructors for these classes were
women from the local community who were trained for just a short period of time and paid only $10-15 per month.
The effects of a computer-assisted program that also individualized instruction were found to increase test scores by
up to 0.47 SD after the second year of intervention, although impacts from both strategies were short-lived.

                                                         8
include intensive or `high-impact' tutoring as an element (Fryer, 2014; Fryer 2015; Dobbie &

Fryer, 2019; Tuttle, et al., 2015; Angrist et al., 2016; Abdulkadiroglu, et al., 2017). Extrapolating

these test score impacts to earnings gains based on the best estimates in the literature implies that

the benefit-cost ratio of the program is comparable to both exemplar early childhood model

programs, like the Abecedarian Project and the Perry Preschool Program, as well as larger-scale

efforts to improve outcomes for younger children such as the Tennessee Star class size reduction

experiment.

   II.      THE INTERVENTION

         We selected Saga Education's tutoring model to study in part because of its low cost

relative to the intensity of the intervention. One major innovation is the recognition that the

instructional "technology" of tutoring is quite different from that of a classroom, and so the set of

skills and experiences required to be a successful tutor are plausibly different. Compared to

regular classroom instruction, one-on-one (or two-on-one) tutoring greatly simplifies the

instructional task, expanding the set of people who can be successful instructors. Teachers learn

how to individualize instruction or handle classroom management usually through extensive pre-

service pedagogical training as well as on-the-job learning over the first several years of

classroom teaching (Rockoff, 2004; Clotfelter et al., 2010; Henry et al., 2011). But the

importance of that prior training and on-the-job learning is plausibly less for tutoring.

         This insight enables Saga to expand the applicant pool to anyone who both possesses

strong math skills and are willing to devote one year to public servicefor example, recent

college graduates, retirees or career-switchersbut do not necessarily have extensive prior

training or experience as teachers. A school in which classroom teachers cycle in and out after

just one year would face significant challenges. As with other public service programs the tutors



                                                  9
were willing to serve at relatively low wages ($16,000 plus benefits for the nine-month academic

year during the study period, $20,000 plus benefits today). As with Banerjee et al. (2007), Saga

substitutes a very different teaching method for many dimensions of what previous studies call

"teacher skill" or "quality" (such as teaching experience or extensive pedagogical training). This

substitution makes high-dosage tutoring more feasible from a cost perspective.

        The tutors were mostly recent college graduates hired because they had both strong math

skills (according to Saga's screening assessment) and strong interpersonal skills (as revealed by

interviews that also involved delivering a mock tutoring session). Hired tutors have higher SAT

scores than what other studies have reported for big-city public school classroom teachers (Jacob

et al., 2018). 15 But Saga tutors neither had formal teacher training nor were licensed Illinois

teachers. The Saga intervention is similar in spirit to how charters often hire teachers with less

experience and formal teaching credentials than normal public schools in exchange for smaller

class sizes (Lake, Bowen, & Demeritt, 2012). Saga hired 139 total tutors across both study years

out of an estimated pool of approximately 1,200 applicants. Roughly half of tutors hired were

Black or Latinx, and approximately 50% were female. 16 We do not know how many tutors it

would be possible to hire before effectiveness declines, but over this range there is little

difference between tutors at the top vs. bottom of Saga's ranked hiring list (Davis et al., 2017).

        For our study 1, described further below, Saga delivered this tutoring intervention in CPS

starting in the 2013-14 academic year (AY). Each tutor participated in approximately 100 hours


 A comparison of Saga Tutors SAT scores from AY2016-17 and AY2017-18 in Chicago reveals that average math
15

SAT scores were 707 compared with the average math SAT scores for new NYC teachers of 613 reported in
Rockoff, Jacob, Kane, and Staiger (2008). We see similar patterns for English scores.
16
   Of the 54 Saga tutors hired for study 1 in AY2013-14, 18 were Black and 8 were Latinx. Nineteen tutors spoke
fluent Spanish, and every school with a high proportion of Spanish speakers had multiple bilingual tutors. Of the
85 Saga tutors hired in AY2014-15, 23 were Black, 9 were Latinx and about a quarter spoke fluent Spanish. There
was also a significant increase in the percentage of tutors with advanced degrees for the second year, with nearly
20% of tutors possessing an advanced degree, in comparison to 7% in AY2013-14.

                                                       10
of training prior to the start of the school year (full-time for four weeks during the summer).

Studentsas part of their regular class schedulewere assigned to participate in a tutoring

session for one class period every day in addition to their regular math class. For study 2

participants, tutoring typically replaced an elective course such as art or physical education. For

study 1 9th -gradersi.e., the majority of the study 1 sampletutoring replaced a second hour of

Algebra ("double-dose"). This comparison is important to keep in mind when interpreting results

from study 1 versus study 2. The total Saga contact hours could be up to 140 per year. Each tutor

worked with two students at a time during each session, focusing on Saga's Algebra curriculum,

but teaching foundational mathematics skills where needed to access these Algebraic concepts.

Study 1 provided students with up to two years of intervention, whereas study 2 ran for one year.

         Each Saga class period in general followed a set routine. A student would first do four to

five minutes of warm-up problems before receiving 40 minutes of tutoring on material tailored to

that student. Finally, the student would complete one to three problems designed to assess

understanding of the material covered during the class period. So, about half of each session

focused on remediating skill deficits, for which Saga developed its own curriculum, and the other

half was tied to what students were learning in their regular math classrooms. 17 Saga used

frequent internal formative assessments of student progress to individualize instruction. 18 In

addition, Saga site directors worked with mathematics teachers on a weekly basis to understand

what standards were being taught in mainstream math classes so the Saga tutorial covered




17
   For the Fryer study, the tutoring curriculum was reverse-engineered from Texas state standards by Fryer's EdLabs.
For this project, an Illinois-certified math teacher helped develop curricula based on Illinois state standards.
18
   These include one- to three-question mini-assessments of the day's lesson, which allows the tutor to revise the next
day's lesson based on the prior day's learning; tests before and after each of the seven to 10 "course units" Saga has
divided the year up into, which show tutors how much review time to allow for the first two-three weeks of the next
unit); 80 item quarterly proficiency assessments, which tutors use to target areas to work on until the student scores at
least 90%; and site-specific norm-referenced tests (which will involve interim assessments of the tests CPS uses).

                                                           11
complementary concepts. Saga tutors also discussed general study skills with students as part of

the formal program (such as structuring how to approach a difficult problem by breaking it

down), as well as through informal discussions. Tutors taught six periods a day, and each school

was overseen by a site director who handled behavioral issues in the tutoring room and

communication with school staff, and offered daily feedback and professional development. 19

        The control group in our study sample was eligible for all the status quo supports in the

CPS high schools in our study. These services include No Child Left Behind (NCLB) funded

supplemental educational services (SES) tutoring, which is of much lower dosage than Saga

tutoring (and without the same structure, curriculum, or supervision). For example, for study 1

we estimate about 25% of control students in our schools received SES tutoring, which involves

21 hours of writing tutoring per year and 20 hours of math tutoring (i.e., a bit over one-half hour

per week of math tutoring, compared to 45-50 minutes per day with Saga); previous non-

experimental studies of SES tutoring in Chicago find little detectable effect on math scores. 20

While these schools include a variety of other programs (both treatment and control groups are

eligible for these other programs) none of them focus on academic skills the way Saga does. 21

        Fryer (2014) examined the effects of Saga tutoring as part of his larger study introducing

five elements of successful `no excuses' charter school practices into public schools in Houston


19
   Each site director has some combination of relevant experience, including math teaching / tutoring, mentoring,
program direction, nonprofit management, public speaking, and training of adults, and is trained in the Saga
model. Tutors complete a daily report to the site director; here, they note each student's progress and convey any
issues.
20
        The      most      recent     evaluation       of      SES      in      Chicago       is     for    2005-6
(http://sesiq2.wceruw.org/documents/chicago_ses.pdf). During 2005-6 school year, around 24 percent of all eligible
Chicago Public School students (about 70% of students who applied for SES services) received SES services.
21
   Eight of the schools also include GEAR UP services, which focus on preparing for college (essay writing and
ACT prep). Four schools include Youth Guidance's Project Prepare, another college-readiness program (see https://
www.youth-guidance.org/youth-workforce-development/#projectprepare), four of the schools provide Peace
Circles to help youth resolve disputes, 11 of the schools include the Mikva Challenge, which focuses on civic
education (http://www.mikvachallenge.org/), and one school includes buildOn, which focuses on involving youth
in community service (https://www.buildon.org/our-work/buildon-us/).


                                                       12
and several other districts. 22 Saga tutoring did not appear to have large effects on test scores

among 6th grade students beyond the effects of the other charter practices, but did appear to have

more pronounced effects on test scores among 9th grade students, on the order of 0.32 SD,

although high schools could not be randomly assigned. 23

     III.      DATA, RANDOMIZATION AND STUDY SAMPLES

     A. Data

            One way we measure academic performance is from longitudinal student-level records

maintained by CPS. They capture basic demographics, enrollment, attendance, grades in each

course, and disciplinary actions. These data also include achievement test scores for the exams

that CPS administered to 9th and 10th graders in our study yearsthe 9th grade EXPLORE and

10th grade PLAN tests, which are developed by ACT, Inc. We have these CPS data at baseline

for all students in our two study samples. There is some missingness in post-randomization data

(Appendix Table 1), which for school attendance equals 4.4% for controls and 6.2% for

treatment, and somewhat higher for grades (14.6% vs. 14.8%) and test scores (29.8% vs. 29.5%),

presumably in part because of a combination of students dropping out, transferring to suburban

or private schools, and missing school on testing days. Attrition rates are similar for study 2.

Treatment-control differences in missingness are not statistically significant.




22
   Four of the five charter school reformsincreased instructional time, replacing almost all principals and half of
teachers, frequent formative assessments, and a culture of high expectationswere administered in all grades, while
tutoring in math was given only to students in selected grades for cost reasons in the main Houston study.
23
   For older students a quasi-experimental design was used that exploited whether students were enrolled in a
treatment school during the pre-treatment year or were zoned to be in that school. The contrast in math gains
between grades that received tutoring (6th and 9th) versus did not (7th and 10th) was on the order of 0.09 to 0.40 SD.
Separately, Fryer and Howard-Noveck (2020) study the effects of high-dosage reading tutoring for middle-school
students and find statistically significant gains in attendance but not reading scores overall, although for Black
students specifically reading scores increased by 0.09 SD.

                                                         13
         From Saga we obtained tutoring attendance records, tutor characteristics, and student

scores on Saga's own internal math assessments. To measure effects on criminal behavior, we

used juvenile justice and adult criminal justice arrest data from the Chicago Police Department.

         Our final data source comes from two waves of in-person surveys carried out for our

research team by the Institute for Social Research (ISR) at the University of Michigan. We draw

on existing survey questions that have been used in previous studies of youth, including the

Moving to Opportunity survey. 24 The first wave of surveys was carried out for the study 1

sample mostly in May-June of study year 1, with some surveys in early fall of study year 2. We

selected a sub-sample of 881 youth and surveyed 663 for effective response rates of 88.2% for

treatment students and 90.6% for control students. 25 We carried out another wave of in-person

surveys with 1,238 youth in the study 1 sample in the fall after the second intervention year

(2014-15), with effective response rates of 90.1% for the treatment group and 89.1% for controls.

         These surveys also included math achievement tests that we administered to help mitigate

missingness in the CPS test data. These additional math tests were based mostly on items from

the achievement tests generated for the US Department of Education's NELS:88 8th grade wave.

We supplemented the 8th grade NELS:88 math questions with items from the 5th grade wave of

the Early Childhood Longitudinal Sample math assessment to broaden the range of math topics

the assessment covered to help address possible "floor effects." 26 We return to this point below.

     B. Sample selection and randomization




24
   See https://www.nber.org/mtopublic/
25
   ISR used two-phase sampling: after interviewing 70% of the survey sample frame they selected a random sub-
sample for intensive follow-up. Our analyses employ sampling weights to account for this design.
26
   We had the Educational Testing Service (ETS), which designed the tests for the NELS:88, run three-parameter item
response theory (IRT) models (Lord, 1980) on math test score results to allow us to create scale scores and also place
the students in our study in the NELS metric so that we could compare to the NELS sample.

                                                         14
        We invited 30 of the larger high schools in CPS to a briefing about the study. Of those

30, 12 schools, primarily located on the south and west sides of Chicago, signed up to participate

in study 1. Over the summer, we used administrative data to identify male students expected to

attend each school that fall. Because Saga Education's tutoring capacity varied by school and

sometimes by grade, we carried out random assignment conditional on school-by-grade

"randomization blocks" and varied the probability of assignment to the treatment condition

across randomization blocks. 27 All analyses control for randomization-block fixed effects. We

randomized a total of 2,633 students for study 1 starting the summer before the program year,

with 2,103 of those randomized showing up in study schools that fall. This represents 86.4% of

the 2,434 total 9th and 10th grade male students enrolled in our study schools.

        In our study 1 schools we also independently randomized students in the sample to

receive the meta-cognitive intervention studied in Heller et al. (2017), Youth Guidance's

Becoming a Man (BAM) program. Because that randomization was independent of assignment

to Saga tutoring, controlling or not controlling for BAM assignment has no impact on the

estimates of Saga effects reported here. Those BAM results are reported in Bhatt et al. (2021).

        For study 2, we randomized a sample of 2,645 students in 15 schools (12 of which were

also in study 1). 28 Study 2 students included a new cohort of incoming 9th grade male students in

14 schools, a cohort of 9th and 10th grade male students in one school, and a cohort of 9th and 10th

grade girls in seven schools. 29 Of those randomized starting in the summer before the program




27
   Most randomization blocks had treatment-assignment probability between 0.45 and 0.60 (range 0.25 to 0.73).
28
   For study 2 we randomized a total of 2,710 students. However, due to student mobility and other factors N=65
students were randomized into study 2 twice, resulting in the 2,645 "unique" students randomized noted here. See
Table 1 for more details on this.
29
   The range of treatment-assignment probabilities across blocks in study 2 was 0.44 to 0.80.

                                                        15
year, 1,823 (69%) wound up attending a study 2 school. 30 The number of randomized students

who showed up at these study schools comprised 36% of the 5,068 total 9th and 10th grade

students enrolled in study 2 schools.

     C. Sample Characteristics

        Table 1 provides some context for our study sample. The average test score on the

EXPLORE and PLAN tests among all CPS students is close to the national median. CPS

administered some of these tests in the spring, but they are normed against U.S. students taking

fall tests, so CPS students had more days of school before the test than the national sample used

to generate the percentiles. In comparison, the average test scores of students in our study

schools are 9 to 12 percentile points lower than the CPS average. Looking within the study

schools, the specific students in the study have similar average test scores to the schoolwide

averages of the schools they attend. The implication is our sample has scores below the CPS

average, in contrast to many studies of `no excuses' charters where applicants tend to have

slightly better baseline scores than the host school system (e.g., Angrist et al., 2013).

        Table 2 shows that the study 1 sample is split about evenly between Black and Latinx

youth. Almost 90% are eligible for free or reduced lunch (FRL). The average GPA the year

before our study was 2.11 on a 4-point scale. The study 2 sample is similar on these

characteristics but included more Black and fewer Latinx students (and included female

students). Randomization appears to have been successful. We carry out an F-test of the null

hypothesis that baseline characteristics are jointly the same across treatment and control groups




30
  The study sample includes 629 girls who showed up at the study 2 schools (out of 799 randomly assigned), which
equals 26.4% of all 9th and 10th grade female students in these schools, and 1,194 male students who showed up in
study 2 schools (out of 1,847 randomly assigned), which accounts for 44.5% of the total 9th and 10th grade male
students in our study schools.

                                                       16
by regressing a treatment-group indicator against all variables in Table 2, separately for studies 1

and 2, controlling for randomization blocks. The p-value for study 1 is p=0.832, and for study 2

is p=0.893.

     IV.      ANALYSIS PLAN

           Because of our randomized experimental design, our analysis plan is straightforward. We

estimate both the intent-to-treat (ITT) effect and the effect of treatment-on-the-treated (TOT).

The ITT estimate comes from estimating equation (1):

                                       (1)  = 0 + 1  +  2 +  + 

where  is an outcome for student i measured after random assignment,  is an indicator for

having been offered Saga tutoring,  is a full set of randomization block fixed effects,  is a

random error term, and  is a set of baseline controls to improve precision. 31 To ensure the

standard errors we calculate are not misleadingly small as an artifact of finite sampling issues

(Young, 2019), we also report p-values from a non-parametric permutation test (Efron &

Tibshirani, 1993). We randomly re-assigned the treatment indicator  = 100,000 times, storing

the t-test statistic (T) in each replication, then calculating the share of replications where this
                                                                                         1
exceeds the t-test statistic from using actual treatment assignment, T*, or              32
                                                                             =1  (|| > | |).


           While missingness of outcomes is balanced across treatment and control, as a sensitivity

analysis we show results that use multiple imputation to fill in missing values. These methods

assume outcomes are missing at random (MAR), i.e. values are unrelated to missingness




31
   These include test scores from the previous year and, in some models, also include age and grade fixed effects, free
or reduced lunch status indicators, an indicator for having a learning disability, indicators for black and Latinx, and
the following academic measures measured in the 2012-13 and 2013-14 baseline school year: GPA, days absent, days
out-of-school suspension, days in-school suspension, and number of disciplinary incidents.
32
   For the permutation tests for the effects of treatment on the treated (TOT), described below, we randomly re-
assign both the endogenous variable for actual treatment participation (D) and treatment assignment (Z).

                                                          17
conditional on observed covariates. We also estimate a quantile regression on median test scores

and impute arbitrarily low scores (zeros) to students missing tests, given baseline data suggest

those with missing tests are disproportionately students with low baseline test scores and grades.

       To estimate the treatment-on-the-treated (TOT) effect we use random assignment (Zi) as

an instrumental variable (IV) for participation (Di), as in equations (2) and (3) (Angrist, Imbens

& Rubin, 1996; Bloom, 1984). The first-stage equation is:

                             (2)  = 0 + 1  +  2 +  + 

where D is an indicator for having participated in Saga tutoring (defined as having participated in

at least one Saga tutoring session), the 's are parameters to be estimated,  is a random error

term, and all other variables are defined as above. The relationship of interest is:

                             (3)  = 0 + 1  +  2 +  + 

       The identifying assumption here is that treatment assignment has no effect on the

outcomes of those assigned to treatment who do not participate. Below we discuss what evidence

we have about one potential threat to this, the stable unit treatment value assumption (SUTVA).

The IV estimate for the parameter 1 in equation (3) is essentially a ratio of two ITT

estimatesthe ITT effect on the outcome of interest in the numerator, and the ITT effect on

participation in the denominator.

       The final methodological issue has to do with statistical inference in the presence of

multiple testing. We group our outcomes into four different "families" that we expect to be

affected in a similar way by the intervention: (1) mathematics achievement; (2) achievement in

other academic subjects; (3) school behavior; and (4) out-of-school behavior (arrests). We




                                                 18
calculate the false discovery rate (FDR) q-value, which is the share of significant estimates

within a family that are expected to be false positives (Benjamini and Hochberg 1995). 33

     V.      MAIN RESULTS

     A. Impacts from one year of intervention

          The participation rate of study 1 youth in year 1 (defined as receipt of any Saga tutoring

at all) was 40.2% for those assigned to treatment and 1.1% for controls, and for study 2 was

36.9% for the treatment group and 7.8% for controls. The most common reasons for non-

participation among those assigned to programming were: (1) we randomized students over the

summer and then they did not wind up attending the expected study school (this was true of

20.1% of the study 1 sample and 31.1% of the study 2 sample), or (2) the student had a

scheduling conflict with a different required class and could not add Saga tutoring as a class in

their schedule. 34 It was rare for students to either decline Saga or ask to be rescheduled out if it

had been added to their schedule by default.

          Table 3 shows the ITT effect in study 1 on math achievement test scores (EXPLORE and

PLAN tests) equals 0.082 standard deviations (SD), with a TOT effect of 0.16 SD. One potential

concern is that perhaps the tutors are just "teaching to the tests" rather than building broad

knowledge. So it is notable that we see changes in math grades as well, with a TOT impact of

0.56 points on a 1-4 GPA scale, relative to the control complier mean (CCM) of 1.63; this

represents a change of about a C- to a C+.35 We also estimate a decline in percent of math

courses failed of 49% of the CCM (-0.087 / 0.179). Other evidence that the treatment effects are



33
   The results are similar if we use the method from Benjamini, Krieger and Yekutieli (2006).
34
   This was most likely to be true for 10th graders, who tend to have less schedule flexibility than 9th graders, who
could replace their second 9th grade algebra "double dose" section with tutoring in study 1.
35
   The College Board lists a 1.7 GPA as C-, 2.0 as C and 2.3 as C+. How to Convert Your GPA to a 4.0 Scale
(collegeboard.org)

                                                          19
not the result of tutors teaching narrowly to the primary CPS accountability tests is that we find

TOT effects of 0.19 SD on the math tests we had ISR administer on our behalf (and which

teachers, tutors and students did not know would happen in advance). These impacts are

statistically significant with respect to the p-value, calculated using either analytic standard

errors (Table 3) or a permutation test (see appendix Table 2), as well as with respect to the FDR

q-value that accounts for the number of tests in this family of outcomes (with the exception of

the math test we gave, with q-value = 0.058).

       The second panel of Table 3 shows that tutoring seems to have some positive spillovers

on outcomes in other subject areas. Reading test scores do not show significant impacts but the

TOT effect on grades in non-math courses was 0.20 points (relative to a CCM of 1.72) and

percentage of courses failed in non-math classes are cut by 23% (-0.056/0.22). There do not

seem to be any detectable spillovers to behavioral outcomes, as shown in the final two panels of

Table 3. However, some of the estimated effects on arrests are large relative to the control

means, though they are not statistically significant. We return to this below.

       Table 4 suggests the learning gains experienced by students in study 1 are not statistical

flukes, or the result of some unusually good program implementation that cannot be replicated,

since the effects are at least as large in study 2. The TOT effects are a 0.37 SD increase on the

EXPLORE and PLAN math tests, a 0.42 point increase in math grades (relative to a CCM of

1.79), and a 44 percent decline (-0.082/0.187) of math courses failed. There are no statistically

significant indications of spillovers on non-math courses once we account for multiple testing.

We see proportionately large changes in arrests, but they are not statistically significant once we

account for the number of hypotheses we are testing within that family of outcomes.




                                                  20
       Table 5 reports the results of pooling together the year 1 data from studies 1 and 2 to

improve statistical power. In the pooled sample, the TOT estimate is a 0.26 SD increase in math

test scores, a 0.52 point increase in math GPA relative to a CCM of 1.67, and a decline of 0.09 in

percentage of math courses failed, equal to 47% of the CCM. Pooling the two studies is

particularly valuable for detecting effects on outcomes that were not the primary target of the

math tutoring intervention. However even with this added power, the proportionately large

changes in measures like arrests and out-of-school suspensions are not quite significant.

   B. Effects from two years of intervention

       Our study 1 cohort was able to participate in up to two years of the intervention, which

raises the question of whether the gains from tutoring each year are cumulative. One challenge is

that, for year 2, the experiment cleanly identifies the ITT effect, but cannot by itself tell us how

much of the ITT effect at the end of year 2 is due to gains among treatment youth who received

tutoring just in year 1 versus in both years 1 and 2. This challenge stems from the fact that we

did not randomly assign dosage duration.

       However, we can logically bound the possible effects. At one extreme, if there was no

persistence in effects of year 1 participation on year 2 test scores, the year 2 test score ITT is due

entirely to year 2 participation. In this case, the effect of two years of Saga can be estimated as a

TOT where participation is defined as receiving Saga tutoring in year 2. This estimate is

presented in the column labeled "Effect of Treatment in Year 2 on Treated (TOT)" in Table 6,

and is equal to 0.84 SD. At the other extreme, if there is no fade out of effects of year 1

participation, the effect of two years of SAGA can be estimated by a TOT where participation is

defined as receiving Saga tutoring in either year 1 or year 2, or both years. This estimate is

shown in table 6 in the column labeled "Effect of Treatment in Year 1 and/or Year 2 on Treated



                                                  21
(TOT)" and is equal to 0.30 SD. The true effect of two years of Saga should be in between these

two bounds. The results suggest the effects are at the least additive in years of participation, and

perhaps more-than-additive as models of dynamic complementarities in learning would suggest.

       Table 7 provides a different look at the effects of two years of intervention on risky

behavior and crime victimization, using data from the second wave of surveys to study 1 youth

given in the fall after year 2 of the program. We focus on the ITT, but the TOT can be calculated

using the bounds described above. We can see in Panel A that there is a reduction in alcohol use

that is statistically significant. We also see suggestive reductions in use of drugs (other than

marijuana) and seriously hurting someone in a fight, though these are not statistically significant

once we account for the number of hypotheses being tested here. There are no detectable effects

on the other measures.

   C. Longer-Term Effects

       Do the effects we measure fade out, persist, or grow over time? Table 8 pools together

data from studies 1 and 2 (for improved power) and examines impacts for students as measured

in what would be each student's 11th grade year if they were not retained in grade. Interpretation

of these results could be complicated if there are treatment-control differences in grade retention,

but we can rule out effects on this outcome of any larger than plus or minus 2 percentage points

in ITT terms. We see TOT effects on math test scores in 11th grade of 0.22 SD, about the same

size as the pooled impact measured at the end of one year of programming, and the TOT on math

grades is 0.18 GPA points, about 35% of the year one effect.

       Table 9 shows that the estimated TOT effect on graduating on time from high school,

pooling the study 1 and 2 samples again, is positive 1.9 percentage points relative to a CCM of

77.2%, but this is imprecisely estimated. The standard error of 3.4 percentage points means we



                                                 22
cannot rule out a decline in graduation rates as large as -4.8 percentage points or an increase as

large as +8.6 points. 36 The point estimate for the effects of tutoring on graduation is close to the

effect we might expect just from higher math test scores alone. This comes from multiplying the

experimental impact on math test scores (0.26 SD from Table 5) by the coefficient of a non-

experimental regression of graduating on time on 9th grade math test scores controlling for

student characteristics. That exercise suggests higher test scores would boost graduation by 3.0

percentage points, well within the confidence interval around our estimated effect of the

intervention on graduation directly. 37

     D. Robustness checks and extensions

        The estimated effects on math outcomes we measure are robust to a range of estimation

decisions; the non-math GPA result (but not classes failed in non-math subjects) is somewhat

more sensitive to these choices. Appendix Table 11 shows what happens when we change the set

of baseline covariates we control for in our regression, while Appendix Tables 12 and 13 show

the results if we drop from the analysis sample students we thought would be in our study

schools during the summer months when we carried out random assignment but wound up not

showing up at those schools in the fall. Appendix Tables 14 and 15 show the results using

multiple imputation for missing outcomes and, for continuous outcomes, quantile regression

where missing values are imputed arbitrarily low (in this case, zero) values.

        The counterfactual condition in our study is easiest to describe for those students enrolled

in 9th grade; for them, the most common alternative to Saga tutoring is the second period of



36
   Results for the study 1 and 2 cohorts separately are in Appendix Tables 8 and 9, while results for the pooled
cohorts and the full set of graduation outcomes that can be calculated using the CPS data are in Appendix Table 10.
37
   That regression uses data on N=24,782 students in 9th grade in AY2013-14 for whom we have valid test scores
and later graduation outcomes (82% of the total cohort of AY2013-14 9th graders). The coefficient on 9th grade math
scores in that regression equals 0.116.

                                                        23
"double dose" algebra provided as part of the regular CPS curriculum in a standard classroom

setting. In contrast, as noted above, for 10th graders the counterfactual treatment is whatever

elective a student chose not to take. Appendix Table 16 shows results for 9th graders are similar

to those from the pooled sample of 9th and 10th graders, consistent with the findings of Nomi and

Allensworth (2009) suggesting the effects of CPS double dose algebra are limited. Appendix

Table 17 replicates this analysis for the sample of 10th graders pooled from both studies.

       The comparison of year 1 impacts of study 1 versus study 2 is complicated somewhat by

the fact that study 2 includes female as well as male students. Appendix Table 18 shows that the

results for female students are not so different from those of the full study 2 results that pool

males and females together. (For completeness Appendix Table 19 presents results for males

only, pooling together data from studies 1 and 2.)

       The racial / ethnic composition of the study 1 sample is also fairly different from the

study 2 sample; 46% of the study 1 sample are Black students, while in study 2, 64% of students

are Black. We test the interaction of treatment with student race/ethnicity but do not see

differential treatment effects for Black and Latinx students (Appendix Tables 21 and 22 present

the pooled ITT and TOT results for this subsample of students, respectively).

       Finally, the SUTVA assumption could be violated if tutoring has some spillover effects

on control students, for example if control students see benefits of higher-achieving peers. If

control students are most affected when exposed to relatively more higher-achieving peers, then

our estimated effect of tutoring on student learning outcomes should be inversely related to the

share of students assigned to treatment within each of our randomization blocks. Figure 1 plots

these randomization-block-specific treatment assignment rates against block-specific TOT

effects. We see that the treatment effect actually seems to increase (rather than decrease) with



                                                  24
larger share of individuals within a block who are randomized to treatment. This is the opposite

relationship we would expect if control group students were benefitting from positive spillovers,

and so at least under this test we do not see evidence for violation of the SUTVA assumption.

    VI.      MECHANISMS

          In this section we explore patterns of impacts across schools, across students, and across

specific items on the math achievement tests, in order to learn more about mechanisms.

    A. Is this an academic or non-academic intervention?

          Given the positive effects this tutoring intervention seems to have, and given that most

previous academic interventions for economically disadvantaged teenagers yield disappointing

results while many non-academic ones yield encouraging results (for example Heller et al.,

2017), one might wonder whether this is actually a non-academic intervention instead? That is,

perhaps the very small student-to-instructor ratio make Saga tutoring effectively a non-academic,

mentoring program instead. One finding already presented cuts against this interpretation. The

academic subject matter of the tutoring was specifically math, and we find significant positive

effects on math test scores, but no effects on reading test scores. An obvious interpretation of this

pattern of results is that the academic subject matter of the tutoring sessions matters; tutoring

students in math helps them to learn math. However, we find effects on non-math grades,

suggesting there is at least some spillover of the learning or behavioral changes induced by

tutoring that affects learning in other areas.

          We investigate this hypothesis further by analyzing treatment effects on student

responses to the first wave of survey questions we administered, at the end of year 1 for study 1.

Panel A of Table 10 shows no statistically significant changes in the number of adults the student

reports having available to talk to in their school, the number of adults they think care about



                                                  25
them, or their willingness to talk to adults in the school. Panels B, C, and D show there are no

statistically significant changes in measures of "grit", conscientiousness, or (after multiple

testing corrections) locus of control, respectively. These results are not different if we look at an

index of outcomes in each family instead. One might wonder if tutoring affects learning by

changing who the student spends time with. Panel E shows the only significant change in our

collection of social-network measures is for Saga participants compared to controls to think it is

less likely their friends think studying is important; whether this is due to an actual change in

friends, or a new appreciation of what it means to take studying seriously, is not clear.

       Because the wave 1 surveys were carried out mostly in May or June of the first year of

intervention for the study 1 students, perhaps this is just too soon to see very large changes in

some of these measures of candidate mechanisms of action. Table 11 shows results from wave 2

of our survey, which was carried out after the second year that cohort 1 received the intervention.

Here again we see no detectable impacts on perceptions about supportive adults, grit,

conscientiousness, locus of control, growth mindset, or social networks.

       What we do see impacts on are measures of how connected, engaged or ambitious

students are with respect to their studies, as in Table 12. Panel A shows, in the first wave of our

survey, that participants are more likely than controls to say it is important to get good grades in

math, and a marginally significant increase in the share who say they like math (FDR q-value =

.085). Panel B shows this result does not persist until the fall after the 2nd year of the program.

       Taken together, these results seem to suggest that the subject matter focus on math was

important to generating the treatment effects on learning, and that tutoring seems unlikely to

have boosted learning solely through a mentoring effect.

   B. Classroom management



                                                  26
         A different hypothesis for how intensive tutoring improves student learning is by making

it much easier to handle "classroom management" than it is in a typical classroom setting, so that

students then experience fewer disruptions to learning and more time-on-task. In-person

observations we conducted of the Saga program suggest students were spending approximately

90% of their time on math. This figure is high relative to other published figures for regular

public school classrooms, but we could not carry out similar observations for the specific CPS

classrooms that serve as the control condition in this study.

         An alternative empirical test comes from examining across-school variation in impacts.

Specifically, we would expect the benefits of fewer disruptions to instruction with Saga to be

more pronounced in schools where the baseline levels of classroom disruptions are most

pronounced, since that is where the gains from reduced disruption are largest. Table 13 measures

the level of disruptions within a school as the number of disciplinary incidents per study student

in a given school during the study year. This is taken from the CPS administrative school records

and calculated for the first year of intervention separately for study 1 and study 2. 38 We find that

the difference in impacts on academic outcomes are not statistically significant across high-

disruption and low-disruption schools. All else equal, this would not seem to support the

hypothesis that improved classroom management is a key driver of the overall Saga impacts.

         These results do not seem sensitive to our reliance on CPS disciplinary actions as our

measure of school behavioral climate, since we see qualitatively similar results when we use

arrests of students in a school instead (see Appendix Table 20). In addition, in the first wave of




38
  Given that randomization block fixed-effects fully explain school fixed-effects, we cannot estimate the main effect
for the 'above median per capita disciplinary incidents' dummy variable, so we do not report these estimates in the
table. However, we can recover and report the interaction effect and see if impacts differ between these groups.

                                                         27
surveys we administered to students to measure mechanisms, we asked if "disruptions by others

get in the way of my learning." We see no statistically significant impact on this outcome. 39

       C. Personalization

            An alternative hypothesis for these effects is that high-dosage tutoring makes it easier for

instructors to personalize instruction relative to the classroom-teaching condition. We would

expect this benefit to be largest for those students whose academic level is furthest from the level

to which teachers target classroom instruction. Unfortunately, we do not have any direct measure

of the level at which CPS math teachers target classroom instruction. In a more stylized setting

Bloom (1984) found that teachers may target instruction to the top third of the class distribution.

If that were true for CPS math classrooms as well, we would expect to see (all else equal)

students at the bottom of the achievement distribution benefit the most from high-dosage

tutoring. But testing that hypothesis is complicated by the possibility of `floor effects' with our

math test score measures, because floor effects would cause the test results to understate any

gains in math skills among those at the bottom of the achievement distribution.

            To learn more about this hypothesis, we use machine learning techniques to estimate

personalized treatment effects (PTE's) for every individual in the sample. Intuitively, machine

learning procedures use the data to identify the groupings defined by baseline covariates that are

as similar as possible with respect to their estimated treatment effects. Rather than considering

just a few interactions between covariates and treatment assignment, as would be the normal

approach in economics, we can search over all covariates and even complicated functions of the

covariates to model the structure of heterogeneity in effects across observations. To reduce the

risk of fitting noise rather than true structure, these types of machine learning procedures focus



39
     The regression coefficient on the Z-score version of the outcome is -.057 (se=.089) for the intention-to-treat effect.

                                                             28
on maximizing out-of-sample fit. Whereas standard prediction tasks use machine learning to

predict the average outcome for different subgroups defined by partitions of the baseline

characteristics space, here we follow the recent literature in economics, statistics and computer

science to use machine learning to predict treatment effects.

         The specific procedure we use to estimate these PTE's for each student is Athey,

Tibshirani and Wager's (2019) Generalized Random Forest (GRF) method. GRF is an adaptive

locally weighted matching estimator that yields very flexible estimates of conditional average

treatment effects. GRFs basically work in two steps. First, a causal forest is estimated, which can

essentially be thought of as an average of many decision trees (Wager and Athey, 2018). 40

Rather than directly estimating treatment effects by averaging predicted treatment effects across

the causal trees in the forest (as in Wager and Athey, 2018), GRF generates adaptive weights

using the frequency with which observations occur in the same terminal nodes together. Because

each tree's splits are determined by a criterion that (approximately) minimizes the expected

mean squared error of treatment effect predictions (Athey and Imbens, 2016), observations in the

same terminal node should have similar treatment effects. This step yields a separate set of

adaptive weights for each observation indicating how similar treatment effects are likely to be

between the observation and other observations. Second, PTEs for each observation,  , are

estimated using separate weighted least squares regressions of the outcome on treatment for each

observation using the individualized similarity weights determined in the first step.




40
   Our causal forest includes 100,000 trees. For each outcome, we select the tuning parameters (the fraction of the
sample used to build each tree, the fraction of the subsample used for determining splits rather than estimating
effects, the number of variables tried at each split, the minimum node size, and a penalty for imbalance in
observations across splits) by cross-validation on smaller causal forests with 1,000 trees. Note that GRFs determine
splits using an approximation to the Athey and Imbens (2016) criterion, whereas Wager and Athey (2018) use the
exact criterion. Both yield heuristic solutions to the optimization problem because splits are determined sequentially
using a greedy algorithm rather than jointly (which is currently computationally infeasible).

                                                          29
           Before using the PTEs to evaluate mechanisms, we assess how well the predictions

correlate with the true underlying heterogeneity. To this end, we estimate the best linear

predictor (BLP) of conditional average treatment effects based on the estimated PTEs using the

following weighted least squares regression (Chernozhukov et al. 2019):

              (4) = 0 + 1 0, + 2  + 3  -   + 4  -  ( -  [ ]) +  ,

where 0, is a random forest prediction of the outcome using only control group observations,

and  is the probability of treatment for observation i (i.e. the block mean of treatment for i's

                                                                 -1
block). The weights are given by  =  1 -   . If the GRF procedure is successfully

predicting variation in treatment effects, we would expect the estimate of 4 to be close to 1. In

contrast, if the estimated PTEs are essentially noise, the estimate of 4 would be close to 0.

           The BLP estimates, shown in appendix figure 1, suggest that we may be picking up

structure rather than noise with heterogenous treatment effects for our math outcomes, because

the 4 estimates are close to one. But even with our large sample (relatively speaking from the

perspective of social science experiments), we are barely powered if not slightly under-powered

even to detect heterogenous treatment effects on math outcomes. We do not focus on non-math

outcomes in what follows given the poor fit of our heterogeneous treatment effect models. The

fact that our predictions are only correlated with underlying heterogeneity for some outcomes,

but not others, highlights the importance of first doing these kinds of performance checks before

using the predictions for other purposes.

           Figure 2 plots PTEs for math achievement test scores. 41 We can see that there are

enormous differences in the estimated average effects for the quartile of students who benefit the



41
     We also recreate this plot for our predicted treatment effects on Math GPA in appendix figure 2.

                                                           30
most (average PTE = 0.21 SD in ITT terms) versus the smallest-effect quartile (average PTE =

0.007 SD). But it's also the case that the baseline math scores are strikingly different across these

quartiles as well, with those in the top quartile having scores 0.61 SD above our study sample

average at baseline and those in the bottom quartile 1.2 SD below average at baseline. This

highlights the difficulty of interpreting the low estimated PTEs for this bottom quartile. If

Reardon's (2011) estimate is right that high school students gain 0.2 SD on average for each year

in school, the bottom quartile is about 6 years behind the average student in our study. This is a

group for whom the risks of floor effects with these tests would be most pronounced.

       Figure 3 provides us with a different way to see this; for each student in our out-of-

sample validation set, we plot their estimated PTE on math test scores on the x-axis and their

estimated PTE on math GPA on the y-axis. For data visualization purposes we also do K-means

clustering and then show students in each `cluster' in a separate color, and outline the outer

boundary of students in each group. This gives us another way to see that a sizable share of

students are estimated to have PTE's that are close to zero or even negative with respect to math

test scores. On the other hand, almost all students have positive estimated PTE's on math grades.

       For present purposes the most relevant feature of Figure 3 is the fact that around one-

quarter of our study sample has estimated math test score gains in the neighborhood of zero or

negative, but positive (and sometimes substantially positive) gains in math GPA. In principle this

could be due to some gain in school effort or study skills from Saga, if math GPA is more

sensitive to such changes than is math test scores. But in the CPS administrative data we do not

see those students showing particularly large gains (or any gains for that matter) in measures of

effort such as school attendance or school disciplinary infractions. Nor in the survey data do we




                                                 31
see any changes in measures like time spent on homework, or share homework completed. The

figure is at the very least consistent with, if not definitive proof for, floor effects with math tests.

        Note that unfortunately math grades can't help us determine which students benefit the

most, even though we can see almost all students derive some non-zero math grade benefit. The

nice feature of standardized test scores for measuring treatment heterogeneity is that (setting

aside floor effects) they are continuous measures designed to capture the normed, latent

distribution of student ability in a given student population in addition to being tied to standards

that quantify mastery on subject-specific skills and content. The standardized test scores used by

CPSthe EXPLORE / PLAN tests developed by ACT, Inc. are both norm-referenced tests

and criterion-referenced tests, meaning that we are able to compare students' position in

achievement compared to their peers, as well as (aspirationally) consistently quantify the amount

of learning that occurs from one point in the latent distribution to another throughout this

distribution. In contrast, there is no guarantee that a given unit change in grades need mean

remotely the same thing at different points in the GPA distribution.

        Perhaps our best test then of the personalization-of-instruction hypothesis comes from

exploiting the fact that we have access to item-level test score data from the math achievement

tests that we administered to study participants ourselves. We first calculate the difficulty of each

item (j) on the math test by using the testing summary statistic `P+ Score', calculated as the share

of students in our sample who answer the item correctly (Lord, 1980). We divide the sample into

whether students had baseline CPS test scores above versus below study median. Above-median

students score higher than below-median students on every item, and in both groups, the share

who answer a question correctly increases with the P-score (see appendix figure 3).




                                                   32
       Figure 4 provides suggestive visual evidence that reduced `academic mismatch' could

play a role. On the x-axis we rank order the individual test-score items by their P-score, and then

plot the ITT effect for each item for those students whose baseline CPS math test score was

above vs. below the median value for our sample. We then fit a kernel-weighted local

polynomial to these individual test score items for both groups of students. We test the null

hypothesis that there is no difference in the relationship between ITT effects and question

difficulty between students with above and below median test scores using a permutation test

(Canay, Romano, and Shaikh 2017). Let A be a vector indicating whether students had above or

below median test scores and let X denote the remaining data. (, ) is the average absolute

difference in ITTs between the two groups across all questions. We estimate the p-value for the

null hypothesis that there is no difference between the two groups using:
                                           10,000
                                   1
                          (5)  =         1{(,  )  (, )},
                                 10,000
                                             =1


where { }10
         =1
           ,000
                are 10,000 randomly selected within randomization block permutations on the

above/below median classifications (A). While this test is a bit under-powered and we cannot

reject the null hypothesis that the effect is the same for most items (p=.53), visually it looks like

below-baseline-median students seem to benefit the most on items in the bottom or middle of the

difficulty distribution while the above-median may benefit the most on more difficult items.

       Recognizing that the confidence intervals are somewhat large around both of our kernel-

weighted polynomials, what would the difference in shapes of the two curves imply if we took

the results at face value? The fact that below-median-at-baseline students seem to benefit more

on relatively easier items from Saga tutoring and above-median students may benefit more on

harder items would be consistent with the extra personalization built into the Saga program


                                                    33
design, where tutors are instructed to devote some time each session to working with students

where they are academically as determined by frequent formative testing. Unfortunately, we

cannot document this mechanism directly because we do not have direct measures of the

academic level at which tutors devoted their time, nor do we have that for classroom teaching.

But at the very least the differential shapes of the below- and above-median curves in Figure 4

suggest student learning is concentrated on the math topics close to their baseline levels of

knowledge. The implication is that even if Saga were not personalizing, the item-level results

imply that personalizing (concentrating instructional time on where students are academically)

would be an effective strategy. 42

     VII.    CONCLUSION

         One way to read the results reported here is as a test of a specific intervention strategy for

urban public school systems. Fryer (2014) shows that identifying a handful of strategies from `no

excuses' charter schools and incorporating them into public schools can improve student

achievement. But many of those strategies are complicated to implement with fidelity and may

be politically difficult to implement at large scale throughout urban public school systems. The

present paper shows that substantial progress can be made by narrowing down even further the

set of strategies adopted from `no excuses' charter schools to just a single element that is easier

to implement and hence scale: high-dosage tutoring. A key innovation of the specific high-

dosage tutoring model we study here is that the provider, Saga, has figured out a way to deliver




42
   That is, if we took the results in Figure 4 at face value (ignoring the low power of the test that the shapes of the
two curves are the same) they would imply either that (a) below-baseline-median students were showing their
biggest gains on relatively easier items (and vice versa for above-baseline-median students) because Saga tutors
concentrated their instructional effort on items tailored to where students are, or (b) Saga tutors tried to cover
material across the difficulty distribution, and students just benefited most for the content closest to the student's
own academic level, which implies that efforts to further concentrate instruction on that content (i.e. personalization)
would yield even bigger benefits to students.

                                                          34
this at relatively low cost given the intensity of the educational intervention. This stands in

contrast with how tutoring services are often provided to school systems like Chicago's, where a

tutoring provider hires (say) former teachers at prevailing full-time teacher wages, which then for

a given level of spending per pupil means students get just a fraction of the number of

instructional hours as they do with the intervention we study here.

           One way to think about the viability of this strategy at scale is that if personalization is

indeed a key mechanism through which Saga works, then the system goal for tutoring would be

to deliver each student enough `dosage' to eventually get them up to grade level and more

productively engage with grade-level classroom instruction. That is, getting every student up to

speed improves the degree to which regular classrooms are `personalized.' Our best estimate for

the cost per participant during our study period is roughly $3,800, with a defensible range of

$3,500 to $4,300. CPS already receives around $300 million in Title 1 grants each year, and

existing research suggests for the average district how these funds are deployed leads to few

detectable improvements in student learning (Deke, et al., 2012, Dragoset, et al., 2017). As a

thought exercise, that funding, if repurposed to Saga tutoring, would be enough to serve around

80,000 students per year, or 23% of the system's total enrollment of 355,000. 43 Proposals for

how to scale nationally are in Ander, Guryan and Ludwig (2016) and Kraft and Falken (2021).

           But there is another, perhaps more important way to read this study: As a demonstration

that it is not too late or too difficult to substantially change the academic outcomes of children

who are struggling academically even once they have reached adolescence. The lesson may be

that it is possible to improve academic skills by accounting for the challenges of individualizing




43
     This calculation is based on Saga's program cost during our study period ($3,800).

                                                           35
instructionamong other thingsand that these strategies can be effective even when

implemented in regular public high schools to broad, representative samples of students.

         The benefit-cost ratio of Saga tutoring seems to be comparable in magnitude to that of the

most successful early childhood programs, like the Abecedarian Project and the Perry Preschool

Program, as well as interventions at scale to improve student outcomes such as the Tennessee

STAR experiment. 44 Chetty et al. (2011) show that each one-percentile increase in 8th grade test

scores is associated with $150 in additional annual earnings at age 27. We find that, on average,

Saga increases student's test scores by six percentile points in study 1 and by 14 percentile points

for study 2. 45 Together, these two findings suggest Saga increases participants' adult earnings by

$900 each year for study 1 and $2,100 each year for study 2. Assuming these gains persist from

ages 25 to 59 and discounting at a 5% rate to age 15, the present discounted value of the gains is

about $9,000 for study 1 and $21,000 for study 2. With per-student costs of $3,500 to $4,300,

this implies the benefit cost ratio is 2.1 to 2.6 in study 1 and 4.9 to 6.0 in study 2. 46

         By way of comparison the benefit-cost ratios that have been estimated for model early

childhood programs are on the order of 1.9 and 2.2 for the Abecedarian Project (Masse and

Barnett, 2002), and between 3.9 and 6.8 for the Perry Preschool Program (Heckman et al., 2010),

both estimated using a 5% discount rate. Krueger (2003) estimates that a 7-student reduction in




44
   Borman and Hewes (2002) show that the Success for All model yields similar math test score gains per $1,000 as
the model programs discussed here (a 0.04 SD improvement in math per $1,000). Saga also performs favorably
based on this metric, with math TOT effects per $1,000 of 0.04 to 0.05 in Study 1 and 0.09 to 0.11 in Study 2.
Success for All, however, also improves reading scores (a 0.09 SD improvement per $1,000).
45
   The test score percentile data is not available for study 2. Therefore, we estimate the percentile effect by assuming
the ratio of the TOT effects in study 1 and 2 is the same standard deviations and percentiles.
46
   Alternatively, Hanushek and Woessman (2008) review several studies that consistently find a one standard
deviation increase in test scores is associated with about a 12 percent increase in earnings. Applying this effect size
combined with our estimated increase on standardized math test scores to a quadratic wage/salary earnings age
trajectory estimated using data on Black and Latinx individuals from Chicago in the 2019 ACS (and discounted to
age 15 at a 5% rate) implies slightly smaller benefit-cost ratios of 1.6 and 3.8, respectively.

                                                          36
class size in grades K-3 yields a benefit-cost ratio of about 2 using a 4% discount rate (and so

would be below 2 with a 5% discount rate). These studies have long been cited as arguments for

investments in early childhood compared to later life stages; evidently, however, adolescence is

not too late to also realize large social benefits from human capital investment.




                                                37
     REFRENCES


Abdulkadirolu, A., Angrist, J. D., Narita, Y., & Pathak, P. A. (2017). Research Design Meets Market
    Design: Using Centralized Assignment for Impact Evaluation. Econometrica, 85(5), 1373­1432.

Allensworth & Easton. (2005). The On-Track Indicator as a Predictor of High School Graduation.
     Consortium on Chicago School Research.
     https://consortium.uchicago.edu/sites/default/files/2018-10/p78.pdf

Altonji, J. G., Elder, T. E., & Taber, C. R. (2005). Selection on Observed and Unobserved Variables:
    Assessing the Effectiveness of Catholic Schools. Journal of Political Economy, 113(1), 151­184.

Ander, R., Guryan, J., & Ludwig, J. (2016). Improving Academic Outcomes for Disadvantaged
    Students: Scaling Up Individualized Tutorials. 24.

Angrist, J.D., Imbens, G. W., & Rubin, D. B. (1996). Identification of causal effects using
    instrumental variables. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 91(434), 444­455.

Angrist, J.D., Pathak, P. A., & Walters, C. R. (2013). Explaining charter school effectiveness.
    American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 5(4), 1­27.

Angrist, Joshua D., Cohodes, S. R., Dynarski, S. M., Pathak, P. A., & Walters, C. R. (2016). Stand
    and Deliver: Effects of Boston's Charter High Schools on College Preparation, Entry, and
    Choice. Journal of Labor Economics, 34(2), 275­318. https://doi.org/10.1086/683665

Athey, S., & Imbens, G. (2016). Recursive partitioning for heterogeneous causal effects. Proceedings
    of the National Academy of Sciences, 113(27), 7353­7360.
    https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1510489113.

Athey, S., Tibshirani, J., & Wager, S. (2019). Generalized random forests. Annals of Statistics, 47(2),
    1148­1178. https://doi.org/10.1214/18-AOS1709.

Banerjee, A. V., Cole, S., Duflo, E., & Linden, L. (2007). Remedying education: Evidence from two
    randomized experiments in India. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(3), 1235­1264.

Barnett, W. S., & Masse, L. N. (2007). Comparative benefit­cost analysis of the Abecedarian
    program and its policy implications. Economics of Education Review, 26(1), 113­125.
    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.econedurev.2005.10.007.

Belfield, C. R., Nores, M., Barnett, S., & Schweinhart, L. (2006). The High/Scope Perry Preschool
     Program: Cost-Benefit Analysis Using Data from the Age-40 Followup. Journal of Human
     Resources, XLI(1), 162­190. https://doi.org/10.3368/jhr.xli.1.162.

Benjamini, Y., & Hochberg, Y. (1995). Controlling the False Discovery Rate: A Practical and
    Powerful Approach to Multiple Testing. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B
    (Methodological, 57(1), 289­300. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2517-6161.1995.tb02031.x.

                                                     38
Benjamini, Y., Krieger, A. M., & Yekutieli, D. (2006). Adaptive linear step-up procedures that
    control the false discovery rate. Biometrika, 93(3), 491­507.
    https://doi.org/10.1093/biomet/93.3.49.

Bhatt, M., Guryan, J., Ludwig, J., Shah, A., & the Chicago Youth Violence Project Team. (2021).
    Scope challenges to social impact (Working Paper No. 28406). National Bureau of Economic
    Research. http://www.nber.org/papers/w28406

Blattman, C., Jamison, J. C., & Sheridan, M. (2017). Reducing Crime and Violence: Experimental
     Evidence from Cognitive Behavioral Therapy in Liberia. American Economic Review, 107(4),
     1165­1206. https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20150503

Bloom, B. S. (1984). The 2 sigma problem: The search for methods of group instruction as effective
    as one-on-one tutoring. Educational Researcher, 13(6), 4­16.

Bloom, H. S. (1984). Accounting for no-shows in experimental evaluation designs. Evaluation
    Review, 8(2), 225­246.

Bonnie, R. J., & Backes, E. P. (Eds.). (2019). The Promise of Adolescence: Realizing Opportunity for
    All Youth. The National Academies Press. https://doi.org/10.17226/25388

Borman, G. D., & Hewes, G. M. (2002). The Long-Term Effects and Cost-Effectiveness of Success
    for All. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 24(4), 243­266.
    https://doi.org/10.3102/01623737024004243

Boyd, D., Grossman, P., Lankford, H., Loeb, S., & Wyckoff, J. (2006). How changes in entry
    requirements alter the teacher workforce and affect student achievement. Education Finance and
    Policy, 1, 176­216.

Campbell, F. A., Ramey, C. T., Pungello, E., Sparling, J., & Miller-Johnson, S. (2002). Early
   Childhood Education: Young Adult Outcomes From the Abecedarian Project. Applied
   Developmental Science, 6(1), 42­57. https://doi.org/10.1207/s1532480xads0601_05.

Canay, I. A., Romano, J. P., & Shaikh, A. M. (2017). Randomization Tests Under an Approximate
    Symmetry Assumption. Econometrica, 85(3), 1013­1030. https://doi.org/10.3982/ECTA13081

Carneiro, P., & Heckman, J. (2003). Human Capital Policy. In James J. Heckman & A. B. Krueger
    (Eds.), Inequality in America: What Role for Human Capital Policies? (pp. 77­240). MIT Press.

Cascio, E. U., & Staiger, D. O. (2012). Knowledge, tests, and fadeout in educational interventions.
    National Bureau of Economic Research.

Cheng, A., & Peterson, P. E. (2017). How satisfied are parents with their children's schools? New
    evidence from a U.S. department of education survey. Education Next, 17(2), 20­28.




                                                    39
Chernozhukov, V., Demirer, M., Duflo, E., & Fernandez-Val, I. (2019). Generic Machine Learning
    Inference on Heterogenous Treatment Effects in Randomized Experiments.

Chetty, R., Friedman, J. N., Hilger, N., Saez, E., Schanzenbach, D. W., & Yagan, D. (2011). How
    Does Your Kindergarten Classroom Affect Your Earnings? Evidence from Project Star.
    Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(4), 1593­1660. https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjr041

Clotfelter, C., Ladd, H., & Vigdor, J. (2007). Teacher credentials and student achievement:
     Longitudinal analysis with student fixed effects. Economics of Education Review, 26, 673­682.

Clotfelter, C. T., Ladd, H. F., & Vigdor, J. L. (2010). Teacher credentials and student achievement in
     high school: A cross-subject analysis with student fixed effects. Journal of Human Resources,
     45, 655­681.

Davis, J. M. V., Guryan, J., Hallberg, K., & Ludwig, J. (2017). The Economics of Scale-Up (No.
    w23925). National Bureau of Economic Research. https://doi.org/10.3386/w23925

Deke, J., Dragoset, L., Bogen, K., & Gill, B. (2012). Impacts of Title I Supplemental Educational
    Services on Student Achievement. National Center for Education Evaluation and Regional
    Assistance, Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education.

Dobbie, W., & Fryer, R. G. (2019). Charter Schools and Labor Market Outcomes. Journal of Labor
    Economics, 38(4), 915­957. https://doi.org/10.1086/706534

Dragoset, L., Thomas, J., Herrmann, M., Deke, J., James-Burdumy, S., Graczewski, C., Boyle, A.,
    Upton, R., Tanenbaum, C., & Giffin, J. (2017). School Improvement Grants: Implementation and
    Effectiveness (NCEE 2017- 4013. National Center for Education Evaluation and Regional
    Assistance, Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education.

Duflo, E., Dupas, P., & Kremer, M. (2011). Peer effects, teacher incentives, and the impact of
    tracking: Evidence from a randomized evaluation in Kenya. American Economic Review, 101(5),
    1739­1774.

Duncan, G., Dowsett, C. J., Claessens, A., Magnuson, K., Huston, A. C., Klebanov, P., Pagani, L.,
    Feinstein, L., Engel, M., Brooks-Gunn, J., Sexton, H., Duckworth, K., & Japel, C. (2007). School
    readiness and later achievement. Developmental Psychology, 43(6), 1428­1446.

Eccles, J. S., Midgley, C., Wigfield, A., Buchanan, C. M., Reuman, D., Flanagan, C., & Iver, D. M.
     (1993). Development during adolescence: The impact of stage-environment fit on young
     adolescents' experiences in schools and in families. American Psychologist, 48(2), 90­101.

Efron, B., & Tibshirani, R. J. (1993). An introduction to the bootstrap. Monographs on Statistics and
    Applied Probability, 57.




                                                     40
Engel, M., Claessens, A., & Finch, M. A. (2012). Teaching students what they already know? The
    (Mis)Alignment between mathematics instructional content and student knowledge in
    kindergarten. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 35(2), 157­178.

Figlio, D. N., & Page, M. E. (2002). School choice and the distributional effects of ability tracking:
     Does separation increase inequality? Journal of Urban Economics, 51(3), 497­514.
     https://doi.org/10.1006/juec.2001.2255.

Fryer, R. G. (2017). Chapter 2 - The Production of Human Capital in Developed Countries: Evidence
     From 196 Randomized Field Experimentsa. In Abhijit Vinayak Banerjee & E. Duflo (Eds.),
     Handbook of Economic Field Experiments (Vol. 2, pp. 95­322). North-Holland.
     https://doi.org/10.1016/bs.hefe.2016.08.006

Fryer, Roland G., & Howard-Noveck, M. (2020). High-Dosage Tutoring and Reading Achievement:
     Evidence from New York City. Journal of Labor Economics, 38(2), 421­452.
     https://doi.org/10.1086/705882

Fryer, Roland G., Jr. (2014). Injecting Charter School Best Practices into Traditional Public Schools:
     Evidence from Field Experiments. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(3), 1355­1407.
     https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qju011

Gibbs, C., Ludwig, J., & Miller, D. L. (2013). Head Start origins and impacts. In M. J. Bailey & S.
    Danziger (Eds.), Legacies of the War on Poverty (pp. 39­65). Russell Sage Foundation Press.

Goldhaber, D. (2007). Everyone's doing it, but what does teacher testing tell us about teacher
    effectiveness? Journal of Human Resources, 42, 765­794.

Goldin, C., & Katz, L. F. (2008). The Race between Education and Technology. Harvard University
    Press.

Gormley, W. T., Phillips, D., & Gayer, T. (2008). Preschool programs can boost school readiness.
    Science, 320(5884), 1723­1724.

Grogger, J., Neal, D., Hanushek, E., & Schwab, R. (2000). Further Evidence on the Effects of
    Catholic Secondary Schooling [with Comments. In Brookings-Wharton Papers on Urban Affairs
    (pp. 151­201).

Hanushek, E.A., Peterson, P. E., Talpey, L. M., & Woessmann, L. (2020). Long-Run Trends in the
    U.S. SES-Achievement Gap. National Bureau of Economic Research.

Hanushek, Eric A., & Woessmann, L. (2008). The Role of Cognitive Skills in Economic
    Development. Journal of Economic Literature, 46(3), 607­668.
    https://doi.org/10.1257/jel.46.3.607

Heckman, J.J. (2012). Giving Kids a Fair Chance. MIT Press.



                                                      41
Heckman, J.J., Moon, S. H., Pinto, R., Savelyev, P. A., & Yaviz, A. (2010). The rate of return to the
    HighScope Perry Preschool Program. Journal of Public Economics, 94, 114­128.

Heller, S. B., Shah, A. K., Guryan, J., Ludwig, J., Mullainathan, S., & Pollack, H. A. (2017).
     Thinking, Fast and Slow? Some Field Experiments to Reduce Crime and Dropout in Chicago.
     Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132(1), 1­54.

Henry, G. T., Bastian, K. C., & Fortner, C. K. (2011). Stayers and leavers: Early-career teacher
    effectiveness and attrition. Educational Researcher, 40(6), 271­280.

Hunt, D. E. (1975). Person-environment interaction: A challenge found wanting before it was tried.
    Review of Educational Research, 45(2), 209­230.

Jackson, C. K. (2018). Does School Spending Matter? The New Literature on an Old Question (No.
     w25368). National Bureau of Economic Research. https://doi.org/10.3386/w25368

Jacob, B. A., Rockoff, J. E., Taylor, E. S., Lindy, B., & Rosen, R. (2018). Teacher Applicant Hiring
    and Teacher Performance: Evidence from DC Public Schools. Journal of Public Economics, 166,
    81­97. https://doi.org/10.3386/w22054.

Kane, T., Rockoff, J., & Staiger, D. (2008). What does certification tell us about teacher
    effectiveness? Evidence from New York City. Economics of Education Review, 27, 615­631.

Kraft, M. A., & Falken, G. (2021). A Blueprint for Scaling Tutoring Across Public Schools. In
     EdWorkingPapers.com (No. 20­335). Annenberg Institute at Brown University.
     https://www.edworkingpapers.com/ai20-335

Krueger, A. B. (2003). Inequality, too much of a good thing. In James J. Heckman & A. B. Krueger
    (Eds.), Inequality in America: What Role for Human Capital Policies? (pp. 1­76). MIT Press.

Lake, R., Bowen, M., Demeritt, A., McCullough, M., Haimson, J., & Gill, B. (2012). Learning from
    Charter School Management Organizations: Strategies for Student Behavior and Teacher
    Coaching. Mathematica Policy Research.

Long, D., Mallar, C., & Thornton, C. V. D. (1981). Evaluating the Benefits and Costs of the Job
    Corps. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 1(1), 55­76.
    https://doi.org/10.2307/3324110.

Lord, F. M. (1980). Applications of item response theory to practical testing problems. Routledge.

Ludwig, J., & Phillips, D. A. (2007). The benefits and costs of Head Start. National Bureau of
    Economic Research.

Masse, L., & Barnett, W. (2002). A Benefit Cost Analysis of the Abecedarian Early Childhood
    Intervention.



                                                     42
Nomi, T., & Allensworth, E. (2009). Double-dose Algebra as an alternative strategy to remediation:
   Effects on students' outcomes. Journal of Research on Educational Effectiveness, 2(2), 111­148.

Reardon, S. F. (2011). The widening academic achievement gap between the rich and the poor: New
    evidence and possible explanations. In E. G. J. Duncan & R. J. Murnane (Eds.), Whither
    Opportunity? Rising Inequality, Schools, and Children's Life Chances (pp. 91­116). Russell
    Sage Foundation Press.

Rivkin, S. G., Hanushek, E. A., & Kain, J. F. (2005). Teachers, schools, and academic achievement.
    Econometrica, 2, 417­458.

Rockoff, J. E. (2004). The impact of individual teachers on student achievement: Evidence from panel
    data. American Economic Review, 94(2), 247­252.

Rouse, C., & Barrow, L. (2006). U.S. Elementary and Secondary Schools: Equalizing Opportunity or
    Replicating the Status Quo? The Future of Children, 16(2), 99­123.

Schweinhart, L. J., Montie, J., Xiang, Z., Barnett, W. S., Belfield, C. R., & Nores, M. (2005). Lifetime
    Effects: The High/Scope Perry Preschool Study Through Age 40. High/Scope Press.

Shonkoff, J. P., & Phillips, D. A. (2000). From Neurons to Neighborhoods: The Science of Early
    Childhood Development. Zero to Three, 5. https://doi.org/10.17226/9824.

Steinberg, L. (2014). Age of Opportunity: Lessons from the New Science of Adolescence. Houghton
     Mifflin Harcourt.

Tuttle, C. C., Gleason, P., Knechtel, V., Nichols-Barrer, I., Booker, K., Chojnacki, G., Coen, T., &
     Goble, L. (2015). Understanding the Effect of KIPP as It Scales. In Impacts on Achievement and
     Other Outcomes. Final Report of KIPP's "Investing in Innovation Grant Evaluation." In
     Mathematica Policy Research, Inc. Mathematica Policy Research, Inc: Vol. I.
     https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED560079

Wager, S., & S, A. (2018). Estimation and Inference of Heterogenous Treatment Effects using
   Random Forests. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 113(523), 1228­1242.

Young, A. (2019). Channeling Fisher: Randomization Tests and the Statistical Insignificance of
    Seemingly Significant Experimental Results. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 134(2), 557­598.
    https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjy029.




                                                     43
       Technical Appendix

       A. Building Grade Variables

       Students participating in the intervention were assigned to participate in a tutoring

session for one class period every day in addition to their regular math class. It is important to

note that while the control condition for study 2 participants was overwhelmingly an elective

course, the control condition for study 1 9th -gradersi.e., the majority of the study 1

samplewas a second hour or "double-dose" Algebra.

       In building grade variables (overall GPA, non-math core GPA, math GPA, and course

failures) used as covariates and outcomes, we want to ensure that we have comparable

schedules between treatment and control students, taking the above into account. We use the

following criteria to ensure we have comparable course schedules between treatment and

control groups. We present our preferred specifications in the main results, and also include

other variations in the appendices as robustness checks. Our results hold across different

methods of variable calculation.

       CPS defines `core' courses as courses in core subjects: math, social science/history,

science, and reading/English. Our baseline covariates include core GPA (and number of A's,

B's, C's, D's, and F's in core courses). We look at GPA and course failures (percent of courses

failed) separately for math and non-math core subjects as our outcomes. CPS grades are

administered each semester, and we use courses from both semesters of the intervention year to

calculate our yearly grade variables.

       Math Courses

       We first exclude `Math Lab' (the Saga tutoring class) as well as double-dose Algebra

(the class which Saga takes the place of) when calculating math course variables. A vast


                                                44
majority (over 97%) of study students for whom we have grade data only take one math class

each semester after excluding Math Lab and double-dose Algebra.

       For students who take multiple math classes in a semester, our preferred method is to

select the appropriate grade-level math grade for each student as their main 'math course'--

e.g. for a 9th grader, if they are in only one math course that semester, we take that course as

their semester math class; if they are in multiple math courses that semester and take the grade-

level appropriate math course (e.g. Algebra I for 9th graders, and Geometry for 10th graders), we

use that course for variable calculation. If they are in multiple math classes in that semester and

take a math course above their grade level (such as a 9th grader taking Geometry or a 10th

grader taking Algebra II with Trigonometry), then we use that course as their `main' math

course. Otherwise, we randomly select a course and use that as their `math course' for that

semester.

       The method where we `select' the appropriate math course is presented in our main

results and is used throughout our analysis. We also present a version of the results where we

exclude students who we have to make a `selection' for (presented in appendix table 23 and

denoted with a `no selections' marker).

       Non-Math Core Courses

       For non-math core courses (that is, courses in science, social studies, and

reading/English), selecting the appropriate `grade-level' course in each is less straightforward,

and there is also possibility that including Saga in students' schedules affects which other

`core' courses they can take. Thus, we present five methods to calculate non-math core grade

variables. Our results calculated with each of these methods can be found in appendix table 23.




                                               45
       -      Method 1: `All Classes' ­ Include all courses taken by a given student in non-

math core classes in the calculation of GPA and course failures. This is our preferred method.

       -      Method 2: `High grade by subject'Selects the highest grade for each non-math

core topic in each semester and uses those courses to calculate the outcomes. For example, if a

student takes two science classes and two English classes in a semester, we take their highest

science course grade and highest English course grade (as well as their one social science

grade) and use those to calculate GPA and course failures.

       -      Method 3: `Low grade by subject'Same as the above, but instead of selecting

the highest grade for each core subject area in a semester, we use the lowest grade in each core

subject area. This method in conjunction with the above method can help us bound the effects

of the intervention on non-math core grades.

       -      Method 4: `Top 3 classes each semester' uses a student's three highest non-math

grades in core subject areas in a semester regardless of subject.

       -      Method 5: `Top 6 classes in that year' uses a student's six highest non-math

grades in that school year, regardless of subject.




                                                46
Table 1. Baseline Test Score Comparison of Study Samples vs. All CPS Students

                A. Study 1 Sample: Pre-randomization Math Scores (School Year 2012-2013)

                                          Sample                                      N        Mean           25th       50th     75th
                                All CPS Students^                                 409258       44.26           19         43      68
                           All CPS 9th/10th Grade Boys                            31064        44.76           19         41      71
                     All Study School 9th/10th Grade Students                      4406         35.4          14.75       33      54
                      All Study School 9th/10th Grade Boys                         2434        35.22           14         29      54
                           All Randomized Students*                                  2633      37.12           14         33      59
                All Randomized Students Active in Study Schools                      2103      36.32           14         33      54
                      All Participating Treatment Students                            526       32.2           12         29      45

                B. Study 2 Sample: Pre-randomization Math Scores (School Year 2013-2014)

                                      Sample                                     N          Mean      25th       50th      75th
                           All CPS Students^                                 406672         47.16        22         46      72
                    All CPS 9th/10th Grade Students                          61824          48.73        23         49      76
                All Study School 9th/10th Grade Students                      5068          34.89        12         29      54
                      All Randomized Students*                                2645          33.56        13         30      51
           All Randomized Students Active in Study Schools                    1823          31.15        12         28      49
                 All Participating Treatment Students                          571          30.05        10         26      47


           C. Study 2 Sample by Gender: Pre-randomization Math Scores (School Year 2013-2014)

                                    Sample                                   N         Mean         25th      50th       75th
                           All CPS Students^                             406672        47.16        22         46         72
                     All CPS 9th/10th Grade Students                      61824        48.73        23         49         76
                All Study School 9th/10th Grade Girls                      2384        34.05        13         29        53.75
                       All Randomized Girls*                                799        30.26        11         28         47
            All Randomized Girls Active in Study Schools                    629        28.81         8         26         44
             All Participating Treatment Students: Girls                    144        28.11        8.5        26         42
                All Study School 9th/10th Grade Boys                       2684        35.68        12         29         54
                       All Randomized Boys*                                1847        34.99        15         32         53
            All Randomized Boys Active in Study Schools                    1194         32.4        12         28         49
             All Participating Treatment Students: Boys                     427        30.72        11         26         49

In study 1, 1307 students were randomized into the treatment group and 1326 to the control group. In study 2, 1546
students (459 female students and 1088 male students)were randomized into the treatment group; 1125 students were
randomized into the control group (349 female students and 776 male students). In study 1, 15 students randomized
to the control group received one or more session of Saga. In study 2, 88 students randomized to control (15 female
students and 73 male students) participated in one or more session of Saga programming.
Due to student mobility and other factors N =65 students were randomized into study 2 twice, with 39 (60%) retaining
their original treatment assignment across randomizations and 26 being randomized into the other treatment condition.
Of these 26 students, 12 (46%) participated in one or more session of Saga programming.
*Randomization was done using summer rosters of partner schools based on who they expected to enroll; a subset of these students showed up in
these schools in the Fall of the study year. We refer to the students who do not show up as `No Shows', and we include them in the main analysis.
We also present our main analyses excluding these students in the appendices (appendix tables 12 and 13).
^The N for `All CPS Students' refers to all active CPS students in the network. We use baseline tests from the prior year for all CPS students in
grades 3-11 for whom tests were available for this row.
For randomization, we use gender and grade at the time of randomization (neither of which are necessarily time invariant) for blocking.
                Table 2: Baseline Characteristics for Saga Study 1 and Study 2 Cohorts by Randomized Treatment Group
                                                       Study 1                                                Study 2
                                                                       Treat/Control         Robust                            Treat/Control         Robust
                                                     Control Mean,                                          Control Mean,
                                                                         Contrast        Standard Error                          Contrast        Standard Error
                                                       N=1326                                                 N=1145
Demographics
Black                                                    0.461             -0.003             0.011               0.643            -0.006             0.012
Latinx                                                    0.487            0.011              0.013               0.326            -0.001             0.013
ELL                                                       0.120            0.015              0.013               0.103            0.008              0.011
Female                                                    0.002               0               0.001               0.307            0.012*             0.007
Age                                                      14.807            -0.036             0.025              14.430             0.007             0.022
Free and Reduced Lunch recipient                          0.871            0.002              0.013               0.902            -0.019             0.012
Learning Disability                                       0.167             0.012             0.015               0.159            -0.002             0.014

Schooling
In Grade 9 at Study Start                                 0.572            -0.02*             0.011               0.914            -0.008             0.006
In Grade 10 at Study Start                                0.416             0.02*             0.011               0.075            0.007              0.005
GPA in Baseline Year                                      2.109             0.009             0.036               2.386            -0.043             0.031
Pct A's Earned in Baseline Year                          18.774            0.331              0.801              24.744             -0.94             0.707
Pct B's Earned in Baseline Year                          22.382             -0.49             0.655              23.922             0.085             0.573
Pct C's Earned in Baseline Year                          26.781            -0.097             0.708              28.825            -0.294             0.619
Pct D's Earned in Baseline Year                          16.486             0.85              0.646              11.625             0.738             0.470
Pct F's Earned in Baseline Year                          15.578            -0.594             0.916              10.884             0.411             0.665
Math Test Performance in Baseline Year                    0.000             -0.04             0.042               0.000            -0.026             0.041

Crime
Ever Arrested Baseline                                   0.187             -0.009             0.015              0.148             0.008              0.014
Baseline Total Arrests                                   0.517             -0.028             0.061              0.422             -0.065             0.059

Number of baseline arrests for:
Violent offenses                                         0.131              0.007             0.021              0.117             -0.014             0.019
Property offenses                                        0.090             -0.016             0.017              0.067             -0.006             0.015
Drug offenses                                            0.070             -0.004             0.015              0.046             -0.009             0.011
Other offenses                                           0.226             -0.015             0.032              0.190             -0.036             0.031

F-test for treatment-control comparison for all baseline characteristics: Study 1: p=0.832; Study 2: p=0.893; Pooled Study 1 and 2: p=0.828

Baseline treatment/control comparisons, controlling for randomization blocks. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors calculated.
Randomization blocks are defined at the school-grade level in Study 1 (boys only) and school-grade-gender level with the inclusion of girls in study 2.
Some students (N=65) were randomized into Study 2 twice. Both assignments are retained in the table above.
Percent of study participants female: Study 1: 0.1; Study 2: 30.8; Pooled Study 1 and 2: 15.5. Study 1 eligibility was limited to males.
* = p-value < 0.1, ** = p-value < 0.05, *** = p-value < 0.01.
                              Table 3: Estimated Effects on Academic and Behavioral Outcomes in Study 1, Year 1
                                                                                                                                           False
                                                                  Intent to    Robust         Effect of        Robust       Control
                                                      Control                                                                            Discovery
                                              N                     Treat     Standard      Treatment on      Standard      Complier
                                                       Mean                                                                                Rate
                                                                  Estimate      Error      Treated (TOT)        Error        Mean
                                                                                                                                         Q-Value

Mathematics
SY 2014 Math Test Scaled Score (Z)          1852      -0.000      0.082**      (0.036)           0.16**        (0.069)       -0.091         0.032
SY 2014 Math GPA                            2215       1.760      0.274***      (0.04)         0.561***        (0.079)        1.628         0.001
SY 2014 Math Courses Failed (percent)       2215       0.191     -0.043***     (0.013)        -0.087***        (0.026)        0.179         0.003
ISR Math Test 2014 Z-Score                   617      -0.000      0.119**      (0.058)           0.188*        (0.094)       -0.088         0.058
ISR Math Test 2014 Scaled Score             617       31.110      1.344**      (0.566)          2.183**        (0.927)       29.882         0.032

Other Academics
SY 2014 Read Test Scaled Score (Z)          1851       0.000       0.004        (0.04)          0.011          (0.076)       -0.115         0.882
SY 2014 Non-Math GPA                        2244       1.739      0.081**      (0.033)        0.201***         (0.063)        1.724         0.005
SY 2014 Non-Math Core Courses Failed
                                            2244       0.210      -0.027**     (0.011)         -0.056**        (0.022)        0.220         0.021
(percent)

Behavior
SY 2014 Disciplinary Incidents              2494      1.513        0.092       (0.104)          0.208          (0.235)       1.485          0.399
SY 2014 Days Absent                         2494      24.242        0.7        (0.831)           1.58          (1.874)       22.790         0.399
SY 2014 Out-of-School Suspensions           2494      1.515        0.199       (0.153)          0.457          (0.345)       1.522          0.399

Crime
SY 2014   Arrests for Violent Crimes        2633       0.086       -0.015      (0.015)          -0.037         (0.035)       0.103          0.708
SY 2014   Arrests for Property Crimes       2633       0.061        -0.01       (0.01)          -0.024         (0.025)       0.055          0.708
SY 2014   Arrests for Drug Crimes           2633       0.057         0.02      (0.014)           0.048         (0.033)       -0.004         0.708
SY 2014   Arrests for Other Crimes          2633       0.178       -0.002      (0.022)          -0.005         (0.053)       0.121          0.931
SY 2014   Ever Arrested                     2633       0.176       -0.007      (0.013)          -0.018          (0.03)       0.147          0.834
SY 2014   Total Arrests                     2633       0.382       -0.008      (0.037)          -0.018         (0.087)       0.275          0.931

Baseline covariates: Randomization block, treatment assignment, gender, age, learning disability, free and reduced lunch recipient, race, baseline grade level, GPA
days absent from school, disciplinary incidents, including suspensions, and arrests. Where missing data was found, zeroes were imputed and variables
identifying records as missing data were created and included. Randomization blocks are defined at the school-grade level.
Non-math GPA refers to all non math courses in core subject areas (English, Science, Social Science).
"Ever Arrested" indicates whether the student had any arrests during the period.
* = p-value < 0.1, ** = p-value < 0.05, *** = p-value < 0.01.
False discovery rate (FDR) Q-values are the share of estimates within a family of related outcomes that are expected to be false positives. Each panel
in the above table is a `family', so for example, `Mathematics' represents one outcome family. We report the smallest FDR q-value at which we could
reject the null for each outcome using the method from Benjamini and Hochberg (1995); the results are qualitatively similar if we use the
method from Benjamini, Krieger and Yekutieli (2006).
                              Table 4: Estimated Effects on Academic and Behavioral Outcomes in Study 2, Year 1
                                                                                                                                            False
                                                                              Clustered       Effect of       Clustered     Control
                                                      Control       ITT                                                                   Discovery
                                              N                               Standard      Treatment on      Standard      Complier
                                                       Mean       Estimate                                                                  Rate
                                                                                Error      Treated (TOT)        Error        Mean
                                                                                                                                          Q-Value

Mathematics
SY 2015 Math Test Scaled Score (Z)          1865       0.008      0.126***      (0.036)        0.369***        (0.108)        -0.144        0.002
SY 2015 Math GPA                            2062       1.859      0.15***       (0.043)         0.42***        (0.124)        1.787         0.002
SY 2015 Math Courses Failed (percent)       2062       0.149      -0.029**      (0.013)        -0.082**        (0.037)        0.187         0.026

Other Academics
SY 2015 Read Test Scaled Score (Z)          1865       0.007       -0.007        (0.04)         -0.007         (0.119)        -0.057        0.954
SY 2015 Non-Math GPA                        2110       1.936       0.065*       (0.034)         0.182*          (0.1)         1.934         0.206
SY 2015 Non-Math Core Courses Failed
                                            2110       0.138       -0.011       (0.01)          -0.031         (0.028)        0.165         0.424
(percent)

Behavior
SY 2015 Disciplinary Incidents              2474       1.554       -0.002       (0.138)         -0.035         (0.434)        1.759         0.936
SY 2015 Days Absent                         2474       22.777       0.756       (0.822)          2.194          (2.59)       23.126         0.691
SY 2015 Out-of-School Suspensions           2474       0.732         0.07       (0.091)          0.211         (0.286)        0.564         0.691

Crime
SY 2015   Violent Crime Arrests             2710       0.104        -0.013      (0.016)          -0.04         (0.052)        0.138         0.541
SY 2015   Property Crime Arrests            2710       0.072        -0.026      (0.016)          -0.09         (0.055)        0.137         0.209
SY 2015   Drug Crime Arrests                2710       0.051           0        (0.012)          0.001          (0.04)        0.035         0.983
SY 2015   Other Crime Arrests               2710       0.225       -0.052*      (0.028)         -0.168*        (0.092)        0.341         0.203
SY 2015   Ever Arrested                     2710       0.164        -0.019      (0.013)          -0.06         (0.042)        0.195         0.237
SY 2015   Total Arrests                     2710       0.452      -0.091**      (0.045)        -0.297**         (0.15)        0.651         0.203

Some students (N=65) were randomized into Study 2 twice. Both assignments are retained in the models above.
To account for individuals having multiple observations, standard errors are clustered on individuals.
Baseline covariates: Randomization block, treatment assignment, gender, age, learning disability, free and reduced lunch recipient, race, baseline grade level, GPA,
days absent from school, disciplinary incidents, including suspensions, and arrests. Where missing data was found, zeroes were imputed and variables
identifying records as missing data were created and included. Randomization blocks are defined at the school-grade-gender level.
Non-math GPA refers to all non math courses in core subject areas (English, Science, Social Science).
"Ever Arrested" indicates whether the student had any arrests during the period.
* = p-value < 0.1, ** = p-value < 0.05, *** = p-value < 0.01.
False discovery rate (FDR) Q-values are the share of estimates within a family of related outcomes that are expected to be false positives. Each panel
in the above table is a `family', so for example, `Mathematics' represents one outcome family. We report the smallest FDR q-value at which we could
reject the null for each outcome using the method from Benjamini and Hochberg (1995); the results are qualitatively similar if we use the
method from Benjamini, Krieger and Yekutieli (2006).
                 Table 5: Estimated 1 Year Treatment Effects on Academic and Behavioral Outcomes: Pooling Study 1 and 2
                                                                                                                                                 False
                                                                                   Clustered       Effect of       Clustered     Control
                                                           Control       ITT                                                                   Discovery
                                                   N                               Standard      Treatment on      Standard      Complier
                                                            Mean       Estimate                                                                  Rate
                                                                                     Error      Treated (TOT)        Error        Mean
                                                                                                                                               Q-Value

Mathematics
Math Test Scaled Score (Z)                       3717       0.004      0.113***      (0.026)        0.264***        (0.061)        -0.125        0.001
Math GPA                                         4277       1.803      0.219***      (0.029)        0.518***         (0.07)        1.674         0.001
Math Courses Failed (percent)                    4277       0.173     -0.037***      (0.009)       -0.087***        (0.022)        0.185         0.001

Other Academics
Read Test Scaled Score (Z)                       3716       0.003          0         (0.028)          0.007         (0.067)        -0.093        0.920
Non-Math GPA                                     4354       1.825      0.077***      (0.024)        0.185***        (0.058)         1.825        0.005
Non-Math Core Courses Failed (percent)           4354       0.178      -0.02***      (0.007)       -0.048***        (0.018)        0.198         0.012

Behavior
Disciplinary Incidents                           4968      1.532         0.047       (0.086)         0.108           (0.23)        1.613         0.638
Days Absent                                      4968      23.581        0.767       (0.582)         1.817           (1.55)       22.908         0.362
Out-of-School Suspensions                        4968      1.161         0.136       (0.089)         0.347          (0.237)        1.071         0.362

Crime
Arrests for Violent Crimes                       5343       0.094        -0.013      (0.011)         -0.036         (0.031)        0.118         0.292
Arrests for Property Crimes                      5343       0.066       -0.018*       (0.01)        -0.051*         (0.028)        0.091         0.292
Arrests for Drug Crimes                          5343       0.054        0.009       (0.009)          0.027         (0.025)        0.014         0.292
Arrests for Other Crimes                         5343       0.200        -0.026      (0.018)          -0.07         (0.051)        0.216         0.292
Ever Arrested                                    5343       0.171        -0.012      (0.009)         -0.031         (0.025)        0.165         0.292
Total Arrests                                    5343       0.414        -0.048      (0.029)          -0.13         (0.083)        0.440         0.292

Some students (N=65) were randomized into Study 2 twice. Both assignments are retained in the models above.
To account for individuals having multiple observations, standard errors are clustered on individuals.
Baseline covariates: Randomization block, treatment assignment, gender, age, learning disability, free and reduced lunch recipient, race, baseline grade level, GPA,
days absent from school, disciplinary incidents, including suspensions, and arrests. Where missing data was found, zeroes were imputed and variables
identifying records as missing data were created and included. Randomization blocks are defined at the school-grade-gender level.
Non-math GPA refers to all non math courses in core subject areas (English, Science, Social Science).
"Ever Arrested" indicates whether the student had any arrests during the period.
* = p-value < 0.1, ** = p-value < 0.05, *** = p-value < 0.01.
False discovery rate (FDR) Q-values are the share of estimates within a family of related outcomes that are expected to be false positives. Each panel
in the above table is a `family', so for example, `Mathematics' represents one outcome family. We report the smallest FDR q-value at which we could
reject the null for each outcome using the method from Benjamini and Hochberg (1995)
                           Table 6: Estimated Effects of Year 2 Treatment on Academic and Behavioral Outcomes in Study 1
                                                                                                                           False        Effect of                       False
                                                                                             Effect of
                                                                                                                          Discov-     Treatment in                     Discov-
                                                      Control      ITT                     Treatment in      Standard                                     Standard
                                             N                                Standard                                      ery      Year 1 and/or                       ery
                                                       Mean      Estimate                   Year 2 on          Error                                        Error
                                                                                Error                                      Rate        Year 2 on                        Rate
                                                                                          Treated (TOT)
                                                                                                                          Q-Value    Treated (TOT)                     Q-Value

Mathematics
SY 2015 Math Test Scaled Score (Z)          1640      -0.000      0.163***     (0.038)        0.839***        (0.198)      0.001        0.304***            (0.07)      0.001
SY 2015 Math GPA                            1841       1.870       0.14***     (0.049)        0.685***        (0.234)      0.009        0.263***           (0.089)      0.010
SY 2015 Math Courses Failed (percent)       1841       0.168        -0.021     (0.015)         -0.103          (0.07)      0.182          -0.04            (0.027)      0.183
ISR Math Test 2015 Z-Score                   878      0.000         0.067      (0.052)          0.303         (0.232)      0.198          0.112            (0.086)      0.200
ISR Math Test 2015 Scaled Score             878       33.178       0.984*      (0.563)         4.459*         (2.496)      0.127         1.651*            (0.918)      0.133

Other Academics
SY 2015 Read Test Scaled Score (Z)          1640       0.000       -0.055      (0.044)         -0.286         (0.227)      0.577          -0.104           (0.082)      0.537
SY 2015 Non-Math GPA                        1895       1.860        0.035      (0.041)          0.107          (0.19)      0.577           0.041           (0.073)      0.537
SY 2015 Non-Math Core Courses
                                            1895       0.180       -0.007      (0.012)         -0.037         (0.059)      0.577          -0.014           (0.023)      0.537
Failed (percent)

Behavior
SY 2015 Disciplinary Incidents              2251      1.126        -0.036      (0.105)         -0.206         (0.579)      0.760          -0.076           (0.215)      0.761
SY 2015 Days Absent                         2251      23.141        -0.24      (0.899)         -1.523         (4.956)      0.760          -0.566           (1.839)      0.761
SY 2015 Out-of-School Suspensions           2251      0.716         0.049      (0.095)          0.265         (0.521)      0.760           0.098           (0.194)      0.761

Crime
SY 2015   Arrests for Violent Crimes        2633       0.089         0         (0.015)           0            (0.097)      0.998            0              (0.035)      0.998
SY 2015   Arrests for Property Crimes       2633       0.057       0.002       (0.012)         0.012           (0.08)      0.998          0.004            (0.029)      0.998
SY 2015   Arrests for Drug Crimes           2633       0.084       0.025        (0.02)          0.16          (0.127)      0.279          0.058            (0.046)      0.282
SY 2015   Arrests for Other Crimes          2633       0.187       0.036       (0.028)         0.237          (0.179)      0.279          0.086            (0.065)      0.282
SY 2015   Ever Arrested                     2633       0.159       0.019       (0.013)         0.125          (0.083)      0.279          0.045             (0.03)      0.282
SY 2015   Total Arrests                     2633       0.418       0.063       (0.047)         0.409          (0.301)      0.279          0.148            (0.109)      0.282

Baseline covariates: Randomization block, treatment assignment, gender, age, learning disability, free and reduced lunch recipient, race, baseline grade level, GPA,
days absent from school, disciplinary incidents, including suspensions, and arrests. Where missing data was found, zeroes were imputed and variables
identifying records as missing data were created and included. Randomization blocks are defined at the school-grade level.
Non-math GPA refers to all non math courses in core subject areas (English, Science, Social Science).
"Ever Arrested" indicates whether the student had any arrests during the period.
* = p-value < 0.1, ** = p-value < 0.05, *** = p-value < 0.01.
False discovery rate (FDR) Q-values are the share of estimates within a family of related outcomes that are expected to be false positives. Each panel
in the above table is a `family', so for example, `Mathematics' represents one outcome family. We report the smallest FDR q-value at which we could
reject the null for each outcome using the method from Benjamini and Hochberg (1995)
Table 7: Impacts on Self-Reported Risky Behavior and Crime Victimization by Study 1 subjects: end of
Second Program Year
                                                                                                         Control   Intention to    FDR
                                                                                                   N
                                                                                                          Mean        Treat       Q-value
 Risky Behavior
 During your life, how many days have you had at least one drink of alcohol? (Z)                   888   -0.000     -0.207***       0.019
                                                                                                                     (0.061)
 During the past 30 days, on how many days did you have at least one drink of alcohol? (Z)         890   -0.000     -0.187***       0.019
                                                                                                                     (0.063)
 During your life, how many times have you used marijuana? (Z)                                     884   -0.000       -0.089        0.380
                                                                                                                     (0.066)
 During the past 30 days, how many times did you use marijuana? (Z)                                886   -0.000       -0.074        0.449
                                                                                                                     (0.065)
 During your life, how many times have you tried any other sort of illegal
                                                                                                   889   -0.000      -0.132**       0.152
 drug/inhalant/prescription drug? (Z)
                                                                                                                     (0.066)
 Do any of your brothers, sisters, cousins, or friends belong to a gang? (Dummy)                   887    0.318       -0.008        0.834
                                                                                                                     (0.032)
 Do you belong to a gang? (Dummy)                                                                  889    0.079       -0.017        0.526
                                                                                                                     (0.017)
 Have you ever sold marijuana or any other drug to your friends? (Dummy)                           888    0.133       -0.029        0.380
                                                                                                                     (0.022)
 Have you ever sold marijuana or any other drug to people you didn't know? (Dummy)                 888    0.105       -0.025        0.380
                                                                                                                     (0.019)
 During the past 3 months with how many people did you have sexual intercourse? (Z)                557    0.000       -0.202        0.380
                                                                                                                     (0.178)
 How many times have you gotten someone pregnant? (Z)                                              558    0.000       0.074         0.526
                                                                                                                     (0.078)
 In the past year, how many times did you get in a physical fight in which you were so badly
                                                                                                   895    0.000       0.015         0.834
 injured that you were treated by a doctor or a nurse? (Z)
                                                                                                                     (0.063)
 In the past year, how often did you hurt someone badly enough in a physical fight that he or
                                                                                                   895    0.000      -0.143**       0.121
 she needed to be treated by a doctor or nurse? (Z)
                                                                                                                     (0.063)
 During the past 30 days, on how many days did you carry a weapon ­ such as a gun, knife, or
                                                                                                   892   -0.000       -0.049        0.526
 club ­ to school? (Z)
                                                                                                                     (0.064)
 In the past year, how often did you paint graffiti or signs on someone else's property or in a
                                                                                                   895    0.000       -0.054        0.526
 public place? (Z)
                                                                                                                     (0.061)
 In the past year, how often did you deliberately damage property that didn't belong to you? (Z)   896    0.000       -0.056        0.526
                                                                                                                     (0.066)
 In the past year, how often did you take something from a store without paying for it? (Z)        894   -0.000       0.014         0.834
                                                                                                                     (0.068)
 In the past year, how often did you drive a car without owner's permission? (Z)                   895    0.000        0.027        0.827
                                                                                                                     (0.071)
 In the past year, how often did you break into someone's home in order to steal? (Z)              893   -0.000       -0.069        0.380
                                                                                                                     (0.051)
 Crime Victimization
 In the past year, how often did someone pulle a gun/knife on you? (Z)                             894   -0.000              0.006  0.922
                                                                                                                            (0.069)
 In the past year, how often did you get into a physical fight? (Z)                                   894       0.000        -0.056 0.848
                                                                                                                            (0.066)
 In the past year, how often did you get jumped? (Z)                                                  896       0.000        0.031  0.848
                                                                                                                            (0.067)
 In the past year, how often did you get beaten up and something was stolen from you? (Z)             894      -0.000        0.043  0.848
                                                                                                                            (0.083)
 Note: Data are from survey designed by DETAIL and given to a randomly selected subsample of youth, proportional to overall treatment
 and control group size randomized into Saga during 2015. All items are coded so the desired effect direction is positive.
 Baseline covariates and randomization block fixed effects included in all models (see text). Heteroskedasticity-robust standard
 errors in parentheses. * = p-value < 0.1, ** = p-value < 0.05, *** = p-value < 0.01.
 False discovery rate (FDR) Q-values are the share of estimates within a family of related outcomes that are expected to
 be false positives. Each panel in the above table is a `family'. We report the smallest FDR q-value at which we could
 reject the null for each outcome using the method from Benjamini and Hochberg (1995)
                                    Table 8: 11th Grade Outcomes: Saga Studies 1 and 2, pooled
                Outcome                       N       Control     Intent-to-        ITT       Treatment-      TOT         Control        FDR
                                                       Mean         Treat         Standard    on-treated    Standard      Complier      Q-value
                                                                    Effect          Error       Effect        Error        Mean
        Held Back by 11th Grade              3333      0.102          0.002        (0.01)       0.004        (0.022)       0.088         0.872
Mathematics
    11th Grade Math Test (z-score)           2973      0.006       0.096***        (0.029)     0.222***      (0.068)       -0.137        0.003
        11th Grade GPA: Math                 3086      1.980        0.075**        (0.037)     0.179**       (0.086)       1.843         0.037
Non-math Academics
 11th Grade GPA: All Non-Math Courses 3339              1.944        0.022        (0.031)        0.057        (0.072)       1.794          0.782
     11th Grade Reading Test (z-score)        2972      0.007        0.009        (0.031)        0.02         (0.073)      -0.123          0.782
Some students (N=65) were randomized into Study 2 twice. Both assignments are retained in the models above.
To account for individuals having multiple observations, standard errors are clustered on individuals.
Baseline covariates: Randomization block, treatment assignment, gender, age, learning disability, free and reduced lunch recipient, race, baseline grade level,
GPA, days absent from school, disciplinary incidents, including suspensions, and arrests. Where missing data was found, zeroes were imputed and
variables identifying records as missing data were created and included. Non-math GPA refers to all non math courses in core subject areas (English, Science, Social Science).
* = p-value < 0.1, ** = p-value < 0.05, *** = p-value < 0.01.
False discovery rate (FDR) Q-values are the share of estimates within a family of related outcomes that are expected to be false positives.
Each panel in the above table is a `family', so for example, `Mathematics' represents one outcome family. We report the smallest FDR q-value at
which we could reject the null for each outcome using the method from Benjamini and Hochberg (1995).




                                    Table 9: Graduation outcomes: Saga Studies 1 and 2, pooled
        Outcome                N        Control          Intent-to-             ITT          Treatment-          TOT            Control           FDR Q-value
                                         Mean              Treat              Standard       on-treated        Standard         Complier
                                                           Effect               Error          Effect            Error           Mean
  Graduated On-Time         3750       0.749           0.007          (0.013)          0.019           (0.034)         0.772            0.876
    Ever Graduated          3770       0.823            0.004         (0.012)          0.008           (0.032)         0.859            0.876
  Leave code: Dropout       5663       0.054           0.002          (0.007)          0.006           (0.019)         0.042            0.876
Leave code: Corrections 5663           0.028            0.003         (0.006)          0.009           (0.017)         0.011            0.876
  Leave code: Transfer      5663       0.207           0.002          (0.012)          0.005           (0.033)         0.143            0.876
 Leave code: Unknown        5663       0.134           -0.013          (0.01)          -0.038          (0.027)         0.154            0.766
  Leave code: No exit       5663       0.026           0.001          (0.004)          0.003           (0.012)         0.023            0.876
 Leave code: Deceased       5663       0.009           -0.004         (0.003)          -0.012          (0.009)         0.016            0.766
 Some students (N=65) were randomized into Study 2 twice. Both assignments are retained in the models above.
 To account for individuals having multiple observations, standard errors are clustered on individuals.
 Baseline covariates: Randomization block, treatment assignment, gender, age, learning disability, free and reduced lunch recipient, race, baseline grade level,
 GPA, days absent from school, disciplinary incidents, including suspensions, and arrests. Where missing data was found, zeroes were imputed and
 variables identifying records as missing data were created and included.
 * = p-value < 0.1, ** = p-value < 0.05, *** = p-value < 0.01.
 False discovery rate (FDR) Q-values are the share of estimates within a family of related outcomes that are expected to be false positives.
 We treat all outcomes above as one `family'. We report the smallest FDR q-value at which we could reject the null for each outcome using the
 method from Benjamini and Hochberg (1995).
Table 10: Study 1 Sample: Estimated Effects on Outcomes from ISR Survey - End of First Program Year
                                                                                                    Control     Intention to     FDR
                                                                                             N
                                                                                                     Mean          Treat        Q-value
Adult Supports
Number of adults to talk to (No Change)                                                     622      4.297          0.057        0.878
                                                                                                                  (0.338)
Number of adults who care (No Change)                                                       623      7.384         0.355         0.878
                                                                                                                  (0.594)
Would talk to adults at school (Dummy)                                                      623      0.375         -0.012        0.878
                                                                                                                  (0.043)
Grit
Agree: Setbacks don't discourage me (Z)                                                     623      -0.000         0.022        0.947
                                                                                                                  (0.088)
Agree: I am a hard worker (Z)                                                               624      0.000         0.084         0.891
                                                                                                                  (0.086)
Disagree: I have difficulty maintaining focus (Z)                                           623      0.000         -0.092        0.891
                                                                                                                  (0.082)
Agree: I am diligent (Z)                                                                    624      -0.000        0.023         0.947
                                                                                                                  (0.089)
Agree: I finish what I begin (Z)                                                            624      0.000         -0.051        0.947
                                                                                                                  (0.087)
Agree: I can continue until everything is perfect (Z)                                       624      -0.000        -0.006        0.947
                                                                                                                  (0.088)
Conscientiousness
Agree: I am always prepared (Z)                                                             624      0.000         0.118         0.507
                                                                                                                  (0.089)
Agree: I continue until everything is perfect (Z)                                           624      -0.000        -0.006        0.947
                                                                                                                  (0.088)
Agree: I leave a mess in my room (Z)                                                        624      0.000         -0.011        0.947
                                                                                                                  (0.087)
Locus of Control
Agree: I have control over direction of life (Z)                                            621      -0.000         0.052        0.564
                                                                                                                   (0.088)
Disagree: Every time I try to get ahead, something or somebody stops me (Z)                 624      0.000          0.058        0.564
                                                                                                                   (0.089)
Disagree: Luck is more important than hard work (Z)                                         624      0.000         0.165**       0.125
                                                                                                                   (0.087)
Disagree: My plans never work out, planning makes me unhappy (Z)                            622      -0.000         0.051        0.564
                                                                                                                   (0.091)
Agree: I can make plans work (Z)                                                            623      -0.000       -0.219**       0.060
                                                                                                                   (0.083)
Social Networks
Reports No Close Friends (Dummy)                                                            623      0.025           -0.012       0.875
                                                                                                                    (0.014)
Friends think it is important to attend classes regularly (Z)                                607      -0.000         -0.061       0.882
                                                                                                                    (0.091)
Friends think it is important to get good grades (Z)                                         607      -0.000         -0.035       0.967
                                                                                                                    (0.082)
Friends think it is important to study (Z)                                                   607      0.000        -0.248***      0.049
                                                                                                                    (0.091)
Friends think it is important to continue education to college (Z)                           607      -0.000          0.012       0.967
                                                                                                                    (0.084)
Have stopped hanging around with someone (Recoded Dummy)                                     623      0.505          0.066        0.438
                                                                                                                    (0.045)
Have started hanging around with someone (Recoded Dummy)                                     622       0.616          0.002       0.967
                                                                                                                    (0.044)
Note: Data are from survey designed by DETAIL and given to a randomly selected subsample of Study 1 youth, proportional to
overall treatment and control group size randomized during 2015. All items are coded so the desired effect direction is positive.
Baseline covariates and randomization block fixed effects included in all models (see text). Heteroskedasticity-robust standard
errors in parentheses. * = p-value < 0.1, ** = p-value < 0.05, *** = p-value < 0.01.
False discovery rate (FDR) Q-values are the share of estimates within a family of related outcomes that are expected to
be false positives. Each panel in the above table is a `family'. We report the smallest FDR q-value at which we could
reject the null for each outcome using the method from Benjamini and Hochberg (1995)
Table 11: Study 1 Sample: Estimated Effects on Outcomes from ISR Survey - End of Second Program Year
                                                                                                    Control     Intention to     FDR
                                                                                             N
                                                                                                     Mean          Treat        Q-value
Adult Supports
Number of adults to talk to (No Change)                                                     893      4.089         0.143         0.567
                                                                                                                  (0.252)
Number of adults who care (No Change)                                                       894      6.436         0.299         0.567
                                                                                                                  (0.403)
Grit
Agree: Setbacks don't discourage me (Z)                                                     896      0.000          -0.04        0.555
                                                                                                                   (0.07)
Agree: I am a hard worker (Z)                                                               896      0.000         0.061         0.555
                                                                                                                  (0.063)
Disagree: I have difficulty maintaining focus (Z)                                           896      -0.000        -0.046        0.555
                                                                                                                  (0.068)
Agree: I am diligent (Z)                                                                    896      0.000          0.062        0.555
                                                                                                                  (0.065)
Conscientiousness
I see myself as someone who does things carefully and completely.                           896      -0.000        -0.023        0.886
                                                                                                                  (0.066)
I see myself as someone who can be somewhat careless.                                       895      -0.000        -0.023        0.886
                                                                                                                  (0.069)
I see myself as someone who is a reliable worker.                                           896      -0.000         0.029        0.886
                                                                                                                  (0.068)
I see myself as someone who tends to be disorganized.                                       896      0.000         -0.007        0.912
                                                                                                                  (0.067)
I see myself as someone who tends to be lazy.                                               896      0.000         -0.018        0.886
                                                                                                                  (0.067)
I see myself as someone who keeps working until things are done.                            896      -0.000         0.054        0.886
                                                                                                                  (0.063)
I see myself as someone who does things efficiently (quickly and correctly).                896      -0.000         0.062        0.886
                                                                                                                  (0.067)
I see myself as someone who makes plans and sticks to them.                                 896      0.000          0.088        0.886
                                                                                                                  (0.069)
I see myself as someone who is easily distracted; has trouble paying attention.             896      -0.000        -0.055        0.886
                                                                                                                  (0.067)
Locus of Control
Disagree: You can learn but not change intelligence (Z)                                     896      -0.000       0.117*         0.536
                                                                                                                  (0.068)
Disagree: Intelligence can't be changed much (Z)                                            896      -0.000        0.091         0.536
                                                                                                                  (0.065)
Disagree: You have a certain amount of intelligence, can't change (Z)                       896      -0.000         0.069        0.564
                                                                                                                  (0.067)
Disagree: Moral character can't be changed (Z)                                              896      0.000          0.041        0.758
                                                                                                                  (0.068)
Disagree: Responsibility can't be changed (Z)                                               896      0.000         -0.016        0.813
                                                                                                                  (0.069)
Disagree: Moral traits can't be changed (Z)                                                 896      0.000         0.067         0.564
                                                                                                                  (0.069)
Social Networks
Reports No Close Friends (Dummy)                                                            895      0.042           0.008        0.810
                                                                                                                    (0.015)
Friends think it is important to attend classes regularly (Z)                                855      0.000          -0.018       0.810
                                                                                                                    (0.071)
Friends think it is important to get good grades (Z)                                         855       0.000         -0.057       0.810
                                                                                                                    (0.067)
Friends think it is important to study (Z)                                                   855      0.000          0.025        0.810
                                                                                                                    (0.068)
Friends think it is important to continue education to college (Z)                           853      -0.000          0.032       0.810
                                                                                                                    (0.068)
Have stopped hanging around with someone (Recoded Dummy)                                     895      0.593          -0.008       0.810
                                                                                                                    (0.034)
Have started hanging around with someone (Recoded Dummy)                                     896       0.644         -0.037       0.810
                                                                                                                    (0.034)
Note: Data are from survey designed by DETAIL and given to a randomly selected subsample of Study 1 youth, proportional to
overall treatment and control group size randomized during 2015. All items are coded so the desired effect direction is positive.
Baseline covariates and randomization block fixed effects included in all models (see text). Heteroskedasticity-robust standard
errors in parentheses. * = p-value < 0.1, ** = p-value < 0.05, *** = p-value < 0.01.
False discovery rate (FDR) Q-values are the share of estimates within a family of related outcomes that are expected to
be false positives. Each panel in the above table is a `family'. We report the smallest FDR q-value at which we could
reject the null for each outcome using the method from Benjamini and Hochberg (1995)
                              Table 12: Impacts of Self-Reported Attitudes on Education
                                                                                                            Control     Intention to    FDR
                                                                                                     N
                                                                                                             Mean          Treat       Q-value
Survey Wave 1: School year 2013-2014
Disruptions by others get in the way of my learning (Z)                                             623      -0.000         -0.057      0.836
                                                                                                                           (0.089)
Weekly time spent on homework (Z)                                                                   623      0.000          -0.091      0.684
                                                                                                                           (0.084)
How much of your homework do you finish? (Z)                                                        622      0.000           0.008      0.992
                                                                                                                           (0.084)
Expect to graduate high school and continue education (Dummy)                                       623      0.910           0.008      0.965
                                                                                                                           (0.025)
Want to graduate high school and continue education (Dummy)                                         623      0.923          0.002       0.992
                                                                                                                           (0.024)
How important are good grades to you? (Z)                                                           623      0.000          0.061       0.836
                                                                                                                           (0.083)
Feeling safe at school (Z)                                                                          623      -0.000          0.041      0.938
                                                                                                                           (0.094)
Like math (Z)                                                                                       623      -0.000        0.203**      0.085
                                                                                                                           (0.086)
Good grades in math (Z)                                                                             623      -0.000       0.289***      0.001
                                                                                                                           (0.078)
Like school in general (Z)                                                                          623      0.000           -0.13      0.577
                                                                                                                           (0.086)
Like reading (Z)                                                                                    623      0.000          -0.102      0.684
                                                                                                                           (0.082)
Good grades in reading (Z)                                                                          623      0.000          -0.072      0.802
                                                                                                                           (0.081)
Survey Wave 2: School year 2014-2015
Weekly time spent on homework (Z)                                                                   896      0.000            0.01      0.879
                                                                                                                            (0.07)
Expect to graduate high school and continue education (Dummy)                                        895       0.132        0.032       0.338
                                                                                                                           (0.025)
Want to graduate high school and continue education (Dummy)                                          896       0.630        0.037       0.338
                                                                                                                           (0.032)
How important are good grades to you? (Z)                                                            896      -0.000        0.092       0.338
                                                                                                                           (0.061)
Feeling safe at school (Z)                                                                           896      -0.000        -0.019      0.869
                                                                                                                            (0.07)
Like math (Z)                                                                                        896      -0.000         0.079      0.338
                                                                                                                           (0.067)
Good grades in math (Z)                                                                              896      -0.000         0.097      0.338
                                                                                                                           (0.064)
Like school in general (Z)                                                                           896       0.000        0.033       0.767
                                                                                                                           (0.066)
Like reading (Z)                                                                                     896      -0.000        -0.083      0.338
                                                                                                                           (0.067)
Good grades in reading (Z)                                                                           895       0.000        -0.076      0.338
                                                                                                                           (0.066)
Note: Data are from survey designed by DETAIL and given to a randomly selected subsample of Study 1 youth, proportional to
overall treatment and control group size randomized during 2015. All items are coded so the desired effect direction is positive.
Baseline covariates and randomization block fixed effects included in all models (see text). Heteroskedasticity-robust standard
errors in parentheses. * = p-value < 0.1, ** = p-value < 0.05, *** = p-value < 0.01.
False discovery rate (FDR) Q-values are the share of estimates within a family of related outcomes that are expected to
be false positives. Each panel in the above table is a `family'. We report the smallest FDR q-value at which we could
reject the null for each outcome using the method from Benjamini and Hochberg (1995)
Table 13: ITT Estimates Interacted with Whether School Above Median in CPS Disciplinary Incidents During
School Year (Pooled)

              Year 1 Outcome                   N        Ctrl Mean       Intent-to-Treat    ITT Standard         Dummy x          Interaction SE
                                                                             Est.             Error             Treatment
                                                                                                                  Status
 Mathematics
                 Math GPA                    4331         1.786             0.246***           (0.043)             -0.05             (0.060)
         Math Courses Failed (percent)       4331         0.179            -0.044***           (0.013)            0.011              (0.019)
          Standardized Math Score            3741         0.001             0.13***            (0.038)            -0.031             (0.052)
 Non-math academics
            Non-Math GPA                     4409         1.809              0.062*            (0.035)             0.025             (0.049)
  Non-math Core Courses Failed (percent)     4409         0.184             -0.019*            (0.010)             0.001             (0.015)
       Standardized Reading Score            3740         0.001              -0.007            (0.041)             0.017             (0.056)
 Behavior
             Disciplinary incidents          5035         1.549            -0.171**            (0.082)            0.379**            (0.166)
                 Days Absent                 5035        23.932             -0.281             (0.719)            2.252*             (1.157)
              Out-of-School Incs             5035         1.180              -0.09             (0.075)            0.421**            (0.174)
 Crime
             Violent Crime Arrests              5410         0.095               0.005             (0.014)               -0.03       (0.021)
            Property Crime Arrests              5410         0.073              -0.014             (0.013)              -0.014       (0.020)
                 Drug Arrests                   5410         0.054              -0.013             (0.009)             0.043**       (0.017)
                 Other arrests                  5410         0.207              -0.022             (0.022)              -0.008       (0.036)
             Any Arrests (Dummy)                5410         0.176             -0.027**            (0.012)               0.029       (0.018)
                  All Arrests                   5410         0.429              -0.045             (0.034)              -0.008       (0.058)
  Some students (N=65) were randomized into Study 2 twice. Both assignments are retained in the models above. To account for
 individuals having multiple observations, standard errors are clustered on individuals. Baseline covariates: Randomization block,
 treatment assignment, gender, age, learning disability, free and reduced lunch recipient, race, baseline grade level, GPA, days
 absent from school, disciplinary incidents, including suspensions, and arrests. Where missing data was found, zeroes were imputed
 and variables identifying records as missing data were created and included. Non-math GPA refers to all non math courses in core
 subject areas (English, Science, Social Science). * = p-value < 0.1, ** = p-value < 0.05, *** = p-value < 0.01.
  Given that randomization block fixed-effects fully explain school fixed-effects, we cannot estimate the main effect for the
 'above median' dummy variable, so we do not report this in the table. However, we can recover and report the interaction effect.
                       Math Test TOT vs Randomization rate
                       Coefficient: 2.825* (1.658)

                                                                                                                           q




                 5.0
                                                                                                                   q




                                                                                                           q
                                                                                             q

                 2.5                                                                 q   q
Math Test TOT




                                                                                     q


                                                                             q
                                                             q                 q    q                q
                                                                        q
                                                         q                   q q q
                          q                                       q              qq                  q             q
                                              q                        q
                                                                       q           q                       q           q
                                q                                        q    q               q
                                                                       qq      q   qqq    q
                                          q                           q        q         q q           q       q   q
                 0.0                q               qq   q
                                                                  qq    q             qq
                                                                                            q
                                                                                                           q
                                                                        q
                                                                       qq
                                                                         q       q
                                                                                             q                                     q

                                                                                             q                                 q
                                                                                                 q
                                              q


                -2.5                      q




                                                                                                 q

                -5.0
                                              0.4                                                0.6                               0.8
                                                                 Randomization rate

Figure 1: SUTVA Analysis: Block-level randomization rate plotted against TOT effect on math test score
                                                      Math test score (Z): Predicted Treatment Effect vs Rank, N=3597


                                                0.3
                                       (Xi)




                                                                                                              Q4 avg: 0.21
                                        (-i)
Individual Predicted Treatment Effect ^




                                                0.2                                          Q3 avg: 0.154

                                                                             Q2 avg: 0.107

                                                0.1

                                                            Q1 avg: 0.007

                                                0.0




                                               -0.1




                                               -0.2
                                                        0                   1000             2000              3000
                                                                  Reverse-rank of sorted Predicted Treatment Effects

Figure 2: Random Forests for Treatment Heterogenity: Predicted treatment effects against their rank, stan-
dardized math test data. Average PTE's for each quartile are presented.
                            PTE Cluster Scatterplot: X=Math test score (Z) vs Y=Math GPA
                      0.6




                                   (-0.026, 0.455), N=142

                      0.4
 Math GPA, Estimate




                                                                                           clusters
                                                                                            a   1

                                                                                            a   2
                                                           (0.165, 0.263), N=1346           a   3
                                                                                            a   4
                      0.2
                                           (0.014, 0.192), N=681

                                                         (0.146, 0.129), N=1130




                      0.0

                        -0.2        -0.1          0.0         0.1         0.2       0.3
                                              Math test score (Z), Estimate

Figure 3: Random Forests for Treatment Heterogenity: Plotting PTEs of multiple outcomes - Math GPA vs
Math test scores. Clusters estimated using k-means, k=4; k chosen through data-driven selection method.
                                                                 ISR Math test Item-level ITT Effect by Difficulty
 Intent to Treat Effect (proportion correct response)




                                                         0.050




                                                         0.025




                                                         0.000




                                                        -0.025




                                                        -0.050
                                                                              0.6                    0.4                 0.2          0.0
                                                                                           Item Difficulty Level (P+)

                                                                                    Above Median Students     Below Median Students


Figure 4: Treatment effects on individual ISR items against item-level difficulty for students above/below the
median baseline standardized math test score. Above/Below median is calculated for all students taking the
ISR math asessment. The lines shown are local polynomial fitted lines to see any underlying nonlinearities in
the relationships between item-level impacts and difficulty. We also include [0.5, 0.95] confidence intervals on
the fitted lines. This plot truncates the 3 easiest items (P-plus > 0.75) to better display the graph; the full
version is included in the appendices.
1   Appendices


           Table 1: (Appendix) Missing Data by Treatment Assignment: Study 1 and 2
                                                      Control          Treatment
         Study 1: Percent Missing
         N                                             1326               1307
         Grade Data - Baseline year                     6.49              7.88
         Attendance Data - Baseline year                3.09              3.06
         Standardized Math Test - Baseline year        14.48             16.68
            F-test p-value: 0.997
         Grade Data - Program year 1                   14.63             14.84
         Attendance Data - Program year 1               4.37               6.2
         Standardized Math Test - Program year 1       29.79             29.53
            F-test p-value: 0.958
         Grade Data - Program year 2                   27.98             27.54
         Attendance Data - Program year 2              14.71             14.31
         Standardized Math Test - Program year 2       37.41             38.03
            F-test p-value: 0.981
         Study 2: Percent Missing
         N                                             1145               1565
         Grade Data - Baseline Year                     6.55              9.58
         Attendance Data - Baseline Year                3.23              5.88
         Standardized Math test - Baseline Year         9.96             12.14
            F-test p-value: 0.946
         Grade Data - Study Year                       23.67             20.89
         Attendance Data - Study Year                   8.91              8.56
         Standardized Math test - Study Year           31.18             31.18
            F-test p-value: 0.995
Table 2: (Appendix) Estimated Effects on Academic and Behavioral Outcomes in Study 1, Year 1: Permutation Test
                                                                         Intent to Treat        Robust
                                              N        Control Mean                                           Permutation P-value
                                                                            Estimate        Standard Error

 Mathematics
 SY 2014 Math Test Scaled Score (Z)         1852          -0.000             0.082**            (0.036)               0.252
 SY 2014 Math GPA                           2215           1.760            0.274***             (0.04)               0***
 SY 2014 Math Courses Failed (percent)      2215           0.191            -0.043***           (0.013)              0.01***
 ISR Math Test 2014 Z-Score                 617           -0.000             0.119**            (0.058)               0.183
 ISR Math Test 2014 Scaled Score             617          31.110             1.344**            (0.566)               0.128

 Other Academics
 SY 2014 Read Test Scaled Score (Z)         1851           0.000              0.004              (0.04)               0.869
 SY 2014 Non-Math GPA                       2244           1.739             0.081**            (0.033)               0.781
 SY 2014 Non-Math Core Courses Failed
                                            2244           0.210            -0.027**            (0.011)               0.436
 (percent)

 Behavior
 SY 2014 Disciplinary Incidents             2494          1.513               0.092             (0.104)               0.443
 SY 2014 Days Absent                        2494          24.242               0.7              (0.831)               0.226
 SY 2014 Out-of-School Suspensions          2494          1.515               0.199             (0.153)               0.158

 Crime
 SY 2014   Arrests for Violent Crimes       2633           0.086             -0.015             (0.015)               0.462
 SY 2014   Arrests for Property Crimes      2633           0.061              -0.01              (0.01)               0.258
 SY 2014   Arrests for Drug Crimes          2633           0.057              0.02              (0.014)               0.187
 SY 2014   Arrests for Other Crimes         2633           0.178             -0.002             (0.022)               0.926
 SY 2014   Ever Arrested                    2633           0.176             -0.007             (0.013)               0.963
 SY 2014   Total Arrests                    2633           0.382             -0.008             (0.037)               0.994

 Permutation tests were performed by randomly shuffling treatment assignment at the randomization block level and performing a
 (2-sided) t-test at each repetition. We then calculate the share of replications where this exceeds the t-test statistic
 using actual treatment assignment. This process is repeated for 100000 repetitions for each outcome.
 Non-math GPA refers to all non math courses in core subject areas (English, Science, Social Science).
 "Ever Arrested" indicates whether the student had any arrests during the period.
 * = p-value < 0.1, ** = p-value < 0.05, *** = p-value < 0.01.
Table 3: (Appendix) Estimated Effects on Academic and Behavioral Outcomes in Study 2, Year 1: Permutation Test
                                                                                               Clustered
                                              N        Control Mean       ITT Estimate                        Permutation P-value
                                                                                            Standard Error

 Mathematics
 SY 2015 Math Test Scaled Score (Z)         1865           0.008            0.126***            (0.036)              0.014**
 SY 2015 Math GPA                           2062           1.859             0.15***            (0.043)              0.012**
 SY 2015 Math Courses Failed (percent)      2062           0.149            -0.029**            (0.013)               0.159

 Other Academics
 SY 2015 Read Test Scaled Score (Z)         1865           0.007             -0.007              (0.04)               0.778
 SY 2015 Non-Math GPA                       2110           1.936             0.065*             (0.034)               0.283
 SY 2015 Non-Math Core Courses Failed
                                            2110           0.138             -0.011             (0.01)                0.628
 (percent)

 Behavior
 SY 2015 Disciplinary Incidents             2474          1.554              -0.002             (0.138)               0.434
 SY 2015 Days Absent                        2474          22.777             0.756              (0.822)               0.701
 SY 2015 Out-of-School Suspensions          2474          0.732               0.07              (0.091)               0.215

 Crime
 SY 2015   Violent Crime Arrests            2710           0.104              -0.013            (0.016)              0.465
 SY 2015   Property Crime Arrests           2710           0.072              -0.026            (0.016)              0.069*
 SY 2015   Drug Crime Arrests               2710           0.051                 0              (0.012)              0.635
 SY 2015   Other Crime Arrests              2710           0.225             -0.052*            (0.028)              0.123
 SY 2015   Ever Arrested                    2710           0.164              -0.019            (0.013)              0.184
 SY 2015   Total Arrests                    2710           0.452            -0.091**            (0.045)              0.06*

 Permutation tests were performed by randomly shuffling treatment assignment at the randomization block level and performing a
 (2-sided) t-test at each repetition. We then calculate the share of replications where this exceeds the t-test statistic
 using actual treatment assignment. This process is repeated for 100000 repetitions for each outcome.
 Non-math GPA refers to all non math courses in core subject areas (English, Science, Social Science).
 "Ever Arrested" indicates whether the student had any arrests during the period.
 * = p-value < 0.1, ** = p-value < 0.05, *** = p-value < 0.01.
Table 4: (Appendix) Estimated 1 Year Effects on Academic and Behavioral Outcomes, Pooling Study 1 and 2: Permutation Test
                                                                                                    Clustered
                                                   N        Control Mean       ITT Estimate                        Permutation P-value
                                                                                                 Standard Error

       Mathematics
       Math Test Scaled Score (Z)                3717           0.004             0.113***           (0.026)             0.008***
       Math GPA                                  4277           1.803            0.219***            (0.029)               0***
       Math Courses Failed (percent)             4277           0.173            -0.037***           (0.009)             0.001***

       Other Academics
       Read Test Scaled Score (Z)                3716           0.003                0               (0.028)              0.758
       Non-Math GPA                              4354           1.825            0.077***            (0.024)              0.093*
       Non-Math Core Courses Failed
                                                 4354           0.178            -0.02***            (0.007)              0.066*
       (percent)

       Behavior
       Disciplinary Incidents                    4968          1.532               0.047             (0.086)               0.284
       Days Absent                               4968          23.581              0.767             (0.582)               0.313
       Out-of-School Suspensions                 4968          1.161               0.136             (0.089)               0.196

       Crime
       Arrests for Violent Crimes                5343           0.094              -0.013            (0.011)               0.355
       Arrests for Property Crimes               5343           0.066             -0.018*             (0.01)              0.035**
       Arrests for Drug Crimes                   5343           0.054               0.009            (0.009)               0.595
       Arrests for Other Crimes                  5343           0.200              -0.026            (0.018)               0.326
       Ever Arrested                             5343           0.171              -0.012            (0.009)                0.24
       Total Arrests                             5343           0.414              -0.048            (0.029)               0.169

      Permutation tests were performed by randomly shuffling treatment assignment at the randomization block level and performing a
      (2-sided) t-test at each repetition. We then calculate the share of replications where this exceeds the t-test statistic
      using actual treatment assignment. This process is repeated for 100000 repetitions for each outcome.
      Non-math GPA refers to all non math courses in core subject areas (English, Science, Social Science).
      "Ever Arrested" indicates whether the student had any arrests during the period.
      * = p-value < 0.1, ** = p-value < 0.05, *** = p-value < 0.01.
Table 5: (Appendix) Estimated Effects of Year 2 Treatment on Academic and Behavioral Outcomes in Study 1: Permutation Test
                                                    N        Control Mean       ITT Estimate      Standard Error    Permutation P-value

       Mathematics
       SY 2015 Math Test Scaled Score (Z)         1640          -0.000            0.163***            (0.038)              0.045**
       SY 2015 Math GPA                           1841           1.870             0.14***            (0.049)               0.441
       SY 2015 Math Courses Failed (percent)      1841           0.168              -0.021            (0.015)               0.986
       ISR Math Test 2015 Z-Score                 878            0.000              0.067             (0.052)               0.756
       ISR Math Test 2015 Scaled Score             878          33.178             0.984*             (0.563)               0.944

       Other Academics
       SY 2015 Read Test Scaled Score (Z)         1640           0.000             -0.055             (0.044)              0.097*
       SY 2015 Non-Math GPA                       1895           1.860             0.035              (0.041)              0.942
       SY 2015 Non-Math Core Courses Failed
                                                  1895           0.180             -0.007             (0.012)               0.884
       (percent)

       Behavior
       SY 2015 Disciplinary Incidents             2251          1.126              -0.036             (0.105)               0.927
       SY 2015 Days Absent                        2251          23.141              -0.24             (0.899)               0.698
       SY 2015 Out-of-School Suspensions          2251          0.716               0.049             (0.095)               0.617

       Crime
       SY 2015   Arrests for Violent Crimes       2633           0.089                0               (0.015)               0.929
       SY 2015   Arrests for Property Crimes      2633           0.057              0.002             (0.012)               0.959
       SY 2015   Arrests for Drug Crimes          2633           0.084              0.025              (0.02)               0.202
       SY 2015   Arrests for Other Crimes         2633           0.187              0.036             (0.028)               0.274
       SY 2015   Ever Arrested                    2633           0.159              0.019             (0.013)               0.161
       SY 2015   Total Arrests                    2633           0.418              0.063             (0.047)               0.275

       Permutation tests were performed by randomly shuffling treatment assignment at the randomization block level and performing a
       (2-sided) t-test at each repetition. We then calculate the share of replications where this exceeds the t-test statistic
       using actual treatment assignment. This process is repeated for 100000 repetitions for each outcome.
       Non-math GPA refers to all non math courses in core subject areas (English, Science, Social Science).
       "Ever Arrested" indicates whether the student had any arrests during the period.
       * = p-value < 0.1, ** = p-value < 0.05, *** = p-value < 0.01.
                                           Table 6: (Appendix) 11th Grade Outcomes: Study 1
                Outcome                       N       Control      Intent-to-         ITT        Treatment-     TOT          Control         FDR
                                                       Mean          Treat          Standard     on-treated   Standard       Complier       Q-value
                                                                     Effect           Error        Effect       Error         Mean
        Held Back by 11th Grade              1722      0.119           0.004         (0.013)        0.008      (0.025)         0.100         0.756
Mathematics
    11th Grade Math Test (z-score)           1528      0.010          0.158***        (0.04)       0.3***      (0.074)        -0.214         0.001
        11th Grade GPA: Math                 1590      2.002            0.061        (0.052)        0.124      (0.097)         1.872         0.201
Non-math Academics
 11th Grade GPA: All Non-Math Courses 1721              1.963         -0.01         (0.042)       -0.011        (0.079)         1.853          0.890
     11th Grade Reading Test (z-score)        1528      0.012         0.018         (0.044)        0.035        (0.081)        -0.189          0.890
Some students (N=65) were randomized into Study 2 twice. Both assignments are retained in the models above. Robust standard errors used.
To account for individuals having multiple observations, standard errors are clustered on individuals.
Baseline covariates: Randomization block, treatment assignment, gender, age, learning disability, free and reduced lunch recipient, race, baseline grade level,
GPA, days absent from school, disciplinary incidents, including suspensions, and arrests. Where missing data was found, zeroes were imputed and
variables identifying records as missing data were created and included. Non-math GPA refers to all non math courses in core subject areas (English, Science, Social Science).
* = p-value < 0.1, ** = p-value < 0.05, *** = p-value < 0.01.
False discovery rate (FDR) Q-values are the share of estimates within a family of related outcomes that are expected to be false positives.
Each panel in the above table is a `family', so for example, `Mathematics' represents one outcome family. We report the smallest FDR q-value at
which we could reject the null for each outcome using the method from Benjamini and Hochberg (1995).




                                           Table 7: (Appendix) 11th Grade Outcomes: Study 2
                Outcome                       N       Control      Intent-to-         ITT        Treatment-     TOT          Control         FDR
                                                       Mean          Treat          Standard     on-treated   Standard       Complier       Q-value
                                                                     Effect           Error        Effect       Error         Mean
        Held Back by 11th Grade              1611      0.079           0.003         (0.013)        0.01        (0.04)         0.061         0.810
Mathematics
    11th Grade Math Test (z-score)           1445      0.000           0.017         (0.041)        0.046      (0.126)         0.046         0.717
        11th Grade GPA: Math                 1496      1.953           0.079         (0.052)        0.244      (0.156)         1.809         0.239
Non-math Academics
 11th Grade GPA: All Non-Math Courses 1618              1.920         0.047         (0.043)        0.146        (0.132)        1.721           0.534
     11th Grade Reading Test (z-score)        1444      0.001         -0.005        (0.043)       -0.021        (0.133)        -0.008          0.875
Some students (N=65) were randomized into Study 2 twice. Both assignments are retained in the models above.
To account for individuals having multiple observations, standard errors are clustered on individuals.
Baseline covariates: Randomization block, treatment assignment, gender, age, learning disability, free and reduced lunch recipient, race, baseline grade level,
GPA, days absent from school, disciplinary incidents, including suspensions, and arrests. Where missing data was found, zeroes were imputed and
variables identifying records as missing data were created and included. Non-math GPA refers to all non math courses in core subject areas (English, Science, Social Science).
* = p-value < 0.1, ** = p-value < 0.05, *** = p-value < 0.01.
False discovery rate (FDR) Q-values are the share of estimates within a family of related outcomes that are expected to be false positives.
Each panel in the above table is a `family', so for example, `Mathematics' represents one outcome family. We report the smallest FDR q-value at
which we could reject the null for each outcome using the method from Benjamini and Hochberg (1995).




                                            Table 8: (Appendix) Graduation outcomes: Study 1
        Outcome                N        Control          Intent-to-              ITT           Treatment-        TOT            Control         FDR Q-value
                                         Mean              Treat               Standard        on-treated      Standard         Complier
                                                           Effect                Error           Effect          Error           Mean
  Graduated On-Time         1853       0.738            0.008         (0.017)           0.017          (0.036)         0.759            0.74
    Ever Graduated          1859       0.826            0.005         (0.015)           0.011          (0.033)         0.862            0.74
  Leave code: Dropout       2728       0.062            0.005          (0.01)           0.013          (0.024)         0.052            0.74
Leave code: Corrections 2728           0.032            0.005         (0.007)           0.012          (0.017)         0.010            0.74
  Leave code: Transfer      2728       0.195            0.006         (0.015)           0.014          (0.037)         0.120            0.74
 Leave code: Unknown        2728       0.125           -0.011         (0.012)          -0.027          (0.029)         0.118            0.74
  Leave code: No exit       2728       0.015          -0.009**        (0.004)         -0.021**          (0.01)         0.027            0.27
 Leave code: Deceased       2728       0.009           -0.003         (0.003)          -0.006          (0.008)         0.012            0.74
 Robust standard errors are used and presented in the models above.
 To account for individuals having multiple observations, standard errors are clustered on individuals.
 Baseline covariates: Randomization block, treatment assignment, gender, age, learning disability, free and reduced lunch recipient, race, baseline grade level,
 GPA, days absent from school, disciplinary incidents, including suspensions, and arrests. Where missing data was found, zeroes were imputed and
 variables identifying records as missing data were created and included.
 * = p-value < 0.1, ** = p-value < 0.05, *** = p-value < 0.01.
 False discovery rate (FDR) Q-values are the share of estimates within a family of related outcomes that are expected to be false positives.
 We treat all outcomes above as one `family'. We report the smallest FDR q-value at which we could reject the null for each outcome using the
 method from Benjamini and Hochberg (1995).
                                        Table 9: (Appendix) Graduation outcomes: Study 2
       Outcome              N        Control        Intent-to-         ITT          Treatment-          TOT           Control       FDR Q-value
                                      Mean            Treat          Standard       on-treated        Standard        Complier
                                                      Effect           Error          Effect            Error          Mean
  Graduated On-Time         1897       0.761           0.008          (0.019)          0.025            (0.06)         0.788            0.919
    Ever Graduated          1911       0.821            0.003         (0.017)          0.006           (0.055)         0.857            0.919
  Leave code: Dropout       2935       0.044           -0.002         (0.008)          -0.005          (0.028)         0.034            0.919
Leave code: Corrections 2935           0.023            0.001         (0.007)          0.005           (0.022)         0.011            0.919
  Leave code: Transfer      2935       0.219           -0.003         (0.017)          -0.012          (0.055)         0.172            0.919
 Leave code: Unknown        2935       0.145           -0.013         (0.014)          -0.046          (0.045)         0.191            0.826
  Leave code: No exit       2935       0.037           0.011          (0.007)          0.035           (0.025)         0.013            0.740
 Leave code: Deceased       2935       0.010           -0.005         (0.004)          -0.018          (0.013)         0.020            0.740
 Some students (N=65) were randomized into Study 2 twice. Both assignments are retained in the models above.
 To account for individuals having multiple observations, standard errors are clustered on individuals.
 Baseline covariates: Randomization block, treatment assignment, gender, age, learning disability, free and reduced lunch recipient, race, baseline grade level,
 GPA, days absent from school, disciplinary incidents, including suspensions, and arrests. Where missing data was found, zeroes were imputed and
 variables identifying records as missing data were created and included.
 * = p-value < 0.1, ** = p-value < 0.05, *** = p-value < 0.01.
 False discovery rate (FDR) Q-values are the share of estimates within a family of related outcomes that are expected to be false positives.
 We treat all outcomes above as one `family'. We report the smallest FDR q-value at which we could reject the null for each outcome using the
 method from Benjamini and Hochberg (1995).




               Table 10: (Appendix) All Graduation/Enrollment outcomes: Pooling Studies 1 and 2
                     Outcome                            N        Control        Intent-to-         ITT           Treatment-        TOT            Control
                                                                  Mean            Treat          Standard        on-treated      Standard         Complier
                                                                                  Effect           Error           Effect          Error           Mean
                Graduated On-Time                      3750       0.749           0.007          (0.013)          0.019          (0.034)            0.772
          Graduated On-Time Post-Match                 3755       0.757           0.006          (0.013)          0.014          (0.034)            0.783
                   Ever Graduated                      3770       0.823           0.004          (0.012)          0.008          (0.032)            0.859
             Graduated On-Time (zeros)                 5653       0.492           0.008          (0.013)          0.023          (0.036)            0.558
      Graduated On-Time Post-Match (zeros)             5662       0.499           0.007          (0.013)          0.021          (0.036)            0.564
               Ever Graduated (zeros)                  5663       0.543           0.009          (0.013)          0.027          (0.037)            0.610
Ever Graduated (Transfers/Unknowns=Dropouts) 5663                 0.543           0.009          (0.013)          0.027          (0.037)            0.610
Ever Graduated (Transfers/Unknowns=Graduates) 5663                0.884          -0.002           (0.01)         -0.006          (0.028)            0.908
                Leave code: Dropout                    5663       0.054           0.002          (0.007)          0.006          (0.019)            0.042
              Leave code: Corrections                  5663       0.028           0.003          (0.006)          0.009          (0.017)            0.011
                Leave code: Transfer                   5663       0.207           0.002          (0.012)          0.005          (0.033)            0.143
               Leave code: Unknown                     5663       0.134          -0.013           (0.01)         -0.038          (0.027)            0.154
                 Leave code: No exit                   5663       0.026           0.001          (0.004)          0.003          (0.012)            0.023
                Leave code: Deceased                   5663       0.009          -0.004          (0.003)         -0.012          (0.009)            0.016
 Some students (N=65) were randomized into Study 2 twice. Both assignments are retained in the models above.
 To account for individuals having multiple observations, standard errors are clustered on individuals.
 Baseline covariates: Randomization block, treatment assignment, gender, age, learning disability, free and reduced lunch recipient, race, baseline grade level,
 GPA, days absent from school, disciplinary incidents, including suspensions, and arrests. Where missing data was found, zeroes were imputed and
 variables identifying records as missing data were created and included.
 * = p-value < 0.1, ** = p-value < 0.05, *** = p-value < 0.01.
 False discovery rate (FDR) Q-values are the share of estimates within a family of related outcomes that are expected to be false positives.
 We treat all outcomes above as one `family'. We report the smallest FDR q-value at which we could reject the null for each outcome using the
 method from Benjamini and Hochberg (1995).
               Table 11: (Appendix) Sensitivity of ITT Estimates to Choice of Baseline Covariates (Pooled Data from Study 1 and 2)

                                              All Covariates         Sociodemographic             Academic             Criminal Activity                  No Covariates

                                          Estimate     Standard    Estimate     Standard    Estimate     Standard     Estimate    Standard     Estimate                   Standard
                                                         Error                    Error                    Error                    Error                                   Error
Mathematics
Math GPA                                  0.219***      (0.029)     0.188***     (0.034)     0.226***     (0.029)     0.202***     (0.034)     0.198***                   (0.035)
Math Courses Failed (percent)             -0.037***     (0.009)    -0.032***      (0.01)    -0.039***     (0.009)    -0.035***      (0.01)    -0.035***                    (0.01)
Math Test Scaled Score (Z)                 0.113***     (0.026)     0.089***     (0.031)     0.114***     (0.026)     0.099***     (0.034)     0.095***                   (0.034)

Other Academics
Read Test Scaled Score (Z)                    0         (0.028)      -0.015      (0.033)      -0.002      (0.029)      -0.011      (0.034)      -0.014                    (0.034)
Non-Math GPA                              0.077***      (0.024)      0.051*      (0.029)     0.08***      (0.024)     0.061**      (0.029)     0.059**                     (0.03)
Non-Math Core Courses Failed
                                          -0.02***      (0.007)     -0.014*      (0.008)    -0.021***     (0.007)     -0.018**     (0.008)     -0.017**                   (0.009)
(percent)

Behavior
Disciplinary Incidents                      0.047       (0.086)      0.065       (0.092)      0.031       (0.091)      0.047       (0.091)       0.043                    (0.093)
Days Absent                                 0.767       (0.582)      0.948       (0.669)      0.618       (0.586)       0.79        (0.66)       0.722                    (0.686)
Out-of-School Suspensions                   0.136       (0.089)      0.154       (0.097)      0.127       (0.096)      0.149       (0.094)       0.139                    (0.098)

Crime
Arrests for Violent Crimes                  -0.013      (0.011)      -0.011      (0.011)      -0.014      (0.011)      -0.012      (0.011)       -0.012                   (0.011)
Arrests for Property Crimes                -0.018*       (0.01)      -0.016       (0.01)     -0.019*       (0.01)     -0.018*       (0.01)      -0.018*                    (0.01)
Arrests for Drug Crimes                      0.009      (0.009)       0.009       (0.01)       0.006       (0.01)       0.009      (0.009)        0.007                    (0.01)
Arrests for Other Crimes                    -0.026      (0.018)      -0.024       (0.02)     -0.032*      (0.019)      -0.026      (0.018)        -0.03                    (0.02)
Ever Arrested                               -0.012      (0.009)      -0.008       (0.01)      -0.014       (0.01)       -0.01      (0.009)       -0.012                    (0.01)
Total Arrests                               -0.048      (0.029)      -0.042      (0.033)     -0.059*      (0.032)      -0.046       (0.03)       -0.053                   (0.034)

Some students (N=65) were randomized into Study 2 twice. Both assignments are retained in the models above.
Sections indicate different combinations of baseline covariates used in ITT models.
Baseline covariates: Randomization block, treatment assignment, gender, age, learning disability, free and reduced lunch recipient, race, baseline grade level, GPA,
days absent from school, disciplinary incidents, including suspensions, and arrests. Where missing data was found, zeroes were imputed and variables
identifying records as missing data were created and included.
Sociodemographic: race, gender, age, learning disability, subsidized lunch, baseline grade; Academic: GPA, absences, grades earned; Criminal Activity: arrests.
Math Scaled Score refers to the respective CPS standardized test administered in a given year to a given grade level. See text for details.
Non-math GPA refers to all non math courses in core subject areas (English, Science, Social Science).
"Ever Arrested" indicates whether the student had any arrests during the period.
* = p-value < 0.1, ** = p-value < 0.05, *** = p-value < 0.01.
          Table 12: (Appendix) Estimated Effects on Academic and Behavioral Outcomes in Study 1, Year 1 (No Shows Omitted)
                                                                                                                                           False
                                                                  Intent to    Robust         Effect of        Robust       Control
                                                      Control                                                                            Discovery
                                              N                     Treat     Standard      Treatment on      Standard      Complier
                                                       Mean                                                                                Rate
                                                                  Estimate      Error      Treated (TOT)        Error        Mean
                                                                                                                                         Q-Value

Mathematics
SY 2014 Math Test Scaled Score (Z)          1597       0.007      0.086**      (0.039)         0.147**         (0.064)       -0.077         0.029
SY 2014 Math GPA                            1991       1.765      0.279***     (0.041)        0.522***         (0.075)        1.665         0.001
SY 2014 Math Courses Failed (percent)       1991       0.186     -0.038***     (0.013)        -0.07***         (0.024)       0.162          0.007

Other Academics
SY 2014 Read Test Scaled Score (Z)          1596       0.004       -0.013      (0.043)         -0.019          (0.071)       -0.085         0.788
SY 2014 Non-Math GPA                        2011       1.739      0.074**      (0.034)        0.161***         (0.059)        1.763         0.021
SY 2014 Non-Math Core Courses Failed
                                            2011       0.206      -0.023**     (0.011)         -0.043**        (0.021)        0.206         0.063
(percent)

Behavior
SY 2014 Disciplinary Incidents              2115      1.559        0.093       (0.105)           0.19          (0.205)        1.486         0.598
SY 2014 Days Absent                         2115      24.913       0.433       (0.898)          0.911          (1.737)       23.407         0.598
SY 2014 Out-of-School Suspensions           2115      1.645        0.105       (0.166)          0.211          (0.323)        1.749         0.598

Crime
SY 2014   Arrests for Violent Crimes        2129       0.092       -0.017      (0.017)          -0.034         (0.033)        0.104         0.585
SY 2014   Arrests for Property Crimes       2129       0.064       -0.015      (0.012)           -0.03         (0.023)        0.061         0.585
SY 2014   Arrests for Drug Crimes           2129       0.058        0.017      (0.016)           0.034         (0.031)        0.011         0.585
SY 2014   Arrests for Other Crimes          2129       0.177        0.011      (0.025)           0.016         (0.048)        0.101         0.862
SY 2014   Ever Arrested                     2129       0.183        -0.01      (0.014)          -0.021         (0.028)        0.152         0.686
SY 2014   Total Arrests                     2129       0.392       -0.005      (0.042)          -0.014         (0.081)        0.276         0.862

Baseline covariates: Randomization block, treatment assignment, gender, age, learning disability, free and reduced lunch recipient, race, baseline grade level, GPA
days absent from school, disciplinary incidents, including suspensions, and arrests. Where missing data was found, zeroes were imputed and variables
identifying records as missing data were created and included.
"No Show" indicates that the student did not enroll in Fall of study start in the school they were expected to attend.
Non-math GPA refers to all non math courses in core subject areas (English, Science, Social Science).
"Ever Arrested" indicates whether the student had any arrests during the period.
* = p-value < 0.1, ** = p-value < 0.05, *** = p-value < 0.01.
False discovery rate (FDR) Q-values are the share of estimates within a family of related outcomes that are expected to be false positives. Each panel
in the above table is a `family', so for example, `Mathematics' represents one outcome family. We report the smallest FDR q-value at which we could
reject the null for each outcome using the method from Benjamini and Hochberg (1995)
          Table 13: (Appendix) Estimated Effects on Academic and Behavioral Outcomes in Study 2, Year 1 (No Shows Omitted)
                                                                                                                                            False
                                                                              Clustered       Effect of       Clustered     Control
                                                      Control       ITT                                                                   Discovery
                                              N                               Standard      Treatment on      Standard      Complier
                                                       Mean       Estimate                                                                  Rate
                                                                                Error      Treated (TOT)        Error        Mean
                                                                                                                                          Q-Value

Mathematics
SY 2015 Math Test Scaled Score (Z)          1416       -0.018     0.145***      (0.043)        0.359***        (0.107)        -0.100        0.002
SY 2015 Math GPA                            1703       1.869      0.168***      (0.046)        0.431***         (0.12)        1.840         0.002
SY 2015 Math Courses Failed (percent)       1703       0.147      -0.034**      (0.014)        -0.087**        (0.035)        0.181         0.013

Other Academics
SY 2015 Read Test Scaled Score (Z)          1415       -0.060       0.009       (0.046)         0.033          (0.113)        -0.105        0.768
SY 2015 Non-Math GPA                        1730        1.950       0.053       (0.037)         0.136          (0.096)         2.031        0.355
SY 2015 Non-Math Core Courses Failed
                                            1730       0.139       -0.012       (0.01)          -0.031         (0.026)        0.153         0.355
(percent)

Behavior
SY 2015 Disciplinary Incidents              1844       1.635       -0.073        (0.15)         -0.243         (0.406)        1.860         0.877
SY 2015 Days Absent                         1844       24.433       0.241       (0.953)          0.421         (2.561)       24.013         0.877
SY 2015 Out-of-School Suspensions           1844       0.861       0.024        (0.113)          0.048         (0.307)        0.708         0.877

Crime
SY 2015   Violent Crime Arrests             1848       0.115        -0.015       (0.02)         -0.041         (0.055)        0.143         0.538
SY 2015   Property Crime Arrests            1848       0.089        -0.033       (0.02)         -0.089         (0.054)        0.122         0.163
SY 2015   Drug Crime Arrests                1848       0.054        -0.003      (0.016)         -0.008         (0.042)        0.037         0.849
SY 2015   Other Crime Arrests               1848       0.250        -0.051      (0.033)         -0.144          (0.09)        0.286         0.163
SY 2015   Ever Arrested                     1848       0.191       -0.029*      (0.016)        -0.079*         (0.043)        0.196         0.163
SY 2015   Total Arrests                     1848       0.507       -0.101*      (0.054)        -0.283*         (0.146)        0.587         0.163

Some students (N=65) were randomized into Study 2 twice. Both assignments are retained in the models above.
To account for individuals having multiple observations, standard errors are clustered on individuals.
Baseline covariates: Randomization block, treatment assignment, gender, age, learning disability, free and reduced lunch recipient, race, baseline grade level, GPA,
days absent from school, disciplinary incidents, including suspensions, and arrests. Where missing data was found, zeroes were imputed and variables
identifying records as missing data were created and included.
"No Show" indicates that the student did not enroll in Fall of study start in the school they were expected to attend.
Non-math GPA refers to all non math courses in core subject areas (English, Science, Social Science).
"Ever Arrested" indicates whether the student had any arrests during the period.
* = p-value < 0.1, ** = p-value < 0.05, *** = p-value < 0.01.
False discovery rate (FDR) Q-values are the share of estimates within a family of related outcomes that are expected to be false positives. Each panel
in the above table is a `family', so for example, `Mathematics' represents one outcome family. We report the smallest FDR q-value at which we could
reject the null for each outcome using the method from Benjamini and Hochberg (1995)
                  Table 14: (Appendix) Study 1: Variations on Missing Outcome Data Imputation
                                                                         Original Results      Quantile Regression (QR)      Multiple Imputation (MI)
                                                   N      Control     Intent to     Robust        QR           QR             MI       MI Standard Error
                                                           Mean         Treat      Standard     Estimate    Standard       Estimate
                                                                      Estimate       Error                    Error
SY 2014 Math Test Scaled Score (Z)                   1852     0.000        0.082**     (0.036)     0.067***     (0.023)         0.079*       (0.045)
SY 2014 Math GPA                                     2215     1.760       0.274***      (0.04)     0.28***      (0.061)       0.268***        (0.04)
SY 2014 Math Courses Failed (percent)                2215     0.191      -0.043***     (0.013)                                -0.04***       (0.013)
SY 2014 Read Test Scaled Score (Z)                   1851     0.000         0.004       (0.04)      -0.004      (0.025)         -0.006       (0.042)
SY 2014 Non-Math GPA                                 2244     1.739        0.081**     (0.033)       0.073      (0.045)        0.084**       (0.033)
SY 2014 Non-Math Core Courses Failed (percent) 2244           0.210       -0.027**     (0.011)                                -0.026**       (0.011)
SY 2014 Days Absent                                  2494    24.242          0.7       (0.831)      -0.213      (0.525)          0.702        (0.82)
 We present our standard results alongside different approaches to imputing missing data.
 We run median quantile regression after imputing 0's for the outcome variables, denoted as `QR'. We calculate bootstrap standard errors.
 We also perform multiple imputation via chained equations (denoted `MI'). We impute M=50 datasets and pool the estimated effects and robust standard
errors.




                  Table 15: (Appendix) Study 2: Variations on Missing Outcome Data Imputation
                                                                         Original Results      Quantile Regression (QR)      Multiple Imputation (MI)
                                                   N      Control       ITT        Clustered      QR           QR             MI       MI Standard Error
                                                           Mean       Estimate     Standard     Estimate    Standard       Estimate
                                                                                     Error                    Error
SY 2015 Math Test Scaled Score (Z)                   1865     0.008      0.126***      (0.036)     0.074***      (0.02)        0.085*        (0.045)
SY 2015 Math GPA                                     2062     1.859       0.15***      (0.043)    0.206***      (0.053)        0.107**       (0.043)
SY 2015 Math Courses Failed (percent)                2062     0.149      -0.029**      (0.013)                                  -0.021       (0.013)
SY 2015 Read Test Scaled Score (Z)                   1865     0.007        -0.007       (0.04)       -0.016      (0.02)         -0.024       (0.046)
SY 2015 Non-Math GPA                                 2110     1.936       0.065*       (0.034)      0.107**     (0.047)          0.049       (0.036)
SY 2015 Non-Math Core Courses Failed (percent) 2110           0.138        -0.011       (0.01)                                  -0.009        (0.01)
SY 2015 Days Absent                                  2474    22.777         0.756      (0.822)        0.171      (0.47)          0.85        (0.813)
 We present our standard results alongside different approaches to imputing missing data.
 We run median quantile regression after imputing 0's for the outcome variables, denoted as `QR'. We calculate bootstrap standard errors.
 We also perform multiple imputation via chained equations (denoted `MI'). We impute M=50 datasets and pool the estimated effects and robust
standard errors.
 N=65 were randomized into Study 2 twice.
 Both assignments are retained in the models above and standard errors are clustered at the student level.
          Table 16: (Appendix) Estimated 1 Year Treatment Effects: Pooling Study 1 and 2 - 9th Grade Student Subsample Only
                                                                                                                                                 False
                                                                                   Clustered       Effect of       Clustered     Control
                                                           Control       ITT                                                                   Discovery
                                                   N                               Standard      Treatment on      Standard      Complier
                                                            Mean       Estimate                                                                  Rate
                                                                                     Error      Treated (TOT)        Error        Mean
                                                                                                                                               Q-Value

Mathematics
Math Test Scaled Score (Z)                       2735       0.006      0.102***       (0.03)        0.263***        (0.077)        -0.063        0.002
Math GPA                                         3020       1.832      0.158***      (0.035)        0.391***        (0.087)         1.801        0.001
Math Courses Failed (percent)                    3020       0.165      -0.025**      (0.011)        -0.062**        (0.026)        0.161         0.019

Other Academics
Read Test Scaled Score (Z)                       2734       0.001        0.003       (0.033)          0.017         (0.084)        -0.090        0.836
Non-Math GPA                                     3083       1.875      0.057**       (0.029)        0.144**         (0.072)        1.933         0.138
Non-Math Core Courses Failed (percent)           3083       0.165       -0.013       (0.009)         -0.034         (0.021)        0.171         0.164

Behavior
Disciplinary Incidents                           3579      1.440         0.083       (0.099)         0.23           (0.274)       1.419          0.402
Days Absent                                      3579      22.817        0.974       (0.677)         2.57            (1.88)       21.170         0.402
Out-of-School Suspensions                        3579      1.028         0.099       (0.097)         0.269          (0.268)       0.978          0.402

Crime
Arrests for Violent Crimes                       3905       0.092        -0.009      (0.013)          -0.026        (0.038)        0.109         0.607
Arrests for Property Crimes                      3905       0.072       -0.021*      (0.012)         -0.063*        (0.035)        0.096         0.123
Arrests for Drug Crimes                          3905       0.053        0.005       (0.011)           0.015        (0.032)        0.020         0.629
Arrests for Other Crimes                         3905       0.212      -0.06***       (0.02)       -0.168***        (0.061)        0.317         0.036
Ever Arrested                                    3905       0.165       -0.019*       (0.01)         -0.053*         (0.03)        0.182         0.123
Total Arrests                                    3905       0.429      -0.085**      (0.034)        -0.241**        (0.102)        0.541         0.054

Some students (N=65) were randomized into Study 2 twice. Both assignments are retained in the models above.
To account for individuals having multiple observations, standard errors are clustered on individuals.
Baseline covariates: Randomization block, treatment assignment, gender, age, learning disability, free and reduced lunch recipient, race, baseline grade level, GPA,
days absent from school, disciplinary incidents, including suspensions, and arrests. Where missing data was found, zeroes were imputed and variables
identifying records as missing data were created and included.
Non-math GPA refers to all non math courses in core subject areas (English, Science, Social Science).
"Ever Arrested" indicates whether the student had any arrests during the period.
* = p-value < 0.1, ** = p-value < 0.05, *** = p-value < 0.01.
False discovery rate (FDR) Q-values are the share of estimates within a family of related outcomes that are expected to be false positives. Each panel
in the above table is a `family', so for example, `Mathematics' represents one outcome family. We report the smallest FDR q-value at which we could
reject the null for each outcome using the method from Benjamini and Hochberg (1995)
         Table 17: (Appendix) Estimated 1 Year Treatment Effects: Pooling Study 1 and 2 - 10th Grade Student Subsample Only
                                                                                                                                                 False
                                                                                   Clustered       Effect of       Clustered     Control
                                                           Control       ITT                                                                   Discovery
                                                   N                               Standard      Treatment on      Standard      Complier
                                                            Mean       Estimate                                                                  Rate
                                                                                     Error      Treated (TOT)        Error        Mean
                                                                                                                                               Q-Value

Mathematics
Math Test Scaled Score (Z)                        976       -0.002      0.127**       (0.05)         0.251**        (0.098)        -0.254        0.011
Math GPA                                         1235       1.750      0.328***      (0.052)        0.709***        (0.112)         1.487        0.001
Math Courses Failed (percent)                    1235       0.189     -0.049***      (0.017)       -0.107***        (0.038)         0.202        0.007

Other Academics
Read Test Scaled Score (Z)                        976       0.009       -0.012       (0.057)         -0.025         (0.111)        -0.097        0.823
Non-Math GPA                                     1248       1.714      0.087**       (0.042)        0.189**         (0.092)        1.659         0.114
Non-Math Core Courses Failed (percent)           1248       0.209      -0.025*       (0.014)        -0.055*         (0.031)         0.240        0.114

Behavior
Disciplinary Incidents                           1340      1.778        -0.174        (0.18)         -0.403         (0.418)        2.311         0.699
Days Absent                                      1340      25.195        0.451       (1.135)          1.018         (2.614)       26.241         0.699
Out-of-School Suspensions                        1340      1.503        0.081        (0.207)          0.184         (0.476)        1.670         0.699

Crime
Arrests for Violent Crimes                       1371       0.100       -0.027       (0.021)         -0.064         (0.049)        0.143         0.559
Arrests for Property Crimes                      1371       0.053       -0.008       (0.017)         -0.018         (0.041)        0.079         0.788
Arrests for Drug Crimes                          1371       0.055       0.017        (0.018)          0.038         (0.041)        0.018         0.703
Arrests for Other Crimes                         1371       0.161       0.056        (0.036)          0.129         (0.084)        0.011         0.559
Ever Arrested                                    1371       0.187       0.001         (0.02)          0.002         (0.046)        0.146         0.968
Total Arrests                                    1371       0.370        0.038       (0.055)          0.085         (0.128)        0.251         0.757

Some students (N=65) were randomized into Study 2 twice. Both assignments are retained in the models above.
To account for individuals having multiple observations, standard errors are clustered on individuals.
Baseline covariates: Randomization block, treatment assignment, gender, age, learning disability, free and reduced lunch recipient, race, baseline grade level, GPA,
days absent from school, disciplinary incidents, including suspensions, and arrests. Where missing data was found, zeroes were imputed and variables
identifying records as missing data were created and included.
Non-math GPA refers to all non math courses in core subject areas (English, Science, Social Science).
"Ever Arrested" indicates whether the student had any arrests during the period.
* = p-value < 0.1, ** = p-value < 0.05, *** = p-value < 0.01.
False discovery rate (FDR) Q-values are the share of estimates within a family of related outcomes that are expected to be false positives. Each panel
in the above table is a `family', so for example, `Mathematics' represents one outcome family. We report the smallest FDR q-value at which we could
reject the null for each outcome using the method from Benjamini and Hochberg (1995)
                                        Table 18: (Appendix) Year 1 Effect Estimates - Female Students Only
                                                                                                                                                 False
                                                                                   Clustered       Effect of       Clustered     Control
                                                           Control       ITT                                                                   Discovery
                                                   N                               Standard      Treatment on      Standard      Complier
                                                            Mean       Estimate                                                                  Rate
                                                                                     Error      Treated (TOT)        Error        Mean
                                                                                                                                               Q-Value

Mathematics
Math Test Scaled Score (Z)                        595       -0.054     0.12**        (0.059)        0.389**         (0.191)        -0.136        0.064
Math GPA                                          658       2.007      0.177**       (0.073)        0.556**         (0.234)         1.774        0.054
Math Courses Failed (percent)                     658       0.117       -0.021        (0.02)         -0.069         (0.062)        0.180         0.267

Other Academics
Read Test Scaled Score (Z)                        596       0.083       0.048        (0.067)          0.153         (0.218)        -0.107        0.675
Non-Math GPA                                      678       2.163        0.064       (0.059)           0.2           (0.19)         2.012        0.675
Non-Math Core Courses Failed (percent)            678       0.109       -0.008       (0.016)         -0.021          (0.05)        0.138         0.675

Behavior
Disciplinary Incidents                            767      1.700        -0.303       (0.227)         -1.061         (0.799)       2.875          0.554
Days Absent                                       767      25.549       -1.091       (1.449)         -3.544         (4.968)       32.176         0.564
Out-of-School Suspensions                         767      0.636         0.09        (0.147)          0.289         (0.499)        0.306         0.564

Crime
Arrests for Violent Crimes                        817       0.065       -0.004       (0.021)         -0.013         (0.075)        0.066         0.862
Arrests for Property Crimes                       817       0.031       -0.014       (0.017)          -0.05         (0.059)         0.082        0.483
Arrests for Drug Crimes                           817       0.006        0.013        (0.01)          0.053         (0.036)        -0.029        0.204
Arrests for Other Crimes                          817       0.108     -0.091***      (0.034)       -0.318***        (0.123)        0.340         0.059
Ever Arrested                                     817       0.105       -0.032        (0.02)         -0.113         (0.071)        0.188         0.204
Total Arrests                                     817       0.210      -0.096**      (0.048)        -0.328*         (0.169)         0.459        0.161

Some students (N=65) were randomized into Study 2 twice. Both assignments are retained in the models above.
To account for individuals having multiple observations, standard errors are clustered on individuals.
Baseline covariates: Randomization block, treatment assignment, gender, age, learning disability, free and reduced lunch recipient, race, baseline grade level, GPA,
days absent from school, disciplinary incidents, including suspensions, and arrests. Where missing data was found, zeroes were imputed and variables
identifying records as missing data were created and included.
Non-math GPA refers to all non math courses in core subject areas (English, Science, Social Science).
"Ever Arrested" indicates whether the student had any arrests during the period.
* = p-value < 0.1, ** = p-value < 0.05, *** = p-value < 0.01.
False discovery rate (FDR) Q-values are the share of estimates within a family of related outcomes that are expected to be false positives. Each panel
in the above table is a `family', so for example, `Mathematics' represents one outcome family. We report the smallest FDR q-value at which we could
reject the null for each outcome using the method from Benjamini and Hochberg (1995)
                         Table 19: (Appendix) Year 1 Effects Estimates - Male Students Only (pooling studies 1 and 2)
                                                                                                                                                 False
                                                                                   Clustered       Effect of       Clustered     Control
                                                           Control       ITT                                                                   Discovery
                                                   N                               Standard      Treatment on      Standard      Complier
                                                            Mean       Estimate                                                                  Rate
                                                                                     Error      Treated (TOT)        Error        Mean
                                                                                                                                               Q-Value

Mathematics
Math Test Scaled Score (Z)                       3122       0.013       0.11***      (0.029)         0.25***        (0.064)        -0.126        0.001
Math GPA                                         3619       1.769      0.232***      (0.032)        0.526***        (0.072)         1.647        0.001
Math Courses Failed (percent)                    3619       0.182      -0.04***       (0.01)        -0.09***        (0.023)        0.186         0.001

Other Academics
Read Test Scaled Score (Z)                       3120       -0.010      -0.009       (0.032)         -0.014         (0.071)        -0.090        0.840
Non-Math GPA                                     3676        1.769     0.077***      (0.026)        0.178***         (0.06)        1.804         0.010
Non-Math Core Courses Failed (percent)           3676        0.190    -0.021***      (0.008)        -0.05***        (0.019)        0.204         0.013

Behavior
Disciplinary Incidents                           4201      1.504         0.081       (0.091)         0.208          (0.232)        1.492         0.369
Days Absent                                      4201      23.257        1.006       (0.637)         2.478          (1.624)       21.680         0.290
Out-of-School Suspensions                        4201      1.248         0.135       (0.103)         0.342          (0.263)        1.191         0.290

Crime
Arrests for Violent Crimes                       4526       0.099       -0.015       (0.012)          -0.04         (0.033)        0.126         0.522
Arrests for Property Crimes                      4526       0.072       -0.018       (0.011)          -0.05         (0.031)        0.092         0.522
Arrests for Drug Crimes                          4526       0.062       0.008         (0.01)          0.023         (0.028)        0.021         0.522
Arrests for Other Crimes                         4526       0.215       -0.015        (0.02)         -0.036         (0.055)        0.200         0.522
Ever Arrested                                    4526       0.182       -0.008        (0.01)          -0.02         (0.027)        0.162         0.522
Total Arrests                                    4526       0.449        -0.04       (0.033)         -0.102         (0.091)        0.439         0.522

Some students (N=65) were randomized into Study 2 twice. Both assignments are retained in the models above.
To account for individuals having multiple observations, standard errors are clustered on individuals.
Baseline covariates: Randomization block, treatment assignment, gender, age, learning disability, free and reduced lunch recipient, race, baseline grade level, GPA,
days absent from school, disciplinary incidents, including suspensions, and arrests. Where missing data was found, zeroes were imputed and variables
identifying records as missing data were created and included.
Non-math GPA refers to all non math courses in core subject areas (English, Science, Social Science).
"Ever Arrested" indicates whether the student had any arrests during the period.
* = p-value < 0.1, ** = p-value < 0.05, *** = p-value < 0.01.
False discovery rate (FDR) Q-values are the share of estimates within a family of related outcomes that are expected to be false positives. Each panel
in the above table is a `family', so for example, `Mathematics' represents one outcome family. We report the smallest FDR q-value at which we could
reject the null for each outcome using the method from Benjamini and Hochberg (1995)
Table 20: (Appendix) ITT Estimates Interacted with Whether School Above Median in Arrests per-capita
During School Year (Pooled)

              Year 1 Outcome                   N        Ctrl Mean       Intent-to-Treat    ITT Standard         Dummy x          Interaction SE
                                                                             Est.             Error             Treatment
                                                                                                                  Status
 Mathematics
                 Math GPA                    4331         1.786             0.306***           (0.045)           -0.144**            (0.060)
         Math Courses Failed (percent)       4331         0.179            -0.055***           (0.013)             0.028             (0.018)
          Standardized Math Score            3741         0.001             0.164***           (0.040)            -0.085             (0.053)
 Non-math academics
            Non-Math GPA                     4409         1.809             0.087**            (0.038)            -0.018             (0.050)
  Non-math Core Courses Failed (percent)     4409         0.184            -0.028**            (0.011)             0.016             (0.015)
       Standardized Reading Score            3740         0.001                0               (0.044)            0.004              (0.058)
 Behavior
             Disciplinary incidents          5035         1.549            -0.213**            (0.092)            0.414**            (0.162)
                 Days Absent                 5035        23.932             -0.647             (0.709)            2.656**            (1.122)
              Out-of-School Incs             5035         1.180             -0.117             (0.085)            0.429**            (0.167)
 Crime
             Violent Crime Arrests              5410         0.095              -0.018             (0.014)                0.01       (0.020)
            Property Crime Arrests              5410         0.073              -0.004             (0.009)              -0.028       (0.018)
                 Drug Arrests                   5410         0.054              -0.007             (0.008)              0.03*        (0.016)
                 Other arrests                  5410         0.207             -0.041**            (0.018)               0.023       (0.033)
             Any Arrests (Dummy)                5410         0.176             -0.029**            (0.013)               0.03*       (0.018)
                  All Arrests                   5410         0.429             -0.071**            (0.031)              0.035        (0.055)
  Some students (N=65) were randomized into Study 2 twice. Both assignments are retained in the models above. To account for
 individuals having multiple observations, standard errors are clustered on individuals. Baseline covariates: Randomization block,
 treatment assignment, gender, age, learning disability, free and reduced lunch recipient, race, baseline grade level, GPA, days
 absent from school, disciplinary incidents, including suspensions, and arrests. Where missing data was found, zeroes were imputed
 and variables identifying records as missing data were created and included. Non-math GPA refers to all non math courses in core
 subject areas (English, Science, Social Science). * = p-value < 0.1, ** = p-value < 0.05, *** = p-value < 0.01.
  Given that randomization block fixed-effects fully explain school fixed-effects, we cannot estimate the main effect for the
 'above median' dummy variable, so we do not report this in the table. However, we can recover and report the interaction effect.
 Table 21: (Appendix) Intent-to-treat (ITT) Estimates: Black and Latinx Subsample, pooling both studies
                 Outcome                         N     Ctrl Mean         ITT            ITT         ITT Q-val        ITT x          ITT x          ITT x        ITT Joint    ITT Joint
                                                                                      Standard                       Latinx         Latinx         Latinx       Test P-val   Test Q-val
                                                                                        Error                      Interaction     Standard        Q-val
                                                                                                                                     Error
 Academics: Math
              Math GPA                         4133       1.784        0.196***        (0.041)         0.001         -0.004         (0.061)         0.946        0.006***      0.010
      Math Courses Failed (percent)            4133       0.178        -0.032**        (0.014)         0.018         -0.002         (0.019)         0.946          0.28        0.280
       Math Test Scaled Score (Z)              3574       -0.008        0.084**        (0.035)         0.018          0.029         (0.052)         0.946        0.001***      0.003
 Academics: Non-math
          Non-Math Core GPA                    4209        1.797       0.092***        (0.034)         0.019         -0.053         (0.049)         0.663         0.757        0.940
  Non-Math Core Courses Failed (percent)       4209       0.184        -0.022**        (0.011)         0.060          0.012         (0.015)         0.663         0.444        0.940
       Read Test Scaled Score (Z)              3573       -0.009        -0.002         (0.039)         0.953         -0.018         (0.058)         0.754          0.94        0.940
 Behavior
           Disciplinary Incidents              4814      1.589           0.001         (0.138)         0.993          0.111         (0.169)         0.876         0***         0.001
                Days Absent                    4814      24.139          1.121         (0.896)         0.321         -0.189         (1.208)         0.876         0.101        0.102
          Out-of-School Suspensions            4814      1.204           0.182         (0.147)         0.321          -0.06         (0.175)         0.876         0***         0.001
 Crime
           Arrests for Violent Crimes          5162       0.098         -0.008         (0.018)        0.671         -0.011        (0.02)        0.620          0***            0.002
          Arrests for Property Crimes          5162       0.070         -0.023         (0.017)        0.330          0.013        (0.02)        0.620         0.099*           0.149
            Arrests for Drug Crimes            5162       0.056          0.007         (0.015)        0.671          0.009       (0.017)        0.620          0.935           0.936
           Arrests for Other Crimes            5162       0.213        -0.053*         (0.028)        0.320          0.056       (0.037)        0.620          0.879           0.936
                 Ever Arrested                 5162       0.179         -0.016         (0.014)        0.391          0.013       (0.018)        0.620        0.001***          0.002
                  Total Arrests                5162       0.437         -0.076         (0.047)        0.320          0.065       (0.058)        0.620        0.038**           0.077
 We test for differences between the Black and Latinx students in our study sample by running our normal ITT/TOT analysis, and including a term interacting
 treatment with an indicator variable for `Latinx'. We present those estimates above, along with corresponding FDR Q-values. We also test whether the
 coefficients on the interaction term and the Latinx indicator variable are jointly 0; we present this p-value and corresponding FDR Q-value in the
 table above. Some students (N=65) were randomized into Study 2 twice. Both assignments are retained in the models above. To account for individuals having
 multiple observations, standard errors are clustered on individuals.
 The compliance rate for Black students is 0.35 and the compliance rate for Latinx students is 0.43.
 Baseline covariates: Randomization block, treatment assignment, gender, age, learning disability, free and reduced lunch recipient, race, baseline grade level, GPA,
 days absent from school, disciplinary incidents, including suspensions, and arrests. Where missing data was found, zeroes were imputed and variables
 identifying records as missing data were created and included. Non-math GPA refers to all non math courses in core subject areas (English, Science, Social Science).
 * = p-value < 0.1, ** = p-value < 0.05, *** = p-value < 0.01.
 False discovery rate (FDR) Q-values are the share of estimates within a family of related outcomes that are expected to be false positives.
 Each panel in the above table is a `family', so for example, `Mathematics' represents one outcome family. We report the smallest FDR q-value at
 which we could reject the null for each outcome using the method from Benjamini and Hochberg (1995).




Table 22: (Appendix) Treatment-on-the-treated (TOT) Estimates: Black and Latinx Subsample, pooling
both studies
                 Outcome                       N      Ctrl Mean         TOT            TOT         TOT Q-val        TOT x          TOT x          TOT x        TOT Joint     TOT Joint
                                                                                     Standard                       Latinx         Latinx         Latinx       Test P-val    Test Q-val
                                                                                       Error                      Interaction     Standard        Q-val
                                                                                                                                    Error
 Academics: Math
              Math GPA                        4133      1.784         0.538***        (0.114)         0.001          -0.143        (0.147)         0.900          0.531        0.798
      Math Courses Failed (percent)           4133      0.178         -0.089**        (0.038)         0.020          0.017         (0.047)         0.900          0.817        0.818
       Math Test Scaled Score (Z)             3574      -0.008         0.241**        (0.101)         0.020          -0.016        (0.126)         0.900          0.162        0.487
 Academics: Non-math
          Non-Math Core GPA                   4209       1.797        0.254***        (0.094)         0.021          -0.169        (0.121)         0.463          0.403        0.605
  Non-Math Core Courses Failed (percent)      4209      0.184          -0.06**         (0.03)         0.063          0.038         (0.038)         0.463          0.263        0.605
       Read Test Scaled Score (Z)             3573      -0.009          0.004         (0.111)         0.975          -0.041        (0.139)         0.771          0.812        0.813
 Behavior
          Disciplinary Incidents              4814       1.589          0.003         (0.425)         0.994           0.244         (0.48)         0.687          0.066*       0.100
               Days Absent                    4814      24.139          3.374         (2.771)         0.336          -1.335         (3.31)         0.687           0.314       0.314
         Out-of-School Suspensions            4814       1.204          0.557         (0.453)         0.336          -0.283        (0.502)         0.687          0.054*       0.100
 Crime
           Arrests for Violent Crimes          5162       0.098          -0.023         (0.058)          0.690          -0.02      (0.061)          0.783          0.07*       0.422
          Arrests for Property Crimes          5162       0.070          -0.075         (0.055)          0.336         0.049       (0.059)          0.614          0.931       0.932
            Arrests for Drug Crimes            5162       0.056          0.025          (0.049)          0.690         0.015       (0.053)          0.783          0.884       0.932
           Arrests for Other Crimes            5162       0.213          -0.17*         (0.092)          0.336         0.186*      (0.107)          0.489          0.175       0.524
                 Ever Arrested                 5162       0.179          -0.051         (0.046)          0.406         0.046       (0.053)          0.614          0.521       0.932
                  Total Arrests                5162       0.437          -0.245         (0.155)          0.336           0.23      (0.174)          0.560          0.831       0.932
 We test for differences between the Black and Latinx students in our study sample by running our normal ITT/TOT analysis, and including a term interacting
 treatment with an indicator variable for `Latinx'. We present those estimates above, along with corresponding FDR Q-values. We also test whether the
 coefficients on the interaction term and the Latinx indicator variable are jointly 0; we present this p-value and corresponding FDR Q-value in the
 table above. Some students (N=65) were randomized into Study 2 twice. Both assignments are retained in the models above. To account for individuals having
 multiple observations, standard errors are clustered on individuals.
 The compliance rate for Black students is 0.35 and the compliance rate for Latinx students is 0.43.
 Baseline covariates: Randomization block, treatment assignment, gender, age, learning disability, free and reduced lunch recipient, race, baseline grade level, GPA,
 days absent from school, disciplinary incidents, including suspensions, and arrests. Where missing data was found, zeroes were imputed and variables
 identifying records as missing data were created and included. Non-math GPA refers to all non math courses in core subject areas (English, Science, Social Science).
 * = p-value < 0.1, ** = p-value < 0.05, *** = p-value < 0.01.
 False discovery rate (FDR) Q-values are the share of estimates within a family of related outcomes that are expected to be false positives.
 Each panel in the above table is a `family', so for example, `Mathematics' represents one outcome family. We report the smallest FDR q-value at
 which we could reject the null for each outcome using the method from Benjamini and Hochberg (1995).
     Table 23: (Appendix) Variations on Calculating Grade Variables: Pooling results from both studies
Outcome                                                 N         Control   Intent-to-       ITT             Treatment-      TOT SE                Control    FDR Q-value
                                                                   Mean     Treat            Standard        on-treated                           Complier
                                                                            Effect           Error           Effect                                 Mean
Math Outcomes
   Number of Math Courses                            4331           1.900   0.007            (0.009)         0.017           (0.021)                  1.942            0.423
   Math GPA                                          4331           1.786   0.219***         (0.03)          0.521***        (0.071)                  1.661            0.001
   Math Course Failures                              4331           0.308   -0.07***         (0.017)         -0.166***       (0.04)                   0.348            0.001
   Math Course Failures (percent)                    4331           0.179   -0.038***        (0.01)          -0.091***       (0.023)                  0.191            0.001
   Math GPA (no selections)                          4210           1.807   0.225***         (0.03)          0.525***        (0.071)                  1.677            0.001
   Math Course Failures (no selections)              4210           0.297   -0.07***         (0.017)         -0.163***       (0.039)                  0.337            0.001
   Math Course Failures (percent) (no                4210           0.172   -0.038***        (0.01)          -0.089***       (0.022)                  0.185            0.001
selections)
Non-Math Core: All classes
  Number of Non-math Core Courses                    4409           6.712   -0.061           (0.044)         -0.144          (0.105)                  6.905            0.210
  Non-math Core GPA                                  4409           1.809   0.076***         (0.024)         0.182***        (0.059)                  1.689            0.019
  Non-math Core Course Failures                      4409           1.112   -0.113**         (0.05)          -0.271**        (0.121)                  1.296            0.051
  Non-math Core Course Failures                      4409           0.184   -0.019**         (0.008)         -0.045**        (0.018)                  0.200            0.032
(percent)
Non-Math Core: High grade by subject
  Number of Non-math Core Courses                    4409           5.518   0.024            (0.029)         0.061           (0.069)                  5.679            0.400
  Non-math Core GPA                                  4409           1.864   0.071***         (0.025)         0.17***         (0.059)                  1.751            0.025
  Non-math Core Course Failures                      4409           0.838   -0.076**         (0.038)         -0.184**        (0.092)                  0.951            0.062
  Non-math Core Course Failures                      4409           0.170   -0.015**         (0.007)         -0.037**        (0.018)                  0.180            0.051
(percent)
Non-Math Core: Low grade by subject
  Number of Non-math Core Courses                    4409           5.518   0.024            (0.029)         0.061           (0.069)                  5.679            0.400
  Non-math Core GPA                                  4409           1.746   0.079***         (0.024)         0.191***        (0.059)                  1.626            0.019
  Non-math Core Course Failures                      4409           0.970   -0.103**         (0.041)         -0.248**        (0.098)                  1.140            0.032
  Non-math Core Course Failures                      4409           0.196   -0.021***        (0.008)         -0.052***       (0.019)                  0.216            0.025
(percent)
Non-Math Core: Top 3 classes each semester
  Number of Non-math Core Courses          4409                     5.656   0.023            (0.027)         0.057           (0.065)                  5.793            0.400
  Non-math Core GPA                        4409                     1.916   0.067***         (0.025)         0.161***        (0.06)                   1.805            0.025
  Non-math Core Course Failures            4409                     0.800   -0.082**         (0.039)         -0.197**        (0.093)                  0.919            0.051
  Non-math Core Course Failures            4409                     0.160   -0.016**         (0.007)         -0.038**        (0.018)                  0.171            0.051
(percent)
Non-Math Core: Top 6 classes in that year
   Number of Non-math Core Courses                      4409            5.713 0.016            (0.024)          0.041          (0.058)                  5.835          0.479
   Non-math Core GPA                                    4409            1.927 0.069***         (0.025)          0.165***       (0.061)                  1.816          0.025
   Non-math Core Course Failures                        4409            0.810 -0.088**         (0.039)          -0.211**       (0.094)                  0.916          0.051
   Non-math Core Course Failures                        4409            0.158 -0.016**         (0.007)          -0.039**       (0.018)                  0.167          0.051
(percent)
 We report variations on the calculation of grade variables (GPA and course failures) for both Math and non-Math courses.
 For math, our preferred method is to select the appropriate grade-level math grade for each student as their main 'math course';
 e.g. for a 9th grader, if they're in only one math course that semester, we take that math grade; if they are in multiple courses that semester and take an algebra
course (the grade-level course for 9th graders), we `pick' that algebra grade; if they are in multiple courses and take geometry (the 10th grade level course), we
take that grade. If they don't take either, then we randomly select a math class.
 For non-math core courses, we present 5 methods:
 - `All classes' includes all non-math core (science, english, and social science) classes
 - `High grade by subject' selects the highest grade for each non-math core topic in each semester, and uses those courses to calculate the outcomes.
 - `Low grade by subject' is the same procedure as above, but uses the lowest grade for each non-math core subject per semester.
 - `Top 3 classes each semester' uses a student's three highest non-math grades in a semester regardless of subject.
 - `Top 6 classes in that year' uses a student's six highest non-math grades in that school year, regardless of subject.
 Some students (N=65) were randomized into Study 2 twice. Both assignments are retained in the models above.
 To account for individuals having multiple observations, standard errors are clustered on individuals.
 Baseline covariates: Randomization block, treatment assignment, gender, age, learning disability, free lunch recipient, race, baseline grade level,
 GPA, days absent from school, disciplinary incidents, including suspensions, and arrests. Where missing data was found, zeroes were imputed and
 variables identifying records as missing data were created and included. Non-math GPA refers to all non math courses, not just core subjects.
 * = p-value < 0.1, ** = p-value < 0.05, *** = p-value < 0.01.
 False discovery rate (FDR) Q-values are the share of estimates within a family of related outcomes that are expected to be false positives.
 All Math outcomes are one family and all non-Math Core outcomes are another family. We report the smallest FDR q-value at
 which we could reject the null for each outcome using the method from Benjamini and Hochberg (1995).
                             Best Linear Predictor Test: Detecting Heterogeneity




                                                       q
                                                           q          q
                                                q
                                    q       q
                                q                                 q                                q
                                                                                         q                     q         q                                         q
                                                                                q                                                q       q       q
                         0
                                                                                                                                             q                                q
 Coefficient estimate




                                                                                                                    q                                     q
                                                                                                                             q       q
                                                                                                           q
                                                                                     q

                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                            q

                                                                                                                                                               q



                                                                                               q




                                                                                                                                                      q



                        -5




                              Math test   Math GPA    Math      Percent   Non-Math Non-Math Non-Math Non-Math Non-Math Non-Math Non-Math Graduated Graduated   11th       11th
                              score (Z)              Course     of Math   Core GPA     Core      Core   Core GPA Core GPA Core GPA Core GPA on-time   ever    Grade      Grade
                                                     Failures   Courses       (all   Failures  Percent   (highest   (lowest   (top 3    (top 6               Math GPA   Math Test
                                                                 Failed   non-math      (all    Failed   grade in  grade in  nonmath  nonmath                           Score (Z)
                                                                             core   non-math      (all     each       each     core      core
                                                                           courses)    core   non-math nonmath     nonmath   classes   classes
                                                                                     courses)    core      core       core  each sem)   during
                                                                                               courses)    topic      topic             year)
                                                                                                        each sem) each sem)
                                                                                                   Outcome of interest

Figure 1: Random Forests for Treatment Heterogeneity - Best Linear Predictor test
For each outcome, the estimate and confidence intervals for the differential forest prediction coefficient of the BLP test are shown for the full-
sample procedure (left) and split-sample procedure (right). Horizontal lines are plotted at 1 and 0.
                                                     Math GPA: Predicted Treatment Effect vs Rank, N=4100
                                               0.6
                                       (Xi)
                                        (-i)
Individual Predicted Treatment Effect ^




                                               0.4
                                                                                                                  Q4 avg: 0.334



                                                                                                Q3 avg: 0.237

                                                                              Q2 avg: 0.183
                                               0.2

                                                           Q1 avg: 0.102




                                               0.0

                                                       0               1000              2000              3000              4000
                                                                  Reverse-rank of sorted Predicted Treatment Effects

Figure 2: Random Forests for Treatment Heterogenity: Predicted treatment effects against their rank, math
GPA. Average PTE's for each quartile are presented.
                           Percent Correct for Above vs. Below Median Students
                    1.00




                    0.75
 Fraction Correct




                    0.50




                    0.25




                    0.00

                                       0.75                   0.50                 0.25             0.00
                                                     Item Difficulty Level (P+)

                                              Above Median Students     Below Median Students


Figure 3: Percent of students correctly answering math items given on the ISR math assessment. Each point
corresponds to a single item.
                                                               ISR Math test Item-level ITT Effect by Difficulty
 Intent to Treat Effect (proportion correct response)




                                                         0.0




                                                        -0.1




                                                                            0.75                   0.50                 0.25         0.00
                                                                                          Item Difficulty Level (P+)

                                                                                   Above Median Students     Below Median Students


Figure 4: Treatment effects on individual ISR items against item-level difficulty for students above/below the
median baseline standardized math test score. Above/Below median is calculated for all students taking the
ISR math asessment. The lines shown are local polynomial fitted lines to see any underlying nonlinearities in
the relationships between item-level impacts and difficulty. We also include [0.5, 0.95] confidence intervals on
the fitted lines.
