                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                DETERRENCE AND COMPELLENCE IN THE PARLIAMENT

                                          Duha T. Altindag
                                           Naci H. Mocan
                                             Jie Zhang

                                        Working Paper 28532
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w28532


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                             March 2021, Revised July 2021




We thank Rafael Di Tella, Gianmarco Daniele, Marcel Garz, Chris Vickers, Aditi Sengupta,
Randy Beard, Gilad Sorek, Giuseppe Di Vita, Pelin Akyol, Nicolas Ziebarth, Francesco Trebbi,
Philip Marx, Paolo Pinotti, Manoel Gehrke, Semih Tümen, Samuel Cole, and the participants of
the CLEAN Seminar Series of Bocconi University, the 8th Economic Analysis of Litigation
Workshop in Paris, France, the Annual Conference of the Spanish Association of Law and
Economics at University Pompeu Fabra for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2021 by Duha T. Altindag, Naci H. Mocan, and Jie Zhang. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Deterrence and Compellence in the Parliament
Duha T. Altindag, Naci H. Mocan, and Jie Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 28532
March 2021, Revised July 2021
JEL No. D02,K0,P48

                                           ABSTRACT

In most countries, Parliamentary immunity protects lawmakers from civil or criminal charges
while in office, and it shields them from prosecution for their political speech or political actions.
This paper presents the first empirical analysis in the literature of the impact of Parliamentary
immunity on the behavior and performance of politicians. Leveraging a Constitutional
Amendment, the adoption of which lifted the immunity of 24 percent of the Members of the
Turkish Parliament (MPs), we find that immunity from prosecution impacts how the MPs act and
perform their duties in the Parliament. Losing immunity pacifies the MPs of the opposition
parties, who become less diligent in the Parliament (drafting fewer pieces of legislation, initiating
fewer investigation inquiries, delivering fewer and shorter speeches) and become less aggressive
(interrupting other MPs less frequently). They also reduce their tendency to cast dissenting votes
against the government. These MPs are less likely to get re-nominated by their parties in the next
election, and they are less likely to get re-elected. We find no evidence that more outspoken and
active opposition MPs or those who are more valuable for their parties have been targeted for
immunity revocation. The results are robust to limiting the analysis to the sample of opposition
MPs who had the same intensity of pre-treatment Parliamentary activity. There is no evidence
that the MPs, who retained immunity, have increased their Parliamentary efforts in reaction to
their same-party colleagues losing immunity. We find that laws are passed faster after the
Constitutional Amendment was adopted, possibly as a consequence of reduced opposition and
deliberation. Using Eurobarometer surveys, we find that citizens' reactions to the revocation of
MP immunity are polarized. An individual's trust in the Parliament is lower or higher based on
whether an MP from the individual's province lost immunity and if that MP subscribes to the
same or opposing ideology as the individual.

Duha T. Altindag                                   Jie Zhang
Auburn University                                  The Center for Economics
Department of Economics                            Finance and Management Studies (CEFMS)
136 Miller Hall                                    Hunan University
Auburn AL, 36849                                   Changsha, Hunan
altindag@auburn.edu                                China
                                                   jiezhangtz@hnu.edu.cn
Naci H. Mocan
Department of Economics
Louisiana State University
2439 BEC
Baton Rouge, LA 70803-6306
and NBER
mocan@lsu.edu
                          Deterrence and Compellence in the Parliament
    I. Introduction

        Politicians' free speech has been protected by law in most countries. 1 Specifically,
elected politicians are provided with non-liability to guard them against arrest and prosecution in
matters related to their mandate, such as expression of opinions and casting votes, in an effort to
make sure that politicians serve the best interest of their constituents without fear of retribution.
This privilege typically starts after the politician is elected, and in most countries it is valid for
perpetuity; i.e., it is not restricted to the term in office. In addition, elected politicians are
typically covered by inviolability during their time in office, which provides wider protections
and eliminates the possibility of any civil or criminal complaint, investigation, search, and
seizure. 2
        Although a large literature in economics has focused on the investigation of the behavior
and performance of politicians, 3 there has been no empirical investigation of how politicians'
performance on the job is influenced by legal immunity from prosecution bestowed upon them. 4
This is because, the existence of political immunity varies only between countries, i.e., in a given
country, immunity applies either to all politicians or to none. There have been cases where the


1
  The origin of protecting politicians from incrimination related to expression of an opinion, can be traced
back to Article 9 of the Bill of Rights of 1689 in England. Reddy et al. (2020) point out that "more than
70 percent of democratic countries have some legal provision that protects elected politicians-to varying
degrees- from apprehension, prosecution or indictment" (Reddy et al. 2020, p. 531). The authors describe
the history of immunity provisions in Section 2 of their paper, and in Table 1 they provide the details of
legislative immunity across countries.
2
  There is concern that Parliamentary immunity of politicians may lead to abuse of power and corruption
(Wigley 2009, 2003), and Reddy, Schularick, and Skereta (2020) show that in a cross-section of
countries, variations in immunity levels between countries explain variations in country-level corruption.
3
 These analyses include the investigation of how the performance and legislative activities of politicians
are influenced by peer effects and connections (Harmon et al. 2019, Saia 2018), by salaries (Mocan and
Altindag 2013, Kotakorpi and Poutvaara 2011), term lengths (Dal Bo and Rossi 2011), political scandals
(Daniele et al. 2020, Ferraz and Finan 2008), the impact of the media (Garz and Sörensen 2017, Snyder
and Strömberg 2010), and even the sex of politicians' offspring (Washington 2008).
4
  Dal B, Dal B, and Di Tella (2006) construct a model where interest groups influence politicians both
through bribes and by threats of smear campaigns, legal harassment and violence. The authors introduce
immunity to the model as a method to insulate politicians from threats, and analyze the impact of
immunity on politician corruption. Reddy, Schularick, and Skereta (2020) modify this model by making
the decision to be corrupt binary and by making the bribery and treat decisions of the pressure group a
sequential one, as opposed to ones that can be pursued simultaneously.

                                                     1
Parliament of a country has revoked the immunity of some politicians following a charge related
to a serious criminal offense or a public scandal such as exposed corruption. Yet, these cases are
rare, and they do not lend themselves to a systematic investigation of the impact of immunity
revocation. Our paper presents the first empirical analysis in the literature of the effect of
Parliamentary immunity on the behavior and performance of lawmakers.
       As detailed in Section II, a well-defined legal threat was initiated by the Turkish
Parliament in May 2016 towards some of its members. Following the enactment of a
constitutional amendment, state prosecutors were empowered to initiate arrest warrants, pursue
indictments, and file lawsuits against 132 of the 550 Members of the Parliament (MPs), the
majority of whom were members of the opposition parties. We analyze the extent to which the
opposition MPs, who lost their immunity, are compelled to vote in tandem with the government
and the extent to which they are deterred from engaging in Parliamentary activities that could be
construed as detrimental for the government.
       According to an original article of the Turkish Constitution, no MP could be questioned,
arrested, detained, or brought to trial unless the Parliament lifted her/his immunity based on the
recommendation of a Parliamentary Committee. The amendment of May 2016, which was
enacted after a bi-partisan vote and with more than 2/3 support of the Parliament, modified the
Constitution and suspended (for one term of the Parliament) this inviolability of some MPs.
Specifically, the amendment permitted prosecutors to pursue indictments and to press charges
against those MPs who had a criminal or civil charge filed against them as of May 2016. The
relevant article of the constitution continued to provide legal protection to other MPs as long as
they had no charges brought against them when the amendment was enacted by the Parliament.
The Constitution also continued to protect the MPs with respect to their political speeches and
other Parliamentary activities. That is, non-liability is continued to be provided to all MPs. The
related details, including the justification of the Amendment as described by the lawmakers who
drafted it and the political environment, are described in Section II below.
       This event enables us to analyze the extent to which lifting Parliamentary immunity of
the MPs has altered their actions and legislative activities in the Parliament vis-à-vis other MPs
who are not impacted by the amendment. It is expected that those MPs, who faced the risk of
legal action due to the removal of their immunity, would keep a lower profile and avoid activities
in the Parliament that would displease the government if they believed that their opposition


                                                  2
activities in the Parliament might trigger prosecution. 5 Examples of such activities include
delivering speeches on the Parliament floor, submitting formal queries addressed to the
government, filing investigation inquiries into the actions of the government or into the activities
of the members of the cabinet, and showing aggression by interrupting the speakers who are
members of the government bloc. Thus, the effect (intended or unintended) of the constitutional
amendment would be a reduction in the intensity of the opposition activities of these MPs.
        In addition to being a deterrent, lifting the immunity could also be a vehicle for
compellence, or "a threat intended to make an adversary to do something" (Schelling 1980, p.
195). In this context, the compellence effect would manifest itself by MPs' actions that reflect
their improved support of the government. An example is voting in tandem with the governing
party to support the bills and legislation proposed by the government as opposed to casting
dissenting votes in the Parliament. 6
        Our paper is also related to the literature on the quality of governance, which analyzed
the importance of institutional structure on the actions of elected representatives, and on political
and economic outcomes. For example, Persson et al. (1997) emphasize the importance of the

5
  Prosecutors, who can bring charges against the MPs, are employed by the Department of Justice, but
their decisions regarding whether or not to bring charges against a person or an entity should not be
influenced by the agenda of the government. Whether this de jure independence of the Department of
Justice translates into de facto independence is difficult to determine. More importantly, it is not possible
to ascertain whether the MPs believed that the prosecutors could not be influenced by the government.
That a Justice Department would act under the direction of the government is not surprising, and there are
many examples of this behavior both in developing and developed countries. A recent example is the
firing of Geoffrey Berman, the US Attorney in Manhattan, by the U.S. Attorney General William Barr, on
June 20, 2020, an action which is widely believed to suppress the investigation of Rudy Giuliani, Donald
Trump's personal lawyer. On October 8, 2020, President Trump, through tweets and interviews on cable
news networks, openly put pressure on Attorney General William Barr to indict his political opponent
former Vice President Joe Biden and former President Barack Obama. We assume that Turkish MPs,
whose immunities have been lifted, considered this event as a credible threat which increased their
probability of prosecution.
6
  It can be argued that the difference between deterrence and compellence is semantic in this context. For
example, using the analogy from the crime literature, one can argue that while an increase in the arrest
rate or the rise in the police force is a deterrence to crime (Di Tella and Schargrodsky 2004, Corman and
Mocan 2000), an increase in the arrest rate or an increase in the number of police officers can be thought
of as a tool to compel individuals not to commit crime. In our particular case, it is clear that the MPs may
be deterred from activities that could be construed as detrimental for the agenda of the government.
These include initiating inquiries into the actions of the government and delivering formal speeches on
the floor of the Parliament to criticize the government. On the other hand, we consider voting in tandem
with the government as having been compelled to openly support the government because supporting a
bill on a roll call is not the opposite of casting a dissenting vote. This is because, the MPs have always
the option to abstain or not to be present in the session for the vote.

                                                     3
separation of powers between the legislative and executive branches to curb the abuse of power.
Persson and Tabellini (2004) show that presidential systems result in smaller governments than
parliamentary democracies. Lizzeri and Persico (2001) present a model that demonstrates
electoral rules impact the provision of public goods. Lizzeri and Persico (2005) show that it
might be efficient to have an institutional structure that restricts electoral competition. Acemoglu
et al. (2013) show that voters may prefer to weaken the checks and balances on politicians,
thereby allowing them to extract higher rents in order to limit the impact of interest groups on
politicians. Along these lines, our paper analyzes the influence of a particular dimension of an
institutional structure ­the protection of the legislators through Parliamentary immunity­ on the
behavior of politicians.
        Our identification strategy relies on the comparison of Parliamentary activities of the
MPs who lost their immunity to those who retained it before and after the enactment of the
constitutional amendment (which triggered the revocation of immunity). A threat to the validity
of this strategy is that the revocation of immunity may be a function of past Parliamentary
activities or personal attributes of the MPs. We show, in an event study analysis, that the trends
in Parliamentary activities were not different between those who lost their immunity and those
who retained it before the date on which the immunity status of some MPs is revoked. We also
show that the MPs who lost their immunity are not different from the ones who continued to be
protected by Parliamentary immunity in observable characteristics such as their age, sex, and
education. The only difference is that those MPs who are members of the opposition parties are
more likely to have their immunity revoked. Thus, we focus on the MPs of the opposition
parties. In these analyses, the treatment group includes the MPs who are members of the
opposition parties and who lost their immunity. The control group consists of the MPs who are
also members of the same opposition parties but retained their immunity.
        To investigate further whether selected MPs of the opposition parties have been targeted
to have their immunity stripped off, we perform a number of analyses. For example, using the
rank of each MP on their party's candidate list before the election, we show that the revocation
of immunity is not targeted to those opposition MPs who were more valuable to their parties
(who were ranked higher on their party ticket) 7 We also analyze the intensity of the


7
 In the proportional representation election system used in Turkey, voters cast their votes in general
elections for political parties and not for individual MP candidates. Each party submits a list of
candidates in a given election district (which is a province). Those candidates who are ranked higher on
                                                       4
Parliamentary activity of each MP before the enactment of the Constitutional Amendment. We
find that the loss of immunity is not concentrated among the opposition MPs who were more
active and outspoken in the Parliament before the revocation of their immunity and that
immunity revocation is not correlated with being active in the Parliament before the
Constitutional Amendment. This result casts doubt about the potential of targeting "troublemaker
and outspoken MPs."
        Furthermore, when we analyze the group of opposition MPs who were most active (in the
top 25 percent of all MPs) in the Parliament before the constitutional amendment, we find that
although they were all similarly highly active ex-ante, those of the group who subsequently lost
their immunity changed their behavior in comparison to those who retained immunity. These
analyses and the fact that the Constitutional Amendment received the endorsement of the leader
of the main opposition party, that the amendment received bi-partisan support in the Parliament,
and that 32 MPs of the government bloc also lost their immunity indicate that the amendment
was not the result of a polarized partisan battle.
        We find that revoking the Parliamentary immunity muffles the MPs. Specifically, MPs
are less likely to interrupt the speeches delivered by the members of the government party when
they no longer have legal immunity from prosecution. We also find that lifting their immunity
reduces the efforts of the MPs regarding scrutinizing and criticizing the government. Such MPs
initiate fewer investigation inquiries against the government and draft fewer pieces of legislation.
They also reduce their tendency to vote against the government during roll call votes. The same
results are obtained when we analyze the sample of opposition MPs who were highly active and
outspoken before the enactment of the constitutional amendment or those who are top-ranked on
their party's pecking order. Losing immunity has no impact on the behavior of government bloc
MPs.
        It is conceivable that members of the same party, who retained their immunity, picked up
the slack and increased their own efforts to compensate for the decline in job effort of their
colleagues who lost immunity. Alternatively, the revocation of their colleagues' immunity may
have galvanized the MPs who retained their immunity, and as a result, they may have increased
their effort in Parliament. We perform two complementary analyses to investigate whether MPs
who lost their immunity "outsourced" their jobs in the Parliament to their colleagues of the same


their party's list are more likely to get elected from that province. Therefore, parties rank their more
senior, important/valuable candidates higher on their list.
                                                        5
party and find no evidence for such spillover effects. We also show that the increase in the
proportion of a party's MPs who lost immunity leads to a decrease, rather than an increase, in the
overall legislative activity of that party. This finding is inconsistent with the conjecture that
political parties may have been energized and became more active in the Parliament after some
of its members lost immunity.
        A faction of the Turkish armed forces that was loyal to the exiled cleric Fethullah Gulen
attempted a coup d'état in July 2016. It is important to note that this coup attempt was a
completely unforeseen event, not expected or predicted by either the government or the
opposition parties. Neither was it foreseen by any other entity, including the media. This coup
attempt failed, and the government declared a state of emergency in late July 2016. Our results
may be confounded by the impact of this state of emergency that followed the coup attempt
because the post-amendment period mostly overlapped with the post-coup period. However,
considering the enactment of the constitutional amendment and the declaration of the state of
emergency as two distinct events reveals that the impact on the treatment group is due to the
former event. We also show that accounting for executive orders issued by the government
during the post-coup period to provide extraordinary powers to the law enforcement and the
prosecutors has no impact on the results. 8 Importantly, we present evidence indicating that the
effect of lifting immunity is observed immediately after the enactment of the constitutional
amendment in May 2016 and not after the declaration of the state of emergency in July 2016. 9
        When an MP's immunity is revoked, she/he can be arrested, detained, and brought to
trial. In these circumstances, those MPs would need to spend time defending themselves against
the alleged offenses. As a result, their time available for legislative activities would be reduced.
We show that this channel is not the driver of the decrease in legislative activities. First, we show
that losing immunity does not lead to a decrease MPs' Parliamentary attendance. Second, MPs
who faced a greater number of investigations (which would require the MPs to spend more time
in their legal defense) did not alter their legislative activities differently in comparison to those

8
 These executive orders provided special authority to the government to unleash the powers of law
enforcement and the legal system in order to detect, detain and prosecute individuals who are suspected to
be collaborators or supporters of the coup attempt.
9
 In additional analyses, we also show the Parliamentary activity, measured by the number of days in
which the Parliament was in session, was not different in the months of May and June in comparison to
other months, demonstrating that the impact of lifting immunity is not attributable to some unusually low
workload of the Parliament.

                                                    6
who faced fewer investigations. Third, we show that the results are not driven by the 16 MPs
who have not completed their term in the Parliament. More specifically, the results do not
change when we drop from the analysis those MPs who were ultimately arrested, indicted, and/or
convicted and thus lost their MP status and therefore stopped attending the Parliament, or
stopped attending for some other reason such as death or resignation.
        Losing Parliamentary immunity may impact MPs' re-election chances for a number of
reasons. To the extent that voters value MPs' effort and effectiveness in the Parliament, the loss
of immunity would reduce MPs' appeal to voters because the loss of immunity leads to reduced
effort and effectiveness in the Parliament. Similarly, voters may consider the loss of immunity
as a negative signal for the character of the MP, regardless of the MP's Parliamentary activity. If
losing Parliamentary immunity tarnishes an MP's reputation, voters may find the MP
unappealing for re-election. 10 Although voters in Turkish general elections vote for the party
ticket and not for particular candidates, these concerns nevertheless may motivate voters to
switch away from the party of the politician who lost immunity. Along the same lines, the
leadership of parties may decide not to nominate such MPs in the following election because of
these concerns.
        We find that opposition MPs whose immunities are revoked in the 26th Parliamentary
term are less likely to get re-elected to the 27th term compared to their counterparts who retain
their Parliamentary immunity. We further show that this is because the MPs whose immunities
are revoked are less likely to be re-nominated by their parties as MP candidates in the next
election. Losing immunity has no impact on either re-nomination or re-election probability of
the MPs of the government bloc. We also show that holding constant immunity status, the
number of charges levied against the MPs has no impact on re-nomination probability,
suggesting that it is the effectiveness in the Parliament, but not the perceived loss of reputation
due to the number of charges that is the driver of re-nomination.
        To investigate the impact of the regime with no immunity protection, we analyze the
speed with which the legislators passed laws. Utilizing the Parliamentary records pertaining to
each legislation enacted, we find that laws are passed more quickly after the Constitutional


10
  Dal B, Dal B and Di Tella (2006) also highlight this point and write that "[A]lthough a legal attack
will not full convince the public that the accused person is guilty, it will increase the perception that he is,
relative to the no accusation scenario. Thus a legal attack can still be painful for example by lowering
reelection chances (Dal B et al. 2006, p. 48).

                                                       7
Amendment. Specifically, after the revocation of MP immunities, the average days it took to
pass a law (from the introduction to the Parliament to the vote) went down by about 1.5 days
(where the average duration is 2.2 days). While this result suggests an increase in efficiency, the
increase in the speed with which legislation is enacted could be detrimental to the quality of the
legislation.
        Finally, we investigate whether lifting MPs' immunity had an impact on citizens' trust in
the Parliament. Using data from two waves of the Eurobarometer Survey and leveraging the fact
that the Constitutional Amendment and the ensuing immunity revocation took place between the
two survey waves and before the military coup attempt, we find that people's reactions were
polarized. Survey respondent's trust in the Parliament is enhanced (diminished) if an MP from
the respondent's province lost immunity and if that MP is a member of the opposing ideology
(same ideology) as the respondent. 11 This effect is driven by citizens who are supporters of the
government bloc.
        In Section II, we provide the background information of the Turkish Parliament, the
immunity provided by the Constitution, the 2016 amendment to the Constitution, and the
political power structure of the 26th Parliament, which faced this "treatment" generated by the
temporary amendment. Section III describes the data. Section IV presents the Empirical
Framework, the main results, as well as the results of robustness analyses. Section V is the
Summary and Conclusion.


II. Political Parties in the Parliament and the Amendment to the Constitution
        We consider the 26th Parliament of the Republic of Turkey and investigate the behavior
of the Members of the Parliament (MPs) in this parliamentary term because the constitutional
amendment, which lifted the immunity of some of the MPs, applied only to this term. The
Parliament consisted of 550 elected members who represented 81 provinces of the country that
had a population of 70 million in 2015.12 MPs serve 4-year terms, and there are no term limits.
The 26th Parliament, however, lasted shorter than four years. Specifically, following the national


11
 Using the same Eurobarometer survey and the same empirical specification, we show that the
Constitutional Amendment had no impact on citizens' trust in the EU or in the United Nations.
12
 After our sample period ended, starting with the 27th Parliamentary term in July 2018, the number of
MPs in the Parliament has increased to 600.

                                                   8
elections, the 26th Parliament convened in November 2015 and concluded in June 2018 because
the government decided to hold snap elections in Summer 2018.
        Four political parties were represented in Parliament during this term. AKP (Justice and
Development Party) had the majority with 317 seats, and it formed the government. This party
has been in the government continuously since 2002. The Nationalist Movement Party (MHP)
had 40 seats. Although MHP was not a coalition partner to the government party AKP (AKP had
more than 50 percent of the seats in the Parliament), MHP has been a political ally of AKP, and
it has been a supporter of the policies and positions of AKP. The two parties are not very
different ideologically, and their MPs vote in tandem on most issues. MHP and AKP even
collaborated during the local elections by nominating joint candidates in several districts. 13
        CHP and HDP are the two opposition parties. CHP (Republican People's Party) is a
center-left party representing social democrats with 134 MPs. HDP (People's Democratic Party)
is a pro-Kurdish left-wing party, which had 59 seats in the Parliament. These two parties are
fiery opponents of the governing party, AKP.


Parliamentary Immunity and the 2016 Constitutional Amendment
        To protect elected politicians' freedom of speech, Article 83 of the Turkish Constitution
provides MPs with general Parliamentary immunity, which has two attributes. First, MPs have
absolute and permanent Parliamentary non-liability. This means that MPs can never be held
accountable for their legislative activities (i.e., neither during nor after their term in the
Parliament). This attribute of the immunity eliminates any possibility of prosecution or
retaliation related to an MP's voting record, the contents of her/his speeches, or any other
Parliamentary activity. The second attribute of MP immunity is Inviolability, which puts a stop to
any legal proceedings or investigations against the MP during her/his term in Parliament. In
other words, MPs who are alleged to have committed a crime, either before or after the elections,
cannot be detained, interrogated, arrested, or tried (Nezirolu 2015). This attribute of immunity
provides MPs the ability to conduct their Parliamentary business with no disruption. The
Parliament could lift the immunity of an MP, provided that law enforcement authorities officially




13
 Although both of these parties pursue a conservative agenda, MHP's political platform is arguably
more nationalistic.

                                                    9
file with a Joint Judiciary Committee of the Parliament the charges brought against the MP and
that the Joint Committee moves the case to the Parliament after its investigation. 14


The Standard Process of Lifting Immunity
        If an MP has a civil or criminal charge filed against her/him, the Joint Judiciary
Committee of the Turkish Parliament evaluates the file of that MP. If the Committee decides to
bring the case to the Parliament, the case is put on the Parliamentary agenda, but it may still be
tabled. If the Parliament decides to make a decision on the case, the charges are discussed, and
the Parliament votes to revoke or retain the immunity of that MP. Between 1923 and 2016, a
total of only 40 MPs lost immunity (all are subsequently convicted by the courts). 15
        Before the general election of November 2015, there were accumulated charges on the
docket of the Judiciary Committee pertaining to MPs of the previous Parliamentary terms. After
the election, when the new Parliament was convened, charges were brought against some of the

14
   As in Turkey, many countries around the world grant non-liability and inviolability to their elected
politicians, although there is variation in the details between countries. For example, in Austria and
Finland non-liability is granted only for the duration of the politicians' mandate but it cannot be waived in
the former country, whereas it can be waived in the latter. In contrast, non-liability is provided for
perpetuity in Denmark and the Netherlands, but it can be waived. In Belgium and Italy, non-liability
cannot be waived, and its duration is unlimited. Similarly, the extent of inviolability varies between
countries. For example, in Ireland, the protection of politicians from a lawsuit is restricted only to the
duration of their mandate, but this protection cannot be waived. In France, Germany and Spain, such
inviolability is limited to the duration of the mandate of the elected politician and it can be waived. In
Greece, Belgium and Finland, inviolability is limited to the days when the Parliament is in session and it
can be waived. Specific details for the European Union countries can be found in McGee (2001). In the
U.S., the First Amendment provides protection of free speech for all citizens, which covers political
speech. However, politicians in the U.S. are not protected from prosecution for alleged crimes. Over the
years a number of U.S. Congressmen have been indicted, tried and convicted while in office. The same is
true for politicians in the U.K., Canada, and Australia.
15
   The historical reluctance of the Parliament to revoke MP immunity has, at times, created frustration.
For example, an MP of the social democratic opposition party (CHP) had two separate law suits filed
against him (before he was elected in 2002) for insulting a civilian person and a public official. Both
cases were suspended because he gained Parliamentary immunity after having been elected. Both cases
were referred by the courts to the Joint Judiciary Committee with the request of lifting immunity. The
Committee rejected the request. The MP unsuccessfully appealed the decision and asked his immunity be
lifted in order for him to defend himself and clear his name in court. The MP got elected to the
Parliament again in 2007 and the same process repeated. The MP took his case to the European Court of
Human Rights arguing that the refusal of the Turkish Parliament to lift his parliamentary immunity had
denied him of his right to access to a court and to a fair trial. By a 13-4 decision the European Court of
Human Rights ruled on December 3, 2009 that the MP may not renounce his Parliamentary immunity in
order to stand trial voluntarily. (European Court of Human Rights; Case Kart v. Turkey, Application
No:8917/05) KART v. TURKEY (coe.int)

                                                     10
newly-elected MPs. These new charges, as well as the existing ones (from previous years)
against some re-elected MPs, constitute the stock of total charges on the docket of the
Committee.
       Some of these charges were terrorism-related, and the government wanted the
prosecutors to pursue them. The legislation, submitted to the Parliament on April 12, 2016, to
introduce the Constitutional Amendment, explicitly stipulates that a goal of the Amendment was
to make it feasible to investigate the charges against terrorism, but that it was important not to
single out specific MPs. It was stipulated that, therefore, it was important to investigate all
charges against all MPs. The text of the legislation stated that there were 562 charges
accumulated over time against the MPs waiting to be investigated at the Judiciary Committee of
the Parliament. The legislation further stipulated that it would take 94 days to discuss all of these
charges at the Parliament and that this would translate into more than 30 weeks of Parliamentary
sessions (almost eight months) as the Parliament meets three days per week. Thus, this
legislation proposed a Constitutional Amendment to lift the immunity of all MPs who had at
least one charge against them. 16
       In May 2016, this legislation received bipartisan support and was enacted by a secret
ballot vote, and it amended Article 83 of the Constitution. The Amendment was proposed by the
governing party (AKP). The ally of the governing party, MHP, was also in favor of the
amendment. These two parties of the government bloc (AKP and MHP) had 357 seats between
them, which was not sufficient to reach the 2/3 majority needed to rectify the Constitution
(which translates into 367 votes). The support of the opposition allowed the amendment to pass
with 376 votes. This means that at least 19 MPs of the opposition parties have voted in favor of
the amendment. If the 32 government bloc MPs, who lost their immunity, voted against the
amendment, this would imply that 51 opposition bloc MPs voted in favor. This is not surprising
because the leader of the Social Democratic Party (the main opposition) publicly supported the
amendment and said he would vote in favor. There was also public support for the Amendment.




16
  Five hundred -sixty two charges pertain to 132 MPs. However, some MPs have a large number of
charges against them that have been accumulated over time. For example, the leader of the Social
Democrat Party (CHP) had 39 charges against him, while another important politician of that party, had
12 charges. The leader of the pro-Kurdish party (HDP) faced 71 charges, and another MP from the same
party had 48 charges. In fact, nine MPs of HDP faced a total of 243 charges between them.

                                                  11
       This amendment, which is designed to apply only to the 26th term of the Parliament (i.e.,
the Parliament that was in session), lifted the immunity of some MPs by revoking their
inviolability privilege. Those MPs who had criminal or civil charges filed against them at the
Joint Judicial Committee had their immunity lifted. As a result, these MPs would not be
inviolable for those alleged offenses, and the police and the prosecutors could continue their
investigations and legal actions against these MPs. Put differently, after the amendment became
effective, these MPs could be interrogated, arrested, detained, and prosecuted. MPs who did not
face a pending investigation at the time of the enactment of the amendment continued to be
covered with full immunity of Article 83 of the Constitution. It is important to note that all MPs
continued to have immunity related to their Parliamentary actions and behavior. In other words,
all MPs continued to be protected by non-liability with respect to their Parliamentary activities.
       One hundred and thirty-two of the 550 MPs, or approximately 1 out of every 4, have lost
their Parliamentary immunity in May 2016. In Table 1, we present the distribution of MPs by
their immunity status and political party. AKP was the governing party that had the majority in
the Parliament with 317 seats. Twenty five of its MPs (eight percent) had their immunity
revoked. The second political party listed in Table 1 is the pan-Turkish MHP, which is an ally of
the AKP. MHP had 40 MPs in the Parliament, and eight of them lost immunity. CHP and HDP
are the two opposition parties, and as Table 1 demonstrates, 40 percent and 76 percent of their
MPs, respectively, lost Parliamentary immunity.
       Although we know the number of charges against each of the 132 MPs who lost their
immunity, with the exception of a few cases that leaked to the media or went to trial, we don't
have information about the nature of the charges against specific MPs, or the specific date on
which a charge was filed because that information is protected for privacy. However, based on a
speech of the Justice Minister on May 17, 2016, delivered in the Parliament in response to a
formal inquiry, we know that these MPs had a variety of accusations filed against them, ranging
from violation of election laws to simple battery, from vandalism and criminal damage to slander
and defamation, from assault to forgery, from sedition to terrorism.


III. Data
       Our data set includes information on the Parliamentary activities of each Member of the
Parliament (MP), obtained from the official minutes of the meetings that are published online at


                                                12
the website of the Turkish Parliament. 17 The top section of Table 2 provides the definitions and
descriptive statistics of the outcome variables analyzed. The unit of observation is an MP-
month. 18 Ignoring the months in which the Parliament was in recess, there are 28 observations
per MP.
          On average, MPs delivered about 6.7 Speeches each month on the Parliament floor. The
minutes of the meetings are very detailed, and each spoken word is recorded. This allows us to
measure the length of each speech by counting the number of words spoken in a month,
represented by the variable Words. Speeches in the Parliament are transcribed in such a way that
identifies the MPs who delivered speeches as well as the MPs who interrupted these speeches.
We counted the number of times an MP interrupted a speech delivered on the podium by another
MP by cutting off the speaker through interjections, comments, and other verbal disruptions.
The official minutes allow us to identify the disrupters. Such interference and interruptions of a
colleague's speech are measures of aggression and harassment. The number of interruptions,
displayed in Table 2, could be the result of interrupting a particular speaker multiple times or
interrupting different speakers on different occasions. The variable Interruptions Targeting
Speeches of Gov. MPs represents the number of times per month the MPs interrupted speeches of
other MPs who were members of the governing party. We also measured the number of
interruptions targeted at non-government MPs (Interruptions Targeting Speeches of Non-Gov.
MPs). These infractions could be committed by an opposition MP against an MP who is a
member of another opposition party or by a government party-MP against an opposition MP.
          We have data on the votes cast by the MPs in roll calls. These voting data are also
publicly available from the Turkish Parliament website. The variable % Votes Against
Government measures the percentage of votes the MP has cast against the bills and motions
proposed by the governing party (AKP). To construct this variable, we first determined how the
overwhelming majority of the MPs of the governing party voted on each issue. If at least 90
percent of the members of the government party voted to support (object) a particular motion,
then we postulate that the government party's position was to accept (reject) the motion on the

17
     https://www.tbmm.gov.tr/tutanak/tutanaklar.htm
18
  Some Parliaments, such as the European Union Parliament, define a Plenary Session as a session
consisting of 2 to 4 consecutive working days. Turkish Parliament has no such classification. The
classification scheme of the Turkish Parliament consists of Meetings and Sessions, where Meetings are 1-
2-hour long, and a Session includes all Meetings in a day. There is no official classification for multiple
days.
                                                    13
floor. 19 We then compared each individual MP's vote to this position and generated % Votes
Against the Government, which measures the extent to which the MP voted against the proposals
of the government.
           Other outcome variables are formal inquiries submitted to the Parliament to initiate an
investigation regarding the activities of the government or a member of the cabinet (Investigation
Inquiries Filed), the number of proposals drafted or co-sponsored for legislation (Drafts of
Legislation), and formal, written queries posed by the MP to the government through the
Parliament (Formal Queries). MPs drafted (or sponsored) 0.13 pieces of legislation per month,
which is equivalent to about one-and-a-half legislation drafted or co-sponsored per year. MPs
posed 1.8 formal queries to a member of the government each month on average, and they filed
an investigation inquiry about the activities of the government 0.17 times per month, which
translates into two inquiries per year (Investigation Inquiries Filed). 20
           We augment our data set with the personal characteristics of the MPs, as reported in their
profiles on the Parliament website. 21 At the bottom of Table 2, we present the sample means of
MP attributes. The average age of the MPs was about 52 when the constitutional amendment was
passed in May 2016. Fourteen percent of the MPs are female, and 41 percent have a graduate
degree. About half of the MPs are re-elected in the following election.
            To test whether the MPs who lost their immunity are different from those who retained
it, we conducted randomization tests where we regressed the indicator for whether MP's
immunity was rescinded (Immunity Lifted) on each MP attribute (Age in May 2016, MA/PhD,
Female, and whether the MP is a member of the opposition). The results are displayed in column
(1) of Appendix Table A1 for all MPs. MPs' education, age, and sex are not related to whether
or not their Parliamentary immunity has been lifted. On the other hand, an opposition MP is
more likely to have her/his immunity lifted. This is consistent with the information displayed in
Table 1, which reveals that opposition parties are hit substantially more strongly with the loss of
Parliamentary immunity. In column (2) of Table A1, we repeat the same exercise within the



19
     The results are not sensitive to different thresholds.
20
  These investigations are conducted by committees which have the power to subpoena documents and
collect testimony.
21
     https://www.tbmm.gov.tr/develop/owa/milletvekillerimiz_sd.mv_liste_eskiler?p_donem_kodu=26

                                                         14
opposition MPs and again find no evidence of a systematic difference between the treated and
control groups in terms of their personal attributes.


IV. Empirical Analysis
       Panel A of Appendix Table A2 presents the means of the outcome variables for the MPs
whose immunity is rescinded (treatment group) versus retained (control group), both before and
after the enactment of the constitutional amendment. Column (7) displays the difference in the
differences and indicates that losing Parliamentary immunity has muted the activities of the MPs
in the Parliament, and it decreased the MPs' tendency to cast votes against the positions of the
government. We also generated three summary measures. Specifically, we created the first
principal component (PC) of the four performance measures related to speeches and
interruptions, the PC of the other four performance measures (%Votes Against the Government,
Investigation Inquiries Filed, Drafts of Legislation, Formal Queries), as well as the PC of all
eight performance indicators. These three Principal Components are employed as aggregate
indicators of Parliamentary performance. Column (7) of Panel A in Appendix Table A2 shows
that the intensity of MPs' Parliamentary activities has declined after May 2016 (the month in
which the immunity of some MPs was lifted), but that the decline was more substantial for those
MPs who have lost their immunity.
       Panel B of Appendix Table A2 repeats the same exercise for the MPs of the opposition
parties. It shows that the decrease in the extent of Parliamentary activities was more significant
for the opposition MPs who lost their immunity in comparison to opposition MPs who retained
their immunity.
       More formally, we implement a difference-in-differences strategy to estimate the impact
of legal immunity on the legislative activities of the MPs. The treatment group consists of the
132 MPs whose immunities were rescinded in May 2016. We consider the remaining MPs as
constituting the control group. We also consider an alternative, and arguably more relevant,
formulation. As shown in Table 1 and also in Appendix Table A1, opposition party MPs are
significantly more likely to have lost their immunity. Furthermore, opposition MPs (those who
are members of CHP and HDP) constitute a more homogenous group in comparison to all MPs
with respect to their political positions regarding their opposition to the government. Thus, we
focus on the MPs of the opposition parties and analyze the impact of losing Parliamentary


                                                 15
immunity among this group of opposition MPs. This group consists of 193 opposition MPs, 99
of whom lost their Parliamentary immunity.
        In this framework, we estimate:

(1)      = 0 + 1   ×  +  +  +  ,

where the subscripts  and  represent MPs and the time periods (months of the 26th Parliament),
respectively. The outcome variable, , measures various legislative activities of the MPs,
displayed in Table 2. The variable Immunity Lifted stands for whether an MP has lost her/his
immunity, and  indicates the post-treatment period, which starts in May 2016. 22 Equation
(1) controls for MP fixed effects,  , and month-by-year fixed effects,  . Standard errors are
clustered at the MP level. The coefficient 1 represents the difference-in-differences estimate.


Baseline Results
        Estimates obtained from Equation (1) are displayed in Table 3. The time period of the
analysis is December 2015 to May 2018. Excluding the months in which the Parliament was in
recess, there are 28 observations per MP. Because we run regressions with 11 different
dependent variables that aim to gauge similar outcomes, we also report in brackets [p-values]
adjusted for multiple-hypothesis testing using the improved Benforroni method of Simes
(Newson 2010, Benjamini and Yekutieli 2001, Simes 1986). Panel A presents the results where
the outcomes are related to speeches in Parliament.
        Losing Parliamentary immunity has a large and statistically significant effect on MPs'
tendency to interrupt the members of the governing party (Panel A, column 3). Losing immunity
reduces the number of speeches delivered each month (column 1) and shortens these speeches
(column 2), although these effects are not statistically significant. Columns (1)-(3) of Panel B
reveal that revoking the immunity reduces the propensity to vote against the government by 3.8
percentage points; it reduces the number of inquiries filed per month by 0.3 and cuts the number
of legislation drafts sponsored by 0.37. The first principal components of the outcomes in
Panels A and B are used as dependent variables in regressions reported in columns 2 and 3 of
Panel C, and the result pertaining to the principal component of all eight outcomes is displayed


22
  Although the Amendment was enacted on May 20, 2016, the bill of the amendment was introduced to
the Parliament on April 12, 2016. By the end of April, it became clear that it was going to pass by bi-
partisan support.
                                                  16
in column 1 of Panel C. Consistent with Panels A and B, the results in Panel C (where the
dependent variables are the first principal components) show that losing immunity reduced MPs'
Parliamentary effort, but that the impact on speech-related activities was not estimated with
precision.
        Although personal attributes of the MPs are not correlated with the probability of losing
Parliamentary immunity (see Appendix Table A1), MPs of the opposition parties are more likely
to have lost their immunity. Of all MPs who lost their immunity, 75 percent are members of
these two opposition parties (99 of 132). 23 Therefore, we estimated the models among the
sample of MPs who belong to opposition bloc parties: CHP and HDP. In this design, the
treatment group consists of those MPs who are members of these opposition parties and who lost
their Parliamentary immunity. The control group contains MPs who are from the same parties
but who retained their immunity. The results, displayed in Table 4, are consistent with the ones
reported in Table 3, but there is stronger evidence that lifting immunity muffles the interruptions
of other MPs' speeches. Specifically, the impact is statistically significant not only in
interruptions targeting government MPs (column 3 of Panel A) but also in interruptions targeting
non-government MPs (column 4 of Panel A). The impacts on the number of speeches and the
total number of words spoken per month are larger among the opposition MPs (columns 1 and 2
of Panel A), although the estimates are not significant at conventional levels. As was the case in
Table 3, Panels B and C of Table 4 demonstrate that Parliamentary immunity impacts legislative
activities (Panel B) and that its effect is registered on aggregate indicators as well (Panel C).
These results are confirmed when we estimated the models using negative binomial regressions.
        The opposition bloc consists of two political parties: the social democrats (CHP) and the
left-wing, pro-Kurdish Peoples' Democratic Party (HDP). Fourteen of HDP's 59 MPs (almost


23
  The political rivalry and the animosity between the governing party AKP, and the two opposition
parties (CHP and HDP) can also be seen in Appendix Table A3, which displays the distribution of all
speech interruptions during the 26th Parliament by the party of the speaker and the interrupter. For
example, column (1) and row (2) show that 27.5 percent of all interruptions in the Parliament took place
when an MP of the governing party (AKP) was delivering a speech, and she/he was interrupted by an MP
of the social democrats (CHP). Similarly, column (1) and row (4) shows that about eight percent of
interruption incidents took place when an AKP speaker was on the podium, interrupted by an MP of the
center-left pro-Kurdish party (HDP). Columns (2) and (4) of row (1) show that 27 percent, and 20
percent of all interruptions in the Parliament are committed by the members of the AKP delegation when
an MP from CHP, or an MP from HDP was delivering a speech, respectively. Thus, 82 percent of all
interruptions committed between the MPs of the government party (AKP) and the opposition parties
(CHP and HDP).

                                                   17
24 percent) lost immunity. 24 To ensure that the results are not driven by the behavior of the MPs
of this party, we dropped the MPs of the HDP, and estimated the models using only the MPs of
the social democratic opposition party, CHP. The results are presented in Table 5. They are
similar to the ones displayed in earlier tables, but here immunity has a statistically significant
impact on the number of speeches and the number of words as well. As column (1) of Panel A in
Table 5 shows, losing Parliamentary immunity reduced the number of speeches delivered in a
month by five and reduced the total number of spoken words in a month by 301 among the MPs
of the main opposition: the social democratic party, CHP. 25
        In Table 6, we present the results obtained from the MPs of the government bloc. This
sample consists of the MPs who are members of the governing party (AKP) and members of
MHP, which is a center-right, pan-Turkish party and a political ally of the AKP. The point
estimates obtained from the sample of government bloc MPs of Table 6 are dramatically smaller
than the corresponding estimates in Table 4 (the opposition sample), and they are never
statistically significant. This indicates that lifting Parliamentary immunity has no impact on the
activities of the MPs if they are members of the governing party or the political ally of the
governing party.
        In supplementary analyses, we investigated the propensity of having been interrupted
while delivering speeches on the podium of the Parliament. We found that the MPs of the
opposition parties are significantly less likely to get interrupted by the government bloc after
they have lost their immunity (see Appendix Table A4). This result is, in part, a reflection that
opposition MPs deliver fewer and shorter speeches after losing their immunity. Consequently,
they face a lower risk of being interrupted. But it could also be a reflection of the government
bloc MPs' diminished enthusiasm to interrupt the opposition MPs whose immunity has been
revoked because such MPs may be more careful in the tenor of their speeches after losing
immunity. 26


24
  As mentioned earlier, the accusations against the MPs which led to their loss of immunity varied in
their severity, ranging from violation of election laws to vandalism and criminal damage, from slander
and defamation to assault, from forgery to terrorism.
25
 This translates into an approximately 3.3-minute reduction in total duration of speeches delivered in a
month for an MP.
26
  We also tried a sentiment analysis using the contents of the speeches. We tried to identify words that
may represent a particular world view and political ideology. The government party (AKP) has a
religious identity, and words such as "God" and "God Willing" are used frequently by the governing
                                                    18
        If there is no treatment effect, but if there exist parallel downward trends for both the
treatment and control groups which continue after the constitutional amendment, all MPs would
experience the same percentage reduction in their activity. Because the treatment group tends to
have bigger pre-treatment mean values for most outcomes, this could produce a spurious
negative effect of the treatment. To investigate this possibility, we took the logarithms of the
outcomes (after adding +1, as there are zero values) rather than using them in levels. The results
provided by this functional form provide the same inference (see Appendix Table A5.)


Parallel Pre-Trends and Potential Post-Treatment Impacts
        To investigate whether the treatment and the control groups followed differential pre-
trends, we conduct an event study analysis by estimating the regression below:

(2)      =     ×  +  +  + 

        This specification is identical to Equation (1), except, instead of the interaction of
  and , we include time dummies' interactions with  .
These interaction terms identify whether the treated group deviates from the trends common to
both groups in each time period. To present the results in a concise manner, we show the
estimates obtained from principal components. Figure 1 displays the estimated coefficients
obtained from the sample of all MPs, where the dependent variable is the first principal
component of all eight outcomes. Figure 2 presents the same information obtained from the
sample of opposition MPs (the Social Democratic Party, CHP, and the pro-Kurdish party, HDP),
and Figure 3 displays the estimates obtained from the sample of the MPs who are members of
the government bloc (the majority party AKP and its ally MHP). In other words, Figures 1, 2,
and 3 correspond to the samples used in Tables 3, 4, and 6, respectively. The bars in the figures
represent the point estimates of the interactions of time dummies with the  
variable, and the capped lines are the 95% confidence intervals.
        In Figures 1 and 2, no consistent pattern is observed in the coefficients before the start of
the treatment, but the post-treatment impacts are negative. This picture supports the parallel pre-
trends assumption, i.e., the difference in behaviors between the treatment and the control groups


party MPs in their speeches. We analyzed if the opposition MPs switched to such phrases after losing
their immunity. We also analyzed the frequency of curse words and rough language, but no clear results
emerged in either case.

                                                  19
is not statistically significant in the pre-treatment period, but the divergence occurred after the
initiation of the treatment. Figure 3 reveals that in the sample of AKP and MHP (the governing
party and the supporting party), there is no impact to speak of.
        To provide more information about the variation driving the results, we also present the
raw means of the first principal component of all legislative activities for the treated and
untreated groups within both the opposition and government parties. Figure 4, which displays
this information among the opposition MPs, shows that before the constitutional amendment (to
the left of the vertical line in the graph) those opposition MPs who ended up losing their
immunity (represented by dots) were more active in the Parliament in comparison to the
opposition MPs who retained their immunity (represented by triangles). However, with the
enactment of the constitutional amendment, the activity level of those who lost immunity went
down and became almost indistinguishable from the activity level of the MPs who retained their
immunity. Figure 5 presents the same information for the MPs of the government bloc. Here
too, the MPs who ended up losing immunity were more active before the enactment of the
amendment compared to those who retained their immunity. But this pattern, for the most part,
remained the same during the post-amendment period among these government bloc MPs.
        All of the 132 MPs who are in the treatment group experienced the treatment at the same
time in May 2016. That is, there is no variation in the timing of the treatment. While this avoids
some complications related to heterogeneous effects that might emerge in the case of staggered
treatment (de Chaisemartin and D'Haultfoeuille 2020, Goodman-Bacon 2021), it can be argued
that the treatment in our case may be capturing some other differential trend related to the
attributes of the MPs. For example, if some characteristic of the treated MPs, other than the fact
that they are treated, caused their performance in the Parliament to change after May 2016, then
the coefficient of   ×  could pick this differential trend, and it would
incorrectly attribute it to the impact of revoking an MP's immunity. Although we have shown in
Appendix Table A1 that there are no differences in observable attributes of the treated and
untreated MPs, to guard against this possibility, we nevertheless estimated an augmented version
of Equation (1). In this alternative specification, we included the interactions of MP attributes
with  as additional variables. 27 These interactions will isolate the Dif-in-Dif effect from


27
  Recall that time-invariant attributes, such as Female and MA/PhD, were not included in the baseline
regressions because of the inclusion of MP fixed effects. But in this alternative specification, the
interactions of these time-invariant variables and  can be included.
                                                    20
other possible differential trends that may be generated by MPs' age, sex, or education. The
coefficient estimates obtained from these regressions are shown in Appendix Table A6. The
results reveal that our findings, reported in previous tables, are robust to this alternative
specification. If anything, the impact of lifting the immunity is more precisely estimated in these
regressions.


Deterrence/Compellence or a Time Constraint?
       It can be argued that the decline in Parliamentary activities of the MPs after they have
lost their immunity is not because of a deterrence or compellence effect, but simply because of
the change in MPs' time constraint. The MPs are prone to investigation, prosecution, and
litigation when their immunity is lifted. This means that the results may be driven by particular
MPs who stopped attending the Parliamentary sessions if they faced investigations and court
hearings subsequent to losing their immunity. To investigate if the results are driven by the
absenteeism of the MPs who have lost their immunity, we conducted three complementary
analyses. First, we analyzed if the immunity status had an impact on attendance to the
Parliament. We do not have data on the actual number of Parliamentary sessions attended. But
we tallied the days on which the MPs cast a vote in the Parliament. Using the number of days
present in the Parliament as the dependent variable, we ran the same model, the results of which
are reported in Appendix Table A7. Column (2) shows that immunity status has no impact on
the number of days present in the Parliament among the MPs of the opposition parties. Column
(1) shows that in the sample of all MPs, losing the immunity status leads to an increase, rather
than a decrease, in the number of days attended. Thus, the decline in Parliamentary performance
cannot be attributed to absenteeism due to losing the immunity status.
       We investigated this question in a different way, using the number of charges against
each MP. Recall that the constitutional amendment permitted the revocation of the immunity of
an MP if the MP had an official investigation pending at the time when the amendment was
enacted. We have information on the number of charges filed against each MP before the
enactment of the constitutional amendment. There exists variation in the number of charges
among the MPs whose immunity is revoked (mean=4.78 std=8.92). A larger number of charges
should lead to a bigger devotion of time and effort on the part of the MP to defend
herself/himself against these charges. Thus, the number of charges levied against the MPs who
lost their immunity is a reasonable proxy for time spent outside of the Parliament.

                                                  21
       Figure 6 presents the distribution of charges among the opposition MPs. Ninety-four
opposition MPs had no charges filed against them when the constitutional amendment was
passed. Thus, these MPs have retained their immunity. The rest of the opposition MPs have a
varying number of charges against them. For example, 27 MPs whose immunities are revoked
had only one investigation about them. Thirty-three MPs were facing 2 or 3 investigations, and
the remaining 39 MPs had at least four investigations or charges. Only in a handful of cases, we
know the contents of these investigations or the indictments/sentences to which they ultimately
led. Nevertheless, MPs who were subject to a large number of investigations are expected to
allocate more time to their potential defense, leaving less time for Parliamentary activities.
Consequently, we ran the same model with the addition of the number of charges against the
MPs (Charges) interacted with the Post dummy. The results, displayed in Table 7, are consistent
with the ones reported earlier and demonstrate that the impact of revocation of immunity is not
attributable to the number of charges faced by the MPs who lost their immunity. This suggests
that the results are unlikely to be driven by MPs' reduced time allocation to the Parliament.
       Finally, we analyzed the sample of MPs who participated in the 26th Parliament
continuously. There are 16 MPs who stopped their Parliamentary activities before the end of
their term. The reason for this type of cease-of-action is either the death of the MP, her/his
resignation, her/his arrest while waiting for a trial, or losing the MP status due to the conviction
after a trial. Of the 16 MPs who have not completed their term in Parliament, all but one are
members of the opposition parties. Dropping these 16 MPs from the sample of opposition MPs
and re-estimating the models did not alter the results, which are reported in Appendix Table A8.


The Coup Attempt
       As mentioned in the Introduction, there was a failed coup d'état in Turkey in July 2016. It
is important to underline that this coup attempt was orchestrated and implemented by a small
faction of the armed forces, who are led by the followers of a cleric, Fethullah Gulen, who was in
self-exile in the U.S. This coup attempt was not anticipated by anyone in the country, including
the government and the opposition parties. Importantly, the coup attempt is unrelated to the
constitutional amendment or the identities of particular MPs who lost their Parliamentary
immunity.
       Following this coup attempt, martial law was declared in the country, and there was
increased public support for the government in the aftermath of the coup attempt. Thus, it is
                                                 22
conceivable that the results might reflect the impact of the coup attempt rather than the impact of
the loss of Parliamentary immunity. To disentangle the potential impact of this coup attempt
from the impact of the loss of immunity, we ran the benchmark models with the addition of a
second indicator (Post-Coup) that is interacted with the indicator for the loss of Parliamentary
immunity. The results, summarized in Appendix Table A9 for the sample of opposition MPs,
show that the Post-Coup period has no impact on legislative activities of the MPs and that the
effect of the loss of Parliamentary immunity remains significant. The results presented in
Appendix Table A9 are based on clustering standard errors by month since it can be argued that
errors are correlated within months. Computing the wild t bootstrap p-values did not alter the
inference. The p-values associated with these bootstrapped standard errors are provided in
{curly brackets} in Appendix Table A9.
        During the period following the attempted coup, the government has issued a number of
executive orders. These executive orders provided extraordinary powers to the law enforcement
agencies and to the judiciary in an effort to locate and prosecute the collaborators or the culprits
of the attempted coup. 28 Appendix Figure AF1 presents the time-series behavior of the monthly
number of executive orders. To the extent that executive orders provided more power and
flexibility to the prosecutors to press charges, it is reasonable to assume that the MPs who have
lost their Parliamentary immunity would keep an even lower profile during periods in which
executive orders are being issued.
        We added the number of executive orders, interacted with the Immunity Lifted indicator,
to the models. The results are presented in Appendix Table A10. Executive orders have no
statistically significant impact on the behavior of opposition MPs, but consistent with previous
results, losing Parliamentary immunity has a negative effect on the outcomes analyzed.
        We also estimated the models for the time period up to the coup attempt, which took
place on July 15, 2016. Thus, we considered only the months of May and June 2016 as the post-
treatment periods. Although doing so substantially limits the variation in the data, the estimates
obtained from this short sample are not subject to potential confounding due to the coup attempt.
The results are presented in Table 8 for the opposition MPs and in Appendix Table A11 for the


28
   These executive orders (called "Kanun Hukmunde Kararname" in Turkish) instituted new laws and
regulations ranging from extending the time period in which suspects can be held in custody to new
procedures regulating the termination of employment of government workers and the military personnel,
to providing financial help to the victims who lost their lives or who were injured while resisting the coup
attempt in the streets.
                                                     23
entire Parliament (all 550 MPs). They reveal that lifting the immunity generated a decline in the
extent to which speeches of the government MPs are interrupted (Panel A), as well as a decrease
in the proportion of votes cast against the government, a decrease in the investigations filed
against the government and legislation drafted (Panel B). Models in Panel C, where the first
principal components are the dependent variables, confirm those results reported in Panels A and
B. In summary, the findings of the paper based on the entire duration of the 26th Parliament are
verified using the pre-coup time period, indicating that the coup attempt is not the driver of the
findings.


Extensions and Robustness
       The estimates in the previous section have a causal interpretation if the MPs in the
control group are counterfactuals to those in the treatment group. That average MP
characteristics, such as age, sex, education, do not depend on their immunity status (see
Appendix Table A1) is reassuring. However, as shown in Panels A and B of Appendix Table A2,
those MPs who lost their immunity were more active in the Parliament before the enactment of
the Constitutional Amendment. It can be argued that the MPs who were more outspoken and
more active in the Parliament could have been targeted for having their immunity lifted. Note
that, in this scenario, some MPs have unobservable attributes that make them formidable and
fiery opposition members (who speak more and interrupt others more frequently, who file
investigation inquiries against the government more often, and so on). At the same time, these
attributes make them more likely targets for immunity revocation. In this case, we would
underestimate the impact of immunity on MPs' activities, and the estimated impact of immunity
revocation would be biased towards zero. However, the analyses detailed in the Appendix show
that opposition MPs who are more active, aggressive, and outspoken before the Constitutional
Amendment was enacted were not targeted for lifting their immunity. Furthermore, the results
hold among this group of highly active MPs. More specifically, when we analyze the sample of
MPs who had similar pre-treatment levels of Parliamentary activity, we find that among this
group, those who subsequently lost immunity reduced their effort in comparison to those who
retained their immunity. (See the description provided in Section 2 of the Appendix and
Appendix Tables A12, A13 in that same section.)
       Similarly, we find no evidence for more valuable MPs being targeted. We show in
Section 2 of the Appendix that MPs, who are ranked higher on their party tickets when they were

                                                 24
elected in their respective provinces, are not more likely to lose immunity. Also, these highly-
ranked and valuable MPs respond to the loss of immunity no differently than other MPs (see
Appendix Tables A14 and A15, and the explanations provided in Section 2 of the Appendix.)
       To analyze the sensitivity of the results to the pre-treatment activity level of the MPs, we
ran the main model depicted in Equation (1) with the following modification. We considered the
pre-treatment Parliamentary activity of each opposition MP as summarized in Appendix Table
A12. Each MP is classified into one of the quartiles of the pre-treatment activity distribution.
We interacted these quartile dummies with the post-amendment dummy (Post) and added them
to Equation (1). The results are presented in Appendix Table A16. The impact of losing
immunity is the same as before.
       We also investigated whether the months of May and June of 2016 (the two months
between the Constitutional Amendment and the coup attempt) were different from previous
years' May and June in terms of the workload of the Parliament. We identified no drop in the
workload in May or June 2016. Analyzing seasonality more generally, we found that the
workload of the Parliament is rather evenly distributed throughout the year. The details of these
analyses are also provided in Section 4 of the Appendix and displayed in Appendix Figure AF2.


Potential SUTVA Violations
       It may be the case that the opposition MPs, who retained their immunity, may have been
nevertheless impacted by the Constitutional Amendment. For example, these control-group MPs
may also have reduced their Parliamentary efforts and tamed their aggressiveness and
determination. If this is true, the impacts we identified in the paper would be underestimates of
the true effect of losing immunity.
       Could the MPs, who are stripped of their immunity, have outsourced their Parliamentary
activities to their colleagues who retained their immunity? It may be implausible for those who
lost their immunity to convince their colleagues to interrupt other MPs' speeches more
frequently, and the case is even less convincing for casting votes in tandem with the government
(because each MP has one vote). It is, however, conceivable for colleagues to pick up the slack
and exert more effort to compensate for the reduced effort of those who lost immunity in such
dimensions as delivering additional speeches on the Parliament floor, speaking longer, or
drafting extra pieces of legislation.


                                                25
       A related conjecture is that the MPs, who retained immunity, may have been energized
due to the revocation of their colleagues' immunity, and they may therefore have increased their
legislative efforts when those who lost immunity did not change their behavior. Under this
scenario, the effect we identify would be driven by such increased effort of immunity-intact MPs
in reaction to their colleagues' loss of immunity.
       Detailed analyses, presented in Appendix Section 3 and Appendix Tables A17 and A18,
show that there is no evidence for the MPs who are in the control group (those who retained their
immunity) to have been impacted by their colleagues' losing immunity.
       To shed additional light on this question, we also ran regressions at the party-level where
the unity of observation is the party-level average of the outcomes in each month. The
regressions control for party fixed effects and party-specific trends. The key variable is
% Immunity Lifted, which is the percentage of the MPs in each party who lost immunity.
Under the assumption of complete outsourcing, the proportion of MPs who lost immunity from a
party should have no impact on that party's Parliamentary activity. Similarly, under the
hypothesis that MPs who lose immunity do not alter their behavior, but that their immunity-
intact peers increase their effort, the impact of % Immunity Lifted should be positive. But the
results, displayed in Appendix Table A19, show that a higher proportion of MPs who have lost
immunity is associated with a reduction of the party's effort and performance in the Parliament.
Thus, consistent with the results presented in Tables A17 and A18, the results of Appendix Table
A19 also indicate that there is no compelling evidence of a notable shift of Parliamentary
activities from immunity-losing to immunity-retaining MPs.


The Impact of Immunity Revocation on Parliamentary Efficiency
       Finally, we analyzed whether the Constitutional Amendment, which led to the revocation
of MP immunities, had an impact on the speed with which legislation is enacted. As shown in
Section 5 of the Appendix, after the Parliamentary action which lifted the immunity of some
MPs, laws were passed 1.5 days faster than before, presumably because of shorter and/or fewer
debates in the Parliament (see Appendix Figures AF3, AF4, Appendix Table A20 and the
associated discussion in Section 5 of the Appendix). Although the increase in the speed with
which legislators passed laws makes the Parliament more efficient, if the quality of these laws is
lower (in their comprehensiveness or in the propensity to be challenged in courts) in comparison


                                                 26
to the quality that would have been observed had these laws been enacted slower, and with more
deliberation, the welfare implications are unclear.


The Impact on Re-Election Probability
        The results in previous sections show that losing Parliamentary immunity has an impact
on the behavior of the MPs who are members of the opposition bloc in the Parliament. Losing
immunity quieted down these MPs and reduced their efforts in the Parliament. To the extent that
these behavioral changes, triggered by the loss of immunity, rendered these MPs less effective in
the eyes of the voters, these MPs are less likely to be re-elected in the next election. Recall that
voters in Turkish general elections cast votes for the party ticket and not for particular
candidates. Nevertheless, these concerns may motivate voters to switch away from the party of
the politician who lost immunity. Along the same lines, party leaders may consider these MPs as
being no longer effective. In this case, these MPs would be less likely to be re-nominated by
their parties in the next election. Alternatively, voters or party leaders may consider the
reputations of these MPs as being tarnished, which may impact the MPs' re-nomination or re-
election chances.
        We ran a regression where the unit of observations is an MP. The dependent variable is
an indicator that takes the value of one if the MP is re-elected to the Parliament in the next
election. The right-hand side variables include the indicator for whether the MP's immunity is
lifted and personal attributes, as well as the party fixed-effects. Also included is the number of
charges that were brought against the MP.
        Table 9, which presents the results, shows that female MPs are less likely to get re-
nominated and re-elected. The same is true for older MPs. The results, presented in column (1)
of Table 9, reveal that losing Parliamentary immunity has no impact on the probability of re-
election of the government bloc MPs. In contrast, column (2) shows that losing immunity leads
to 19 percentage points (48 percent) decrease in the probability of re-election among the
opposition bloc MPs (The group of 16 MPs who are arrested, convicted, resigned, or died after
losing their immunity are not included in these regressions). 29


29
   Previous research analyzed the impact of corruption accusations and convictions on incumbents' re-
election chances. Peters and Welch (1980) do not find a significant impact of corruption charges on re-
election probability of U.S. House of Representatives between 1968 and 1978, but voter reaction is
stronger during 1982-1990 (Welch and Hibbing 1997). Chang, Golden and Hill (2010) analyze political
careers of Italian legislatures between 1948 and 1994 and find that investigations about alleged offenses
                                                    27
           Columns (3)-(4) of Table 9 display the regression results where the dependent variable
is whether the MP has been re-nominated by her/his party as a candidate in the next election.
Once again, column (3) reveals that immunity has no impact on the probability of re-nomination
among the members of the government bloc (AKP and MHP). On the other hand, column (4)
shows that the loss of immunity reduces the chances of re-nomination of opposition MPs by 16
percentage points (a 31 percent decline from the base of 52 percent re-nomination rate). 30 Table
9 also shows that holding constant immunity status, the number of charges levied against the
MPs has no impact on their re-election or re-nomination probability. This suggests that the lack
of effectiveness in the Parliament is the primary factor that impacts the probability of re-election
and re-nomination of the opposition MPs, and not the perceived loss of reputation due to the
number of charges.


The Impact on Citizens' Trust in the Parliament
      In this last section of the paper, we analyze whether lifting the Parliamentary immunity of
the MPs had an impact on citizens' trust in the Parliament. To investigate this question, we
utilize two waves of the Eurobarometer survey, which were registered before and after the
revocation of Parliamentary immunity. 31 The election, which formed the 26th Parliament
analyzed in the paper, was held on November 1, 2015. The first wave of the Eurobarometer
survey was registered after the election, between Nov 7 and November 17, 2015. This means
that the respondents knew the identities of the MPs and the composition of the Parliament when
they took the survey in November 2015. The second survey was conducted between May 21 and
May 31, 2016. The Constitutional Amendment was enacted on May 20, 2016. Thus, the second



did not influence re-election chances until the early 1990s. The authors attribute the shift in voter
behavior to public awareness triggered by the media coverage of well-publicized corruption investigations
in 1992. Similarly, Ferraz and Finan (2008) find that the audit reports of corruption in local governments
of Brazil had a negative impact on incumbents' likelihood of re-election and that the impact was bigger in
municipalities with local radio stations.
30
  We cannot identify whether these MPs tried to run in the next election but their party chose not to
nominate them, or whether they themselves decided not to be a candidate.
31
  Standard Eurobarometer, conducted by the European Commission, monitors public opinion in
European Union member countries, as well as candidate and accession countries. The surveys are
conducted typically twice a year, one in May and the other in November. In each wave, representative
samples of the countries are drawn. The respondents are asked about their opinions on the EU, its
institutions, policies, and goals.
                                                   28
wave of the survey was given right after the revocation of MPs' immunity. It is important to
note that the second wave of the survey was completed before the military coup attempt on July
15, 2016. Thus, the answers of the survey respondents are not confounded by their reactions to
the coup attempt.
       The Eurobarometer survey includes only Turkish citizens; no refugees are surveyed. It is a
repeated cross-section that includes information about a host of respondent attributes. It also
contains questions about people's trust in institutions. As the outcome of this analysis, we use
the question: "Do you trust the National Parliament?" which can be answered as "Yes" or "No."
We ran a regression where the dependent variable is an indicator that equals one if the individual
trusts the Turkish Parliament. The sample mean of this variable is 0.58 (sd=0.49). The model
controls for personal characteristics such as age, sex, education, marital status, household size,
employment status, income and wealth proxies (difficulty in paying bills, ownership of a house
or car), fixed effects for 26 provinces in which the respondents reside, and dummy variable to
account for whether the survey was taken in November 2015 versus May 2016. The key
explanatory variable is a dichotomous indicator which takes the value of 1 if at least one MP
from the respondent's province has lost her/his Parliamentary immunity. 32
      Column (1) of Table 10 reveals that if an MP, who represents the province, has lost her/his
Parliamentary immunity, this has no statistically significant impact on the extent to which
individuals from that province trust the Parliament, although as we demonstrate below, this is not
the correct inference. To analyze in more detail people's reaction to the Parliament's move that
revoked the immunity of some MPs, we recognize that Turkey is a politically polarized country.
Citizens on the right and on the left of the political spectrum have distinct and strong views on a
number of issues, including the other group's identity (Aydin-Duzgit 2019). Thus, we
investigate whether people's trust in the Parliament is a function of whether the action of the
Parliament (lifting MPs' immunity) has helped or hurt "their side."
      The Eurobarometer survey includes a question gauging citizens' self-identification on the
political spectrum. Specifically, the respondents are asked the following question: "In political
matters, people talk of `the left' and `the right.' How would you place your views on this scale?"
They are then shown a ten-unit scale, one denoting the most left, and the most right. We classify

32
  Each province is also an election district. This means that the residents of a province vote to elect their
MPs for the Parliament. The number of MPs from each province is proportional to the province
population.

                                                     29
people as being on the left (right) of the political spectrum if they chose 1-5 (6-10) on this scale.
After dropping respondents who did not answer this question, we have a sample of 1,677
individuals between the two waves of the survey. One thousand forty-one of the sample (62
percent) self-identify as being on the right of the political spectrum.
      Using this information, we estimated the following model:

(3)     = 0 + 1     + 2    +
3   + 4  + 5  + 6  ×  +  + 7  ×  +  ,

where the dependent variable is the same as before (=1 if the individual trusts the Parliament), p
stands for province fixed effects, and Post represents a dummy that identifies whether the
individual was surveyed before or after the enactment of the Constitutional Amendment
(November 2016 or May 2016), and X stands for a vector of personal attributes of the
respondents. Leftipt is an indicator that takes the value of one if individual (i), who resides in
province (p) and surveyed in period (t) self-identifies as being politically on the left, and zero if
she/he is on the right. There are two key explanatory variables: Politically Compatible MP Lost
and Rival MP Lost. The former variable is equal to one if at least one MP from the province of
the respondent lost her/his Parliamentary immunity and if this MP supports the same political
position as the individual (i). For example, if the respondent is ideologically on the left (on the
right), and if an opposition bloc MP (government bloc MP) from that province lost immunity,
Politically Compatible MP Lost Immunity takes the value of 1, and it is zero otherwise.
Similarly, Rival MP Lost equals one if an opposition bloc MP (a government bloc MP) from the
province lost immunity and if the respondent self-describes as being on the right (left) of the
political spectrum. 33 The baseline is the case where both Friendly MP Lost and Rival MP Lost
are equal to zero, which means that no MP from that province lost immunity. Standard errors are
clustered at the province level, and they are bootstrapped because there are only 26 provinces
surveyed. Appendix Figure AF5 presents a map of Turkey, which displays the variation in
opposition and government bloc MPs' loss of immunity between the regions. Appendix Table
A21 presents the same information for each of the provinces.



33
  Recall that the government bloc parties (AKP and MHP) are right-wing parties, and the opposition bloc
(CHP and HDP) are left-wing parties.


                                                  30
        Column (2) of Table 10 shows that if an MP, who is ideologically compatible with the
respondent, has lost her/his immunity (Politically Compatible MP Lost=1), the likelihood that
the Parliament is trusted is reduced, but the estimated impact is not statistically significant. On
the other hand, if an MP, who is an ideological rival, loses immunity (Rival MP Lost=1), the
probability of trusting the Parliament goes up by 22 percentage points (45 percent). This result
indicates that people's perception of the appropriateness of an institutional change (the
enactment of the Constitutional Amendment and the resultant revocation of MP immunity)
depends on whether they believe that the change has helped or hurt their side politically.
        Column (3) of Table 10 presents a specification which investigates the same hypothesis
depicted by Equation (3) in an alternative way. In this specification we divide individuals into
four categories based on whether their own ideology is Left or Right and whether the province in
which they reside experienced a loss of immunity by a government bloc MP (right-wing parties)
or by an opposition bloc MP (left-wing parties). The results are consistent with those reported in
column (2), but they suggest that they are driven by individuals who are on the right of the
political spectrum. A right-wing person in a province loses trust in the Parliament if a right-
wing MP from that province loses immunity, but a right-wing person's propensity to trust the
Parliament goes up if a left-wing MP loses immunity. Thus, the results of Table 10 reveal that
the evolution of trust in the Parliament depends on whether the Parliamentary move (revocation
of immunity) helps or hurts the side with which the citizens associate themselves. 34
        We also conducted a falsification exercise to demonstrate that the results reported in
columns (2) and (3) of Table 10 are not an artifact of some overall change in trust in institutions.
The Eurobarometer survey includes questions about trust in the United Nations (UN) and trust in
the European Union (EU), asked in the same exact way.         We ran the same specification using
the same sample but we created a new trust variable, which takes the value of 1 if an individual
trusts either the EU or the UN, and it is zero if the respondent does not trust either institution.
(the mean value of the variable = 0.39) The results, displayed in column (4) of Table 10 show



34
  It should be kept in mind that although Turkey has been a democratic Republic since 1923, there were a
number of interruptions to democracy due to military coups, and the country embodies an increasingly
polarized electorate and citizenry, and Turkey is listed as one of the most polarized countries (Lauka,
McCoy and Firat 2018, Keyman 2014). Thus, external validity of the results in Table 10 may not be
generalizable to other settings where voters are less polarized.


                                                  31
that having an MP who lost immunity in the province has no impact on the propensity to trust the
UN or the EU and that political polarization has no influence on trusting these institutions either.


V. Summary and Conclusion
       Most countries grant Parliamentary immunity to their elected politicians, which typically
has two components. First, Members of a Parliamentary body (MPs) are protected with non-
liability, which means that they cannot be held accountable for their speeches or for any of their
activity related to their job, such as how they cast their votes, propose legislation, and deliver
political speech. In addition, MPs are usually provided with inviolability, which prohibits any
search and seizure, arrest, and trial for an alleged offense before the end of their term. The goal
of inviolability is to protect elected politicians from politically-motivated frivolous charges and
to allow them to devote their full attention and effort to their job.
       Although there is a sizable literature on the determinants of the behavior and performance
of politicians, no previous work analyzed the question of whether Parliamentary immunity has an
impact on the effort and performance of elected politicians. This is because, immunity applies to
all lawmakers of a country, and variations in the extent and style of immunity can only be
observed across countries and not within a country. While there have been cases where an MP's
immunity has been revoked by her/his peers in a Parliament, such isolated cases are not suitable
for a systematic analysis of the impact of immunity.
       We provide the first empirical investigation of the impact of Parliamentary immunity on
politician behavior. Turkish Parliament adopted a Constitutional Amendment in 2016, which
lifted the immunity of 132 of its 550 Members. Specifically, the amendment, which was
approved with bi-partisan support of the government bloc and the main opposition party, (with
more than 2/3 support of all MPs) revoked the inviolability of these 132 MPs so that any of
them, who had a charge filed against her/him when the amendment was enacted, could be subject
to arrest and prosecution related to that charge. These charges covered a whole spectrum of
offenses, ranging from violation of election laws to assault, from defamation to fraud, from
forgery to terrorism. All MPs continued to have non-liability; i.e., they retained their protection
for free political speech and activities in the Parliament.
       Using a Difference-in-Differences design, we analyze the extent to which losing
Parliamentary immunity impacts MP behavior. We show that the MPs who lost their immunity
are not different in observable dimensions (e.g., age, sex, education) from the ones who retained

                                                  32
it. On the other hand, MPs of the opposition parties were more likely to have lost their immunity.
Thus, our analyses focus on the opposition MPs, although the results mirror those obtained from
all MPs. We find no evidence that opposition MPs who are more valuable for their party or who
have been more active and aggressive before the enactment of the Constitutional Amendment
were more likely to lose their immunity.
       We investigate MPs' Parliamentary performance in standard dimensions such as voting
behavior, legislation proposals drafted, investigation inquiries filed into the actions of the
government, and formal queries posed to the ministers of the cabinet. We also analyze speech-
related activities, such as the number of formal speeches delivered in the Parliament, the length
of these speeches (i.e., the number of words), the number of times the MP interrupted the speech
of another MP who was a member of the government party, and the number of interruptions
targeted towards non-government MPs.
       We find that lifting Parliamentary immunity deters the MPs of the opposition parties
from engaging in Parliamentary activities such as drafting legislation and initiating investigation
inquiries. In addition, losing immunity muffles the opposition party MPs, who deliver fewer and
shorter speeches as a result. Similarly, MPs who lose their immunity reduce the number of times
they interrupt the speakers on the podium. The loss of immunity also compels the opposition
MPs to vote in tandem with the government. These results indicate that losing Parliamentary
immunity motivates the MPs to reduce their work effort and keep a lower profile.
       A number of robustness analyses show that the results do not emerge because the MPs
who lost their immunity altered their attendance to the Parliament. Similarly, we obtain the same
results when we drop from the analysis those MPs who have not completed their term due to
being convicted and jailed, resigned, or passed away. We also show that the impact of the
revocation of immunity is not influenced by the number of charges filed against the MPs. The
conclusions of the paper are unaltered when we analyze the sample of opposition MPs who were
highly active and outspoken before the enactment of the Constitutional Amendment or who are
highly-ranked within their party.
       It may be possible for the MPs, whose immunity has been lifted, to turn to their
immunity-intact colleagues and ask them to draft or sponsor legislation or to initiate an
investigation inquiry on their behalf. If these colleagues comply, or if they independently
increase their legislative activity simply in reaction to their peers' loss of immunity, this would
imply that the treatment of lifting immunity also had an influence on the MPs in the control

                                                  33
group, and that our estimates, in part, reflect the increased activity of the MPs who retained their
immunity. A number of analyses, however, indicate no evidence for such spillover on the MPs
who have retained immunity.
       There was a coup attempt in Turkey during the Parliamentary term analyzed. Considering
this coup attempt and revocation of the immunity as two separate treatments reveals that the
results are not driven by the coup attempt. Similarly, we show that a sequence of executive
orders issued by the government (which provided extraordinary authority to the law enforcement
and the judicial system) during the period after the coup attempt does not alter the results.
Importantly, we show that the results hold during the period before the coup attempt.
       We show that after the enactment of the Constitutional Amendment, which paved the
way to immunity revocation, the Parliament enacted legislation at a faster rate. The number of
days it took to pass a law went down by more than 1.5 days (from an average of 2.2 days), likely
because of shorter and fewer debates due to the reduced effort of the opposition MPs.
       Because the loss of immunity leads to reduced effort and effectiveness in the Parliament,
the MPs who lost their immunity may have lost their appeal to voters. Alternatively, if losing
Parliamentary immunity tarnishes an MP's reputation, voters may find it unappealing to support
the party which re-nominates the MP for re-election. Along the same lines, party leadership
may decide not to nominate such MPs in the following election because of these concerns. We
find that opposition MPs whose immunities are revoked are less likely to get re-elected to the
Parliament. We further show that this is because the MPs whose immunities are lifted are less
likely to be re-nominated by their parties as an MP candidate in the next election. We also show
that holding constant immunity status, the number of charges levied against the MPs has no
impact on re-nomination or re-election probability, suggesting that the decline in MPs'
Parliamentary effectiveness is the driver of these results. Losing immunity has no impact on
either re-nomination or re-election probability of the MPs of the government bloc.
       Finally, we employ data from the Euro Barometer survey and investigate whether lifting
MPs' immunity had an impact on citizen's trust in the Parliament. We find that an individual's
propensity to trust the Parliament decreased if an MP who represents the province of the
individual lost immunity and if that MP was associated with the same political ideology (right or
left of the spectrum) as the individual. In contrast, if an MP who is a member of a political party
representing the opposite ideology lost immunity, the propensity to trust the Parliament went up.
These effects are driven by the citizens who adhere to right-wing politics. This finding is not an

                                                 34
artifact of an overall change in people's trust in institutions because revocation of
parliamentarians' immunity has no impact on individuals' trust in the UN or the EU.
       It should be noted that the loss of immunity did not eliminate the protection of political
speech of the MPs. However, those MPs who lost immunity become vulnerable to prosecution
for alleged civil and criminal violations, and such vulnerability influenced their tendency to
deliver speeches and to speak up and interrupt others, as well as their actions and effort in the
Parliament. Taken together, these findings reveal that Member of the Parliament respond to an
increase in the price of their behavior (the risk of prosecution), which underscore the significance
of Parliamentary immunity in political outcomes.




                                                 35
                                                Figure 1
                                      Event Study Analysis (All MPs)


            .5
            0
            -.5
            -1
            -1.5


                    20 12
                    20 m1
                    20 m2
                    20 m3
                    20 m4
                    20 m5
                    20 m6
                    20 m7
                    20 m8

                      16 9
                      16 0
                      16 1
                    20 12
                    20 m1
                    20 m2
                    20 m3

                           4
                   20 6m




                         m
                   20 m1
                   20 m1
                        m




                        m
                       16
                       16
                       16
                       16
                       16
                       16
                       16
                       16




                       17
                       17
                       17
                       17
                       1
                      15
                   20




To obtain the figure, we estimate  =     ×  +  +  +  , where  is the first
principal component of all legislative effort outcomes.  stands for the indicator function that equals one in month
, and   is a dummy variable for whether an MP's immunity is lifted in May 2016. The bars
represent the point estimates of  , and the capped lines are the 95% confidence intervals. The omitted category is
April 2016, i.e., one month before the immunities are lifted. The Parliament was on holiday in September 2016.




                                                        36
                                          -1   -.5   0   .5   1
                                                                                                                                                    -1.5   -1   -.5   0   .5   1




     See notes to Figure 1.
                                                                                                               See notes to Figure 1.
                              20
                                 15                                                                                                     20
                                   m                                                                                                       15
                               20 12                                                                                                         m
                                  16                                                                                                     20 12
                                                                                                                                            16
                               20 m1
                                  16                                                                                                     20 m1
                                                                                                                                            16
                               20 m2                                                                                                     20 m2
                                  16                                                                                                        16
                               20 m3                                                                                                     20 m3
                                  16                                                                                                        16
                               20 m4                                                                                                     20 m4
                                  16                                                                                                        16
                               20 m5                                                                                                     20 m5
                                  16                                                                                                        16
                               20 m6                                                                                                     20 m6
                                  16                                                                                                        16
                               20 m7                                                                                                     20 m7




37
                                  16                                                                                                        16
                               20 m8                                                                                                     20 m8
                                                                                                                                            1




                                                                                   Figure 3
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Figure 2




                                  1
                              20 6m                                                                                                     20 6m
                                 16 9                                                                                                      16 9
                              20 m1                                                                                                     20 m1
                                 16 0                                                                                                      16 0
                              20 m1                                                                                                     20 m1
                                                                                                                                           16 1
                                 16 1
                                   m                                                                                                         m
                               20 12                                                                                                     20 12
                                  17                                                                                                        17
                                                                                                                                         20 m1
                                                                                                                                                                                   Event Study Analysis (Opposition MPs)




                               20 m1                                                                                                        17
                                  17
                                                                                                                                         20 m2
                                                                  Event Study Analysis (Government Bloc MPs)

                               20 m2                                                                                                        17
                                  17                                                                                                     20 m3
                               20 m3                                                                                                        17
                                  17                                                                                                          m
                                    m                                                                                                           4
                                      4
                                                     Figure 4
                          Mean of the Legislative Effort Over Time (Opposition Parties)




                                 2          1.5
                 1st PC of All Effort Measures
                 0        .5     -.5 1




                                                     2016m1   2016m7     2017m1           2017m7      2018m1     2018m7
                                                                                     tm

                                                                   Immunity Lifted             Immunity Intact


The figure presents the average of the first principal component of all legislative effort outcomes for the opposition
party MPs. The blue, solid line (circles) represents the MPs who lost immunity, and the red dashed line (triangles) is
for the MPs who retained immunity.

                                            Figure 5
              Mean of the Legislative Effort Over Time (Government Bloc Parties)
                                     .5
                     1st PC of All Effort Measures
                                   0 -.5




                                                     2016m1   2016m7      2017m1          2017m7      2018m1     2018m7
                                                                                     tm

                                                                   Immunity Lifted             Immunity Intact


The figure presents the average of the first principal component of all legislative effort outcomes for the government
bloc MPs. The blue, solid line (circles) represents the MPs who lost immunity, and the red dashed line (triangles) is
for the MPs who retained immunity.
                                                                               38
                                                 Figure 6
                                Distribution of Charges (Opposition MPs)
                   100
                   80
            Number of MPs
            40     20
                   0  60




                                      0               1              2-3                      4+
                                                   Number of Charges

The figure presents the number of charges filed against opposition MPs as of the start of the pre-treatment period.




                                                 Table 1
                            Distribution of MPs by Legislative Immunity Status
            Political              Number of MPs whose     Number of MPs whose
                                                                                                   Total
            Party                 Immunity is NOT Lifted     Immunity is Lifted
            AKP                             292                    25 (8%)                          317
            MHP                             32                     8 (20%)                           40
            CHP                             80                    54 (40%)                          134
            HDP                             14                    45 (76%)                           59
            Total                           418                  132 (24%)                          550
AKP (Adalet ve Kalkinma Partisi = Justice and Development Party) is the government party; MHP (Milliyetçi
Hareket Partisi = Nationalist Movement Party) is not in the government but is an ally of AKP. CHP (Cumhuriyet
Halk Partisi = Republican People's Party) is the main opposition party; HDP (Halklarin Demokratik Partisi =
People's Democratic Party) is the second-largest opposition party. CHP and HDP constitute the opposition bloc.




                                                         39
                                                    Table 2
                                                Summary Statistics
                                                     Description                      Mean     Std. Dev.
Legislative Activities of MPs
Speeches                          The number of times per month the MP delivered       6.75     27.74
                                  a speech at the Parliamentary lectern.
Words                             The total number of words MP spoke in               717.16   1792.25
                                  Parliamentary speeches in a month.
Interruptions Targeting           The number of times the MP interrupted the           0.70      4.18
Speeches of Gov. MPs              speech of another MP who was a member of the
                                  government party.
Interruptions Targeting           The number of times the MP interrupted the           1.05      4.91
Speeches of Non-Gov. MPs          speech of another MP who was a member of
                                  opposition parties.
% Votes Against                   The percent of times the MP voted against the       60.97     42.51
Government                        position of the governing party.

Investigation Inquiries Filed     The number of times the MP initiated an              0.17      0.99
                                  investigation in the Parliament regarding the
                                  actions of the government or of a cabinet member.
Drafts of Legislation             The number of bills sponsored by the MP.             0.13      0.92
Formal Queries                    The number of times MP submitted a formal query      1.81     19.48
                                  to the government to be responded in writing or
                                  orally on the Parliament floor.

Treatment Variable
Immunity Lifted                   =1 if MP is among the group of MPs whose             0.24      0.43
                                  immunities are stripped off in May 2016.

MP Attributes
Age                               Age of the MP in May 2016.                          51.93      8.57
Female                            =1 if MP is female.                                  0.14      0.35
MA/PhD                            =1 if MP has a graduate degree.                      0.41      0.49
Re-Elected                        =1 if MP is re-elected to the 27th Parliamentary     0.49      0.50
                                  term.
    The unit of observation is an MP-month. The number of observations is 15,317.




                                                          40
                                          Table 3
                The Impact of Losing Immunity on MPs' Legislative Activities
                                          All MPs
                                 Panel A: Speech Outcomes
                                   (1)         (2)         (3)           (4)
                                                     Interruptions Interruptions
                                Speeches     Words     Targeting     Targeting
                                                      Gov. MPs Non-Gov. MPs
           Immunity Lifted        -5.89     -422.19    -1.44***         0.59
             × Post              (4.72)    (257.76)      (0.43)        (0.47)
                                 [0.24]      [0.15]      [0.00]        [0.24]
           N                     15,317      15,317     15,317         15,317

                                         Panel B: Legislative Effort
                                          (1)              (2)          (3)                        (4)
                                      % Votes        Investigation   Drafts of                   Formal
                                     Against Gov. Inquiries Filed Legislation                    Queries
          Immunity Lifted             -3.83***         -0.31***      -0.37**                      0.95
            × Post                      (1.18)           (0.10)       (0.15)                     (1.54)
                                        [0.00]           [0.01]       [0.03]                     [0.54]
          N                            15,317           15,317        15,317                     15,317

                              Panel C: First Principal Components
                                         (1)             (2)              (3)
                                     1st PC of       1st PC of   1st PC of Effort in
                                    All Effort        Speech      Other Legislative
                                     Measures       Outcomes          Activities
              Immunity Lifted        -0.55**           -0.38          -0.38***
                × Post                (0.22)          (0.23)            (0.11)
                                      [0.03]          [0.15]            [0.00]
              N                       15,317          15,317           15,317
Immunity Lifted is the treatment indicator that is equal to one if the immunity of the MP was stripped off in May
2016. Post stands for the post-treatment period. Outcomes: Panel A: (1) Number of speeches delivered on the
Parliament floor by the MP; (2) Number of words in those speeches; (3) Number of times the MP interrupted the
speech of another MP who is a member of the government party; (4) Number of times an MP interrupted the speech
of another MP who is a member of the opposition parties. Panel B: (1) % of the rollcall votes the MP voted the same
way as the majority of the government party; (2) the number of times the MP filed an investigation inquiry into the
activities of the government (3) the number of bills sponsored by the MP; (4) the number of times MP passed a
formal query to the members of the government. Panel C: (1) first principal component of all outcomes in Panels A
and B; (2) first principal component of outcomes in Panel A; (3) first principal component of outcomes in Panel B.
The unit of observation is an MP-month. All regressions include MP fixed effects and month-by-year dummies.
Standard errors, clustered at the MP level, are in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at 1%,
5% and 10% levels. P-values, adjusted for multiple hypothesis testing, are displayed in [brackets].




                                                          41
                                        Table 4
      The Impact of Losing Immunity on MPs' Legislative Activities --Opposition MPs
                               Panel A: Speech Outcomes
                                 (1)         (2)         (3)              (4)
                                                   Interruptions Interruptions
                              Speeches     Words     Targeting        Targeting
                                                     Gov. MPs Non-Gov. MPs
        Immunity Lifted        -10.12     -550.00    -2.03***          -0.43**
           × Post              (6.26)    (343.91)      (0.62)           (0.21)
                               [0.12]      [0.12]      [0.01]           [0.07]
        N                       5,330      5,330       5,330            5,330

                                        Panel B: Legislative Effort
                                         (1)              (2)          (3)                          (4)
                                     % Votes        Investigation   Drafts of                    Formal
                                    Against Gov.   Inquiries Filed Legislation                   Queries
          Immunity Lifted             -2.08**         -0.40***       -0.37*                        0.09
            × Post                     (1.01)           (0.15)       (0.21)                      (2.39)
                                       [0.07]           [0.02]       [0.10]                      [0.97]
          N                            5,330            5,330        5,330                        5,330

                              Panel C: First Principal Components
                                         (1)             (2)              (3)
                                      st              st           st
                                     1 PC of         1 PC of     1 PC of Effort in
                                    All Effort        Speech      Other Legislative
                                     Measures       Outcomes          Activities
              Immunity Lifted        -0.81***        -0.64**          -0.45***
                × Post                 (0.30)         (0.31)            (0.17)
                                       [0.02]         [0.07]            [0.02]
              N                                5,330               5,330                   5,330
Immunity Lifted is the treatment indicator that is equal to one if the immunity of the MP was stripped off in May
2016. Post stands for the post-treatment period. Outcomes: Panel A: (1) Number of speeches delivered on the
Parliament floor by the MP; (2) Number of words in those speeches; (3) Number of times the MP interrupted the
speech of another MP who is a member of the government party; (4) Number of times an MP interrupted the speech
of another MP who is a member of the opposition parties. Panel B: (1) % of the rollcall votes the MP voted the same
way as the majority of the government party; (2) the number of times the MP filed an investigation inquiry into the
activities of the government (3) the number of bills sponsored by the MP; (4) the number of times MP passed a
formal query to the members of the government. Panel C: (1) first principal component of all outcomes in Panels A
and B; (2) first principal component of outcomes in Panel A; (3) first principal component of outcomes in Panel B.
The unit of observation is an MP-month. All regressions include MP fixed effects and month-by-year dummies.
Standard errors, clustered at the MP level, are in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at 1%,
5% and 10% levels. P-values, adjusted for multiple hypothesis testing, are displayed in [brackets].




                                                          42
                                             Table 5
                The Impact of Losing Immunity on MPs' Legislative Activities
                           MPs of the Social Democratic Party (CHP)
                                  Panel A: Speech Outcomes
                                     (1)          (2)         (3)           (4)
                                                        Interruptions Interruptions
                                 Speeches      Words      Targeting     Targeting
                                                         Gov. MPs Non-Gov. MPs
           Immunity Lifted         -5.09*     -301.23*    -2.09***       -0.27**
             × Post                (2.63)     (173.01)      (0.77)        (0.13)
                                   [0.08]       [0.10]      [0.02]        [0.06]
           N                       3,745        3,745       3,745         3,745

                                          Panel B: Legislative Effort
                                              (1)           (2)           (3)                      (4)
                                           % Votes Investigation
                                                                       Drafts of                Formal
                                           Against      Inquiries
                                                                      Legislation               Queries
                                             Gov.          Filed
            Immunity Lifted                  -1.41      -0.67***       -0.81**                    0.94
              × Post                        (1.38)        (0.23)        (0.35)                   (3.93)
                                            [0.34]        [0.02]        [0.05]                   [0.81]
            N                               3,745         3,745         3,745                    3,745

                             Panel C: First Principal Components
                                        (1)             (2)              (3)
                                    1st PC of       1st PC of   1st PC of Effort in
                                   All Effort        Speech      Other Legislative
                                    Measures       Outcomes          Activities
             Immunity Lifted        -0.84***        -0.45***         -0.81***
               × Post                 (0.26)          (0.17)           (0.26)
                                      [0.01]          [0.02]           [0.01]
             N                        3,745           3,745            3,745
Immunity Lifted is the treatment indicator that is equal to one if the immunity of the MP was stripped off in May
2016. Post stands for the post-treatment period. Outcomes: Panel A: (1) Number of speeches delivered on the
Parliament floor by the MP; (2) Number of words in those speeches; (3) Number of times the MP interrupted the
speech of another MP who is a member of the government party; (4) Number of times an MP interrupted the speech
of another MP who is a member of the opposition parties. Panel B: (1) % of the rollcall votes the MP voted the same
way as the majority of the government party; (2) the number of times the MP filed an investigation inquiry into the
activities of the government (3) the number of bills sponsored by the MP; (4) the number of times MP passed a
formal query to the members of the government. Panel C: (1) first principal component of all outcomes in Panels A
and B; (2) first principal component of outcomes in Panel A; (3) first principal component of outcomes in Panel B.
The unit of observation is an MP-month. All regressions include MP fixed effects and month-by-year dummies.
Standard errors, clustered at the MP level, are in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at 1%,
5% and 10% levels. P-values, adjusted for multiple hypothesis testing, are displayed in [brackets].




                                                          43
                                          Table 6
                The Impact of Losing Immunity on MPs' Legislative Activities
                     Government Bloc MPs (Members of AKP and MHP)
                                 Panel A: Speech Outcomes
                                   (1)         (2)         (3)           (4)
                                                     Interruptions Interruptions
                                Speeches     Words     Targeting     Targeting
                                                      Gov. MPs Non-Gov. MPs
           Immunity Lifted        -1.35     -129.63       -0.17         -1.33
             × Post              (2.45)    (148.85)      (0.18)        (1.38)
                                 [0.58]      [0.58]      [0.58]        [0.58]
           N                      9,987      9,987       9,987         9,987

                                          Panel B: Legislative Effort
                                              (1)          (2)            (3)                      (4)
                                           % Votes Investigation
                                                                       Drafts of                Formal
                                           Against      Inquiries
                                                                      Legislation               Queries
                                             Gov.         Filed
            Immunity Lifted                  -3.60        -0.06          0.03                     0.19
              × Post                        (2.98)       (0.09)         (0.04)                   (0.31)
                                            [0.58]       [0.58]         [0.58]                   [0.58]
            N                               9,987         9,987         9,987                    9,987

                             Panel C: First Principal Components
                                        (1)             (2)             (3)
                                    1st PC of       1st PC of   1st PC of Effort in
                                   All Effort        Speech      Other Legislative
                                    Measures       Outcomes          Activities
             Immunity Lifted          -0.17           -0.18            -0.04
               × Post                (0.13)          (0.16)           (0.08)
                                     [0.58]          [0.58]           [0.58]
             N                        9,987           9,987           9,987
Immunity Lifted is the treatment indicator that is equal to one if the immunity of the MP was stripped off in May
2016. Post stands for the post-treatment period. Outcomes: Panel A: (1) Number of speeches delivered on the
Parliament floor by the MP; (2) Number of words in those speeches; (3) Number of times the MP interrupted the
speech of another MP who is a member of the government party; (4) Number of times an MP interrupted the speech
of another MP who is a member of the opposition parties. Panel B: (1) % of the rollcall votes the MP voted the same
way as the majority of the government party; (2) the number of times the MP filed an investigation inquiry into the
activities of the government (3) the number of bills sponsored by the MP; (4) the number of times MP passed a
formal query to the members of the government. Panel C: (1) first principal component of all outcomes in Panels A
and B; (2) first principal component of outcomes in Panel A; (3) first principal component of outcomes in Panel B.
The unit of observation is an MP-month. All regressions include MP fixed effects and month-by-year dummies.
Standard errors, clustered at the MP level, are in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at 1%,
5% and 10% levels. P-values, adjusted for multiple hypothesis testing, are displayed in [brackets].




                                                          44
                                          Table 7
                The Impact of Losing Immunity on MPs' Legislative Activities
              Including the Number of Charges against the MP (Opposition MPs)
                                 Panel A: Speech Outcomes
                                   (1)         (2)           (3)           (4)
                                                       Interruptions Interruptions
                                Speeches    Words        Targeting     Targeting
                                                        Gov. MPs Non-Gov. MPs
           Immunity Lifted       -7.36*    -417.96*      -1.98***       -0.34**
             × Post              (3.86)    (228.47)        (0.58)        (0.14)
                                 [0.08]      [0.08]        [0.01]        [0.03]
           Charges × Post         -0.48      -23.20         -0.01         -0.02
                                 (0.64)     (34.36)        (0.04)        (0.02)
           N                      5,330       5,330        5,330         5,330

                                          Panel B: Legislative Effort
                                              (1)           (2)           (3)                      (4)
                                           % Votes Investigation
                                                                       Drafts of                Formal
                                           Against      Inquiries
                                                                      Legislation               Queries
                                             Gov.          Filed
            Immunity Lifted                  -1.70      -0.48***       -0.48**                     0.25
              × Post                        (1.08)        (0.17)        (0.24)                   (2.65)
                                            [0.13]        [0.01]        [0.07]                   [0.93]
            Charges × Post                 -0.07**       0.01**         0.02**                    -0.03
                                            (0.03)        (0.01)        (0.01)                   (0.05)
            N                               5,330         5,330          5,330                   5,330

                             Panel C: First Principal Components
                                        (1)             (2)              (3)
                                     st              st           st
                                    1 PC of         1 PC of     1 PC of Effort in
                                   All Effort        Speech      Other Legislative
                                    Measures       Outcomes          Activities
             Immunity Lifted        -0.76***        -0.53***         -0.55***
               × Post                 (0.23)          (0.20)           (0.19)
                                      [0.01]          [0.02]           [0.01]
             Charges × Post            -0.01           -0.02          0.02***
                                      (0.03)          (0.03)           (0.01)
             N                        5,330           5,330            5,330
See notes to Table 4. The results pertain to the same specification and the sample as in Table 4, with the addition of
the interaction between the Post dummy and the number of charges against the MP.




                                                          45
                                           Table 8
                The Impact of Losing Immunity on MPs' Legislative Activities
                During the Period before the Coup Attempt (Opposition MPs)
                                 Panel A: Speech Outcomes
                                   (1)          (2)         (3)           (4)
                                                      Interruptions Interruptions
                                Speeches      Words     Targeting     Targeting
                                                       Gov. MPs Non-Gov. MPs
           Immunity Lifted        -4.26      -285.83    -1.68***         -0.36
             × Post              (3.81)     (218.63)      (0.56)        (0.24)
                                 [0.27]       [0.24]      [0.01]        [0.17]
           N                      1,351       1,351       1,351         1,351

                                          Panel B: Legislative Effort
                                              (1)           (2)           (3)                      (4)
                                           % Votes Investigation
                                                                       Drafts of                Formal
                                           Against      Inquiries
                                                                      Legislation               Queries
                                             Gov.          Filed
            Immunity Lifted                -2.91**       -0.34**       -0.52**                    -0.70
              × Post                        (1.16)        (0.17)        (0.23)                   (0.59)
                                            [0.04]        [0.08]        [0.06]                   [0.26]
            N                               1,351         1,351         1,351                    1,351

                             Panel C: First Principal Components
                                        (1)             (2)              (3)
                                    1st PC of       1st PC of   1st PC of Effort in
                                   All Effort        Speech      Other Legislative
                                    Measures       Outcomes          Activities
             Immunity Lifted        -0.63***         -0.39*          -0.52***
               × Post                 (0.20)         (0.20)            (0.16)
                                      [0.01]         [0.08]            [0.01]
             N                        1,351           1,351            1,351
Immunity Lifted is the treatment indicator that is equal to one if the immunity of the MP was stripped off in May
2016. Post stands for the post-treatment period. Outcomes: Panel A: (1) Number of speeches delivered on the
Parliament floor by the MP; (2) Number of words in those speeches; (3) Number of times the MP interrupted the
speech of another MP who is a member of the government party; (4) Number of times an MP interrupted the speech
of another MP who is a member of the opposition parties. Panel B: (1) % of the rollcall votes the MP voted the same
way as the majority of the government party; (2) the number of times the MP filed an investigation inquiry into the
activities of the government (3) the number of bills sponsored by the MP; (4) the number of times MP passed a
formal query to the members of the government. Panel C: (1) first principal component of all outcomes in Panels A
and B; (2) first principal component of outcomes in Panel A; (3) first principal component of outcomes in Panel B.
The unit of observation is an MP-month. All regressions include MP fixed effects and month-by-year dummies.
Standard errors, clustered at the MP level, are in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at 1%,
5% and 10% levels. P-values, adjusted for multiple hypothesis testing, are displayed in [brackets].




                                                          46
                                             Table 9
       The Impact of Losing Immunity on Re-Election and Re-Nomination Probability
                               Gov.       Opposition     Gov.        Opposition
                               Bloc          Bloc        Bloc            Bloc
                                (1)           (2)         (3)             (4)
                                                   th
                             Re-Elected to the 27        Re-Nominated for the 27th
                                    Parliament                 Parliament
         Immunity Lifted       -0.01       -0.19**       -0.08          -0.16*
                              (0.13)        (0.09)      (0.12)          (0.09)
         Charges               -0.02         0.01        -0.02           0.01
                              (0.05)        (0.02)      (0.04)          (0.02)
         Age                -0.01*** -0.01***         -0.01***        -0.01***
                              (0.00)        (0.00)      (0.00)          (0.00)
         Female                -0.06        -0.19*       -0.06         -0.20**
                              (0.09)        (0.10)      (0.09)          (0.10)
         MA/PhD               0.09*          0.07        0.08            0.04
                              (0.05)        (0.08)      (0.05)          (0.08)
         N                      356          176          356            176
         Party FEs              Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes
Immunity Lifted is the treatment indicator that is equal to one if the immunity of the MP was stripped off in May
2016. Charges represents the number of charges against the MP. Outcomes are dummies for whether the MP is re-
elected to the 27th Parliamentary term (columns 1-2) and for whether the MP is re-nominated by her/his party
(columns 3-4). All regressions include party fixed-effects. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. ***, **, and *
indicate statistical significance at 1%, 5% and 10% levels.




                                                         47
                                          Table 10
            Impact of Lifting MPs' Immunity on Citizens' Trust in the Parliament
                                         (1)           (2)             (3)          (4)
                                      Trust the     Trust the       Trust the    Trust the
                                      Turkish       Turkish         Turkish       EU or
                                     Parliament    Parliament      Parliament      UN
 Immunity of MP(s) from                 -0.04
   the Province is Lifted              (0.10)
                                       {0.60}
 Politically Compatible MP                            -0.09
  of the Province Lost Immunity                      (0.10)
                                                     {0.35}

 Rival MP of the Province                                           0.22**
   Lost Immunity                                                    (0.10)
                                                                    {0.04}

 Ideologically Right-Wing Citizen                                                       -0.21*             -0.18
   × Government MP's                                                                    (0.15)            (0.17)
    Immunity is Lifted                                                                  {0.10}            {0.38}

 Ideologically Right-Wing Citizen                                                       0.34*              -0.12
   × Opposition. MP's                                                                   (0.22)            (0.22)
    Immunity is Lifted                                                                  {0.08}            {0.61}

 Ideologically Left-Wing Citizen                                                         0.11              -0.31
  × Government MP's                                                                     (0.14)            (0.16)
    Immunity is Lifted                                                                  {0.48}            {0.12}

 Ideologically Left-Wing Citizen                                                         0.43              0.07
   × Opposition MP's                                                                    (0.24)            (0.25)
    Immunity is Lifted                                                                  {0.26}            {0.83}
 N                                                1,677              1,677              1,677              1677
 Mean of the Outcome                               0.58               0.58               0.58              0.39
The outcome variable in columns 1-3 is an indicator that takes the value of one if the individual trusts the Turkish
Parliament. The outcome in column 4 is a dummy that takes the value of one if the individual trusts the UN or EU.
Regressions include individual characteristics, which are age and its square, whether the individual has a college
degree, is married, female, employed, owns a car, owns a house, and whether the individual had difficulty in paying
bills in the past year, and the size of the household. We also control for a post dummy, an indicator for whether the
individual is on the left of the ideological spectrum and its interaction with the Post dummy, as well as province
fixed effects and interactions of each province fixed effects with the Left dummy. Standard errors, reported in
parentheses, are clustered at the province level (26 provinces). P-values using the wild-t bootstrap procedure
described in Cameron and Miller (2015) are reported in {brackets}.




                                                          48
                                          References

Acemoglu, D., J. Robinson, and R. Torvik. (2013). "Why Do Voters Dismantle Checks and
    Balances?" Review of Economic Studies 80, pp. 845­875.
Aydin-Duzgit, S. (2019). "The Islamist-Secularist Divide and Turkey's Descent into Severe
    Polarization." Chapter 1 in Democracies Divided: The Global Challenge of Political
    Polarization, eds. T. Carothers and A. O'Dohonue. Brookings Institution Press, Washington,
    D.C.
Benjamini, Y., and D. Yekutieli. (2001). "The Control of the False Discovery Rate in Multiple
    Testing Under Dependency." Annals of Statistics 1165-1188.
Cameron, C., and D. Miller (2015). "A Practitioner's Guide to Cluster-Robust Inference."
    Journal of Human Resources 50(2), pp. 317-372.
de Chaisemartin, C., and X. D'Haultfoeuille. (2020). "Two-Way Fixed Effects Estimators with
    Heterogeneous Treatment Effects." American Economic Review 110(9), pp. 2964-2996.
Chang, Eric C., Miriam Golden, and Seth Hill, 2010. "Legislative malfeasance and Political
    Accountability, World Politics; 62(2): 177-220.
Corman, Hope, and Naci Mocan. (2000). "A Time-Series Analysis of Crime, Deterrence, and
    Drug Abuse in New York City." American Economic Review 90 (3): 584-604.
Di Tella, R., and E. Schargrodsky. (2004). "Do Police Reduce Crime? Estimates Using the
    Allocation of Police Forces After a Terrorist Attack." American Economic Review 94 (1), pp.
    115-133.
Dal Bó, E., and M. Rossi. (2011). "Term Length and the Effort of Politicians." The Review of
    Economic Studies 78(4), pp. 1237­1263.
Dal Bó, E., P. Dal Bó and Rafael Di Tella. 2006. "`Plata o Plamo?': Bribe and Punishment in a
    Theory of Political Influence," American Political Science Review, 100(1): 41-53.
Daniele Gianmarco, Sergio Galletta, and Benny Geys, 2020. "Abondon Ship? Party Brands and
    Politicians' responses to a Political Scandal." Journal of Public Economics, 184:104172
Ferraz, C. and F. Finan. (2008). "Exposing Corrupt Politicians: The Effects of Brazil's Publicly
    Released Audits on Electoral Outcomes." Quarterly Journal of Economics 123(2), pp.703-
    745.
Garz, M., and J. Sörensen. (2017). "Politicians Under Investigation: The News Media's Effect on
    the Likelihood of Resignation." Journal of Public Economics 153, pp. 82-91.
Goodman-Bacon, A. (2021). "Difference-in-Differences with Variation in Treatment Timing."
    Journal of Econometrics, < https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeconom.2021.03.014>.
Harmon, N., R. Fisman, and E. Kamenica. (2019). "Peer Effects in Legislative Voting."
    American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 11(4), pp. 156-80.
Keyman, F. (2014). "The AK Party: Dominant Party, New Turkey and Polarization." Insight
    Turkey 16(2), pp. 19-31.


                                              49
Kotakorpi K, Poutvaara P. (2011). "Pay for Politicians and Candidate Selection: An Empirical
    Analysis." Journal of Public Economics 95(7-8), pp. 877-885.
Lauka, A., J. McCoy, and R. Firat. (2018). "Mass Partisan Polarization: Measuring a Relational
    Concept." American Behavioral Scientist 62(1), pp. 107-126.
Lizzeri, A., and N. Persico. (2005). "A Drawback of Electoral Competition." Journal of the
    European Economic Association 3(4), pp. 1318-1348.
Lizzeri, A., and N. Persico. (2001). "The Provision of Public Goods under Alternative Electoral
    Incentives." American Economic Review 91(1), pp. 225-239.
McGee, S. (2001). "Rules on Parliamentary Immunity in the European Parliament and the
    Member States of the European Union." European Centre for Parliamentary Research and
    Documentation (ECPRD), Brussels.
Mocan, N., and D. Altindag. (2013). "Salaries and Work Effort: An Analysis of the European
    Union Parliamentarians." Economic Journal 123, pp. 1130-1167.
Newson, R. (2010). "Frequentist q-values for Multiple-test Procedures." Stata Journal 10(4), pp.
    568-584.
Nezirolu, . (Ed.) (2015). "The Grand National Assembly of Turkey." GNAT Press Publications
    and Public Relations Department Printing House, Ankara.
Persson, T, G. Roland, and G. Tabellini. (1997). "Separation of Powers and Political
    Accountability." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(4), pp. 1163-1202.
Persson, T., and G. Tabellini. (2004). "Constitutions and Economic Policy." Journal of
    Economic Perspectives 18 (1), pp. 75-98.
Peters, John G. and Susan Welch. 1980." The Effects of Charges of Corruption on Voting
    Behavior in Congressional Elections." American Political Science Review, 74(3): 697-708.
Reddy, K., M. Schularick, and V. Skereta. (2020). "Immunity." International Economic Review
    61(2) pp. 531-56.
Saia, A. (2018). "Random Interactions in the Chamber: Legislators' Behavior and Political
    Distance." Journal of Public Economics 164(C), pp. 225-240.
Schelling, T. (1980). "The Strategy of Conflict." Harvard University Press. Cambridge and
    London.
Simes, J. (1986). "An Improved Bonferroni Procedure for Multiple Tests of Significance."
    Biometrika 73(3), pp. 751-754.
Snyder Jr., J., and D. Strömberg. (2010). "Press Coverage and Political Accountability." Journal
    of Political Economy 118(2), pp. 355­408.
Washington, E. (2008). "Female Socialization: How Daughters Affect Their Legislator
    Fathers." American Economic Review 98(1), pp. 311-32.
Welch, Susan and John Hibbing, 1997. "The Effects of Charges of Corruption on Voting
    Behavior in Congressional Elections, 1982-1990" The Journal of Politics, 59(1): 226-239.
Wigley, S. (2009). "Parliamentary Immunity in Democratizing Countries: The Case of Turkey."
    Human Rights Quarterly 31, pp. 567-591.
                                              50
Wigley, S. (2003). "Parliamentary Immunity: Protecting Democracy or Protecting Corruption?"
   The Journal of Political Philosophy 11(1), pp. 23-40.




                                             51
                                                                             APPENDIX

                                              Appendix Section 1: Various Robustness Analyses



                                                               Appendix Figure AF1
                                                       The Number of Executive Orders by Month
                           8




                                                                                      7
           The Number of Executive Orders
                         4          6




                                                                3       3


                                                                    2       2 2           2        2             2           2
              2




                                                                                               1           1 1                   1


                                            0 0 0 0 0 0 0                         0                    0             0 0 0           0 0 0 0
                           0
                                        12


                                                  3


                                                           6


                                                                    9

                                                                                     12


                                                                                      3


                                                                                      6


                                                                                      9

                                                                                     12


                                                                                      3


                                                                                      6
                                                  m


                                                           m


                                                                    m




                                                                                    m


                                                                                    m


                                                                                    m




                                                                                    m


                                                                                    m
                m




                                                                             m




                                                                                   m
                                                16


                                                         16


                                                                  16




                                                                                  17


                                                                                  17


                                                                                  17




                                                                                  18


                                                                                  18
              15




                                                                           16




                                                                                 17
                                             20


                                                      20


                                                               20




                                                                               20


                                                                               20


                                                                               20




                                                                               20


                                                                               20
           20




                                                                        20




                                                                              20




In late July 2016, after the coup attempt, the government declared a state of emergency which allowed it to issue
executive orders and bypass the Parliamentary approval process to investigate the coup organizers and collaborators.
The figure presents the number of such executive orders over time.




                                                                                          52
                                      Appendix Table A1
                 The Relationship between MP Attributes and Immunity Status
                 Explanatory Variable      Whole Sample Opposition Parties
                                                (1)             (2)

                 Age in May 2016                           -0.002                 -0.006*
                                                          (0.002)                 (0.004)
                                                           [0.58]                  [0.33]

                 MA/PhD                                    -0.040                  0.005
                                                          (0.037)                 (0.078)
                                                           [0.58]                  [0.95]

                 Female                                    0.037                   -0.046
                                                          (0.053)                 (0.086)
                                                           [0.58]                  [0.79]

                 Opposition Party Member                 0.421***
                                                          (0.039)
                                                           [0.00]

Each cell presents the estimate of 1 from a separate regression of the following form:   = 0 +
1  +  , where A stands for an MP attribute listed in column (1). The unit of observation is an MP. The number of
MPs is 550 in the whole sample and 193 in the sample of opposition parties (CHP and HDP). Standard errors,
clustered at the MP level are in (parentheses). P-values, adjusted for multiple hypothesis testing, are displayed in
[brackets].




                                                        53
                                        Appendix Table A2
                          Unconditional Difference-in-Differences Estimates

                                          Panel A: All MPs
                                    MPs Whose Immunities    MPs Whose Immunities
                                         Are Lifted              Are Not Lifted
                                    (1)     (2)       (3)    (4)      (5)       (6)                           (7)
                                    Pre-   Post-            Pre-     Post-
                                                      Dif                       Dif                       Dif-in-Dif
                                   May     May              May      May
                                                    (2)-(1)                   (5)-(4)                      (3)-(6)
                                   2016    2016             2016     2016
Speeches                           19.03   10.42     -8.62  7.47     4.61      -2.86                         -5.76
Words                             1720.64 1017.80 -702.84 823.41 531.58 -291.83                            -411.01*
Interruptions Targeting             2.79    1.19   -1.60   0.61   0.43   -0.18                             -1.42***
    Gov. MPs
Interruptions Targeting             1.84         0.70         -1.14      2.53       0.79       -1.74          0.60
     Non-Gov. MPs
% Votes Against Gov.               85.80        86.54         0.74      49.10      53.91        4.80       -4.06***
Investigation Inquiries             0.67         0.31         -0.36      0.15       0.09       -0.05       -0.31***
     Filed
Drafts of Legislation               0.65         0.18         -0.48      0.19       0.07       -0.12        -0.36**
Formal Queries                      3.45         4.37         0.92       1.14       1.04       -0.10          1.02
1st PC ­ All outcomes               1.17         0.35         -0.82      0.08      -0.20       -0.28        -0.54**
1st PC ­ Speech outcomes            0.86         0.20         -0.66      0.14      -0.15       -0.29         -0.37*
1st PC ­ Other outcomes             0.78         0.34         -0.44     -0.07      -0.14       -0.07       -0.37***
Columns 1-3 (4-6) pertain to the MPs whose immunities are (not) lifted. Columns 1-2 and 4-5 present the means of
the legislative effort outcomes in the pre-treatment (before May 2016) and post-treatment (May 2016 and later)
periods, respectively. Columns 3 and 6 show the over time difference (pre- versus post-treatment) in outcomes.
Column 7 shows the unconditional Dif-in-Dif estimates. For the descriptions of the variables, refer to Table 2 in the
main text. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at 1%, 5% and 10% levels.




                                                         54
                                        Appendix Table A2
                          Unconditional Difference-in-Differences Estimates

                                        Panel B: Opposition MPs
                                   Opposition MPs Whose        Opposition MPs Whose
                                    Immunities Are Lifted    Immunities Are Not Lifted
                                   (1)       (2)       (3)     (4)       (5)      (6)                        (7)
                                   Pre-     Post-             Pre-      Post-
                                                       Dif                        Dif                    Dif-in-Dif
                                  May       May               May       May
                                                     (2)-(1)                    (5)-(4)                   (3)-(6)
                                  2016      2016              2016      2016
Speeches                          21.10    11.33      -9.78   7.77      7.92     0.15                       -9.93
Words                           1944.38 1154.59 -789.79 1262.40 1006.46 -255.93                            -533.86
Interruptions Targeting           3.53    1.54   -1.99    1.62    1.63    0.01                            -2.00***
    Gov. MPs
Interruptions Targeting           0.73        0.40        -0.32        0.33        0.43        0.10       -0.42**
     Non-Gov. MPs
% Votes Against Gov.              96.79       97.45       0.65        94.06       96.85        2.78        -2.13**
Investigation Inquiries            0.85        0.41       -0.44        0.41        0.37       -0.05       -0.39***
     Filed
Drafts of Legislation             0.85        0.23        -0.62        0.50        0.24       -0.26         -0.36*
Formal Queries                    4.46        5.81        1.35         3.27        4.45        1.18          0.17
1st PC ­ All outcomes             1.45        0.52        -0.93        0.53        0.39       -0.14       -0.79***
1st PC ­ Speech outcomes          0.98        0.28        -0.70        0.24        0.17       -0.07        -0.63**
1st PC ­ Other outcomes           1.09        0.54        -0.55        0.58        0.47       -0.11       -0.44***
 Columns 1-3 (4-6) pertain to the opposition MPs whose immunities are (not) lifted. Columns 1-2 and 4-5 present the
 means of the legislative effort outcomes in the pre-treatment (before May 2016) and post-treatment (May 2016 and
 later) periods, respectively. Columns 3 and 6 show the over time difference (pre- versus post-treatment) in
 outcomes. Column 7 shows the unconditional Dif-in-Dif estimates. For the descriptions of the variables, refer to
 Table 2 in the main text. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at 1%, 5% and 10% levels.




                                                        55
                                             Appendix Table A3
                                           Interruptions by Party
                         Share of times an     Share of times a   Share of times an Share of times an
                         AKP MP's Speech CHP MP's Speech MHP MP's Speech HDP MP's Speech
...is interrupted by
                                  0.027                     0.267                   0.028                     0.202
AKP MPs
...is interrupted by
                                  0.275                     0.036                   0.017                     0.010
CHP MPs
...is interrupted by
                                  0.024                     0.010                   0.006                     0.006
MHP MPs
...is interrupted by
                                  0.079                     0.004                   0.001                     0.010
HDP MPs
    The entries are the shares of all interruptions. The shares add up to 1.




                                      Appendix Table A4
        The Impact of Losing Immunity on Being Interrupted while Delivering Speeches
                         Whole Sample           Opposition Bloc       Government Bloc
                                                (CHP & HDP)             (AKP & MHP)
                                (1)                    (2)                     (3)
                      No. Times Interrupted No. Times Interrupted   No. Times Interrupted
                          by Gov. Bloc           by Gov. Bloc            by Gov. Bloc
   Immunity Lifted          -3.71***                -3.43**                  -0.90
     × Post                   (1.00)                 (1.42)                 (0.57)
   N                         15317                    5330                   9987
   Mean of outcome             0.99                   2.42                    0.22
    Immunity Lifted is the treatment indicator that is equal to one if the immunity of the MP (Member of the Parliament)
    was stripped off in May 2016. Post stands for the post-treatment period. All regressions include MP fixed effects
    and month-by-year dummies. Standard errors, clustered at the MP level, are in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate
    statistical significance at 1%, 5% and 10% level.




                                                              56
                                      Appendix Table A5
                           Log of the Outcomes (Opposition MPs)
                                    (1)        (2)          (3)           (4)
                                                      Interruptions Interruptions
                                Speeches    Words       Targeting     Targeting
                                                        Gov. MPs Non-Gov. MPs
           Immunity Lifted         -0.14      0.04      -0.25***      -0.12***
             × Post               (0.10)     (0.24)       (0.07)        (0.04)
                                  [0.23]     [0.88]       [0.00]        [0.01]
           N                      5,330      5,330        5,330         5,330

                                        Panel B: Legislative Effort
                                         (1)              (2)          (3)                          (4)
                                     % Votes        Investigation   Drafts of                     Formal
                                    Against Gov.   Inquiries Filed Legislation                    Queries
          Immunity Lifted             -0.04**          -0.09**        -0.04                        -0.02
            × Post                     (0.02)           (0.04)       (0.04)                       (0.07)
                                       [0.06]           [0.06]       [0.51]                       [0.81]
          N                            5,330            5,330        5,330                         5,330

                              Panel C: First Principal Components
                                         (1)             (2)             (3)
                                      st              st           st
                                     1 PC of         1 PC of     1 PC of Effort in
                                    All Effort        Speech      Other Legislative
                                     Measures       Outcomes          Activities
              Immunity Lifted        -0.13**         -0.13**           -0.08*
                × Post                (0.06)          (0.06)           (0.04)
                                      [0.06]          [0.06]           [0.10]
              N                                5,330               5,330                    5,330
The table presents results from the same specification as Table 4, except that the left-hand side variables are the
natural logarithms of one plus the outcomes.




                                                          57
                                     Appendix Table A6
              The Impact of Losing Immunity on MPs' Legislative Activities
  Controlling for the Interactions of Personal Attributes and the Post-Treatment Dummy
                                 Panel A: Speech Outcomes
                                   (1)          (2)          (3)            (4)
                                                       Interruptions Interruptions
                                Speeches     Words       Targeting      Targeting
                                                        Gov. MPs Non-Gov. MPs
       Immunity Lifted           -8.70*     -473.76*     -1.93***        -0.39**
           × Post                (4.94)     (277.72)       (0.58)         (0.17)
                                 [0.10]       [0.10]       [0.01]         [0.04]
       N                          5,330       5,330        5,330          5,330

                                          Panel B: Legislative Effort
                                              (1)           (2)           (3)                      (4)
                                           % Votes Investigation
                                                                       Drafts of                Formal
                                           Against      Inquiries
                                                                      Legislation               Queries
                                             Gov.          Filed
            Immunity Lifted                -2.06**      -0.39***        -0.38*                    0.07
              × Post                        (0.96)        (0.15)        (0.22)                   (2.31)
                                            [0.05]        [0.02]        [0.10]                   [0.97]
            N                               5,330         5,330         5,330                    5,330

                             Panel C: First Principal Components
                                        (1)             (2)              (3)
                                    1st PC of       1st PC of   1st PC of Effort in
                                   All Effort        Speech      Other Legislative
                                    Measures       Outcomes          Activities
             Immunity Lifted        -0.75***        -0.57**          -0.45***
               × Post                 (0.26)         (0.25)            (0.17)
                                      [0.02]         [0.04]            [0.02]
             N                        5,330           5,330            5,330
See notes to Table 4.
The results pertain to the same specification and the sample as in Table 4, with the addition of the interaction
between Post dummy and MP attributes: Age, Female, and MA/PhD.




                                                          58
                                   Appendix Table A7
            The Impact of Losing Immunity on MPs' Attendance to the Parliament

                                                 Whole Sample          Opposition Parties
                                                      (1)                     (2)
                                                 Days Attended          Days Attended
                      Immunity Lifted              0.39***                   0.05
                        × Post                      (0.06)                  (0.05)
                      N                             15,317                  5,330
Immunity Lifted is the treatment indicator that is equal to one if the immunity of the MP (Member of the Parliament)
was stripped off in May 2016. Post stands for the post-treatment period. Columns 1 and 2 pertain to the whole
sample of MPs and opposition party MPs, respectively. The outcome is the number of days on which the MP
attended the meetings in Parliament. The unit of observation is an MP-month. All regressions include MP fixed
effects and month-by-year dummies. Standard errors, clustered at the MP level, are in parentheses. ***, **, and *
indicate statistical significance at 1%, 5% and 10% levels.




                                                        59
                                     Appendix Table A8
                The Impact of Losing Immunity on MPs' Legislative Activities
               (Opposition MPs who served continuously in the 26th Parliament)
                                 Panel A: Speech Outcomes
                                   (1)         (2)         (3)              (4)
                                                     Interruptions Interruptions
                                Speeches     Words     Targeting        Targeting
                                                       Gov. MPs Non-Gov. MPs
           Immunity Lifted        -3.35     -207.69    -1.71***          -0.23**
             × Post              (2.05)    (143.25)      (0.54)           (0.09)
                                 [0.13]      [0.16]      [0.01]           [0.03]
           N                      4,977      4,977       4,977            4,977

                                          Panel B: Legislative Effort
                                              (1)           (2)           (3)                     (4)
                                           % Votes Investigation
                                                                       Drafts of               Formal
                                           Against      Inquiries
                                                                      Legislation              Queries
                                             Gov.          Filed
            Immunity Lifted                -2.05*        -0.41**        -0.44*                   0.22
              × Post                        (1.07)        (0.16)        (0.23)                  (2.63)
                                            [0.08]        [0.02]        [0.08]                  [0.93]
            N                               4,977         4,977         4,977                   4,977

                             Panel C: First Principal Components
                                        (1)             (2)              (3)
                                     st              st           st
                                    1 PC of         1 PC of     1 PC of Effort in
                                   All Effort        Speech      Other Legislative
                                    Measures       Outcomes          Activities
             Immunity Lifted        -0.56***        -0.34***         -0.49***
               × Post                 (0.18)          (0.12)           (0.18)
                                      [0.01]          [0.02]           [0.02]
             N                        4,977           4,977            4,977
See notes to Table 4. The results pertain to the same specification and the sample as in Table 4, but 15 opposition
MPs who stopped attending the Parliament are dropped. One of these MPs has resigned; the other 14 stopped
attending because they were arrested or convicted following the revocation of their immunity.




                                                         60
                                       Appendix Table A9
           The Impact of Losing Immunity on Opposition MPs' Legislative Activities
                      Controlling for the Impact of the Post-Coup Period
                                  Panel A: Speech Outcomes
                                     (1)         (2)           (3)           (4)
                                                         Interruptions Interruptions
                                 Speeches      Words       Targeting     Targeting
                                                          Gov. MPs Non-Gov. MPs
           Immunity Lifted          -4.26     -285.83      -1.68***      -0.36***
             × Post Treatment      (3.73)    (210.77)        (0.47)        (0.10)
                                  {0.60}       {0.40}       {0.06}        {0.03}
           Immunity Lifted         -6.43*     -290.01         -0.38         -0.07
             × Post Coup           (3.62)    (187.72)        (0.28)        (0.10)
           N                       5,330       5,330         5,330         5,330

                                          Panel B: Legislative Effort
                                              (1)           (2)           (3)                     (4)
                                           % Votes Investigation
                                                                       Drafts of               Formal
                                           Against      Inquiries
                                                                      Legislation              Queries
                                             Gov.          Filed
            Immunity Lifted                 -2.91*      -0.34***       -0.52**                   -0.70
              × Post Treatment              (1.67)        (0.02)        (0.20)                  (0.59)
                                            {0.20}       {0.02}         {0.17}                  {0.44}
            Immunity Lifted                0.92***         -0.06       0.16***                    0.86
              × Post Coup                   (0.29)        (0.04)        (0.03)                  (0.86)
            N                                5,330        5,330         5,330                   5,330

                             Panel C: First Principal Components
                                        (1)             (2)              (3)
                                     st              st           st
                                    1 PC of         1 PC of     1 PC of Effort in
                                   All Effort        Speech      Other Legislative
                                    Measures       Outcomes          Activities
             Immunity Lifted        -0.63***         -0.39*          -0.52***
               × Post Treatment       (0.18)         (0.19)            (0.10)
                                     {0.05}          {0.08}           {0.07}
             Immunity Lifted           -0.20          -0.28           0.08**
               × Post Coup            (0.16)         (0.17)            (0.04)
             N                        5,330           5,330            5,330
See notes to Table 4. The results pertain to the same specification and the sample as in Table 4, with the addition of
the interaction of Immunity Lifted and Post Coup dummy, where the latter variable equals one for the period after
the coup attempt. The p-values that are obtained from the wild t bootstrap method are presented in {curly brackets.}




                                                          61
                                     Appendix Table A10
                The Impact of Losing Immunity on MPs' Legislative Activities
                        Controlling for the Impact of Executive Orders
                                  Panel A: Speech Outcomes
                                    (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)
                                                        Interruptions Interruptions
                                 Speeches      Words      Targeting     Targeting
                                                         Gov. MPs Non-Gov. MPs
           Immunity Lifted         -9.76      -549.22     -1.96***       -0.40*
             × Post               (6.13)     (335.09)       (0.60)        (0.21)
                                  [0.12]       [0.12]       [0.01]        [0.09]
           Immunity Lifted         -2.03       -4.45         -0.40         -0.17
             × Exec. Orders       (1.58)     (103.70)       (0.36)        (0.15)
           N                       5,330       5,330        5,330         5,330

                                         Panel B: Legislative Effort
                                             (1)           (2)           (3)                      (4)
                                          % Votes Investigation
                                                                      Drafts of                Formal
                                          Against      Inquiries
                                                                     Legislation               Queries
                                            Gov.          Filed
            Immunity Lifted               -2.09**      -0.42***        -0.38*                    0.04
              × Post                       (1.01)        (0.15)        (0.21)                   (2.23)
                                           [0.07]        [0.02]        [0.09]                   [0.99]
            Immunity Lifted                 0.05          0.11          0.06                     0.31
              × Exec. Orders               (0.36)        (0.10)        (0.04)                   (1.15)
            N                              5,330         5,330         5,330                    5,330

                              Panel C: First Principal Components
                                         (1)             (2)              (3)
                                      st              st           st
                                     1 PC of         1 PC of     1 PC of Effort in
                                    All Effort        Speech      Other Legislative
                                     Measures       Outcomes          Activities
             Immunity Lifted         -0.81***        -0.62**          -0.47***
               × Post                  (0.29)         (0.30)            (0.17)
                                       [0.02]         [0.07]            [0.02]
             Immunity Lifted            -0.04          -0.10             0.11
               × Exec. Orders          (0.10)         (0.09)            (0.10)
             N                         5,330           5,330            5,330
See notes to Table 4. The results pertain to the same specification and the sample as in Table 4, with the addition of
the interaction of Immunity Lifted and Executive Orders, where the latter variable represents the number of executive
orders issues each month following the coup attempt (see Appendix Figure AF1).




                                                         62
                                    Appendix Table A11
                The Impact of Losing Immunity on MPs' Legislative Activities
                    During the Period before the Coup Attempt (All MPs)
                                 Panel A: Speech Outcomes
                                   (1)         (2)          (3)           (4)
                                                      Interruptions Interruptions
                                Speeches     Words      Targeting     Targeting
                                                       Gov. MPs Non-Gov. MPs
           Immunity Lifted        -2.19     -157.24      -0.79**         0.42
             × Post              (2.97)    (165.76)       (0.35)        (0.36)
                                 [0.56]      [0.47]       [0.06]        [0.45]
           N                      3,850      3,850        3,850         3,850

                                          Panel B: Legislative Effort
                                              (1)           (2)           (3)                      (4)
                                           % Votes Investigation
                                                                       Drafts of                Formal
                                           Against      Inquiries
                                                                      Legislation               Queries
                                             Gov.          Filed
            Immunity Lifted                  -0.38       -0.20**       -0.38**                    0.14
              × Post                        (1.34)        (0.09)        (0.16)                   (0.39)
                                            [0.78]        [0.06]        [0.06]                   [0.78]
            N                               3,850         3,850         3,850                    3,850

                             Panel C: First Principal Components
                                        (1)             (2)              (3)
                                     st              st           st
                                    1 PC of         1 PC of     1 PC of Effort in
                                   All Effort        Speech      Other Legislative
                                    Measures       Outcomes          Activities
             Immunity Lifted        -0.32**           -0.15          -0.32***
               × Post                (0.15)          (0.15)            (0.11)
                                     [0.06]          [0.47]            [0.03]
             N                        3,850           3,850            3,850
Immunity Lifted is the treatment indicator which is equal to one if the immunity of the MP was stripped off in May
2016. Post stands for the post-treatment period. Outcomes: Panel A: (1) Number of speeches delivered on the
Parliament floor by the MP; (2) Number of words in those speeches; (3) Number of times the MP interrupted the
speech of another MP who is a member of the government party; (4) Number of times an MP interrupted the speech
of another MP who is a member of the opposition parties. Panel B: (1) % of the rollcall votes the MP voted the same
way as the majority of the government party; (2) the number of times the MP filed an investigation inquiry into the
activities of the government (3) the number of bills sponsored by the MP; (4) the number of times MP passed a
formal query to the members of the government. Panel C: (1) first principal component of all outcomes in Panels A
and B; (2) first principal component of outcomes in Panel A; (3) first principal component of outcomes in Panel B.
The unit of observation is an MP-month. All regressions include MP fixed effects and month-by-year dummies.
Standard errors, clustered at the MP level, are in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at 1%,
5% and 10% levels. P-values, adjusted for multiple hypothesis testing, are displayed in [brackets].




                                                          63
   Appendix Section 2: Have Outspoken "Troublemaker" MPs been Targeted?
       The estimates in the paper have a causal interpretation if the MPs in the treatment group
and those in the control group are counterfactuals to one another. That average MP
characteristics, such as age, sex, and education, do not depend on their immunity status (see
Appendix Table A1) is reassuring. However, as shown in the Panels of Appendix Table A2,
those MPs who lost their immunity were more active in Parliament before the enactment of the
Constitutional Amendment in May 2016. It can be argued that the MPs who were more
outspoken and more active in the Parliament could have been targeted for having their immunity
being lifted. That is, charges could have been filed against these MPs by their political opponents
to pave the way to lift their immunity.
       Note that, in this scenario, some MPs have personal attributes that make them formidable
and fiery opposition members (who speak more and interrupt others more frequently, who file
investigation inquiries against the government more often, and so on). At the same time, these
character attributes make them more likely targets for immunity revocation. In this case, we
would underestimate the impact of immunity on MPs' activities, and the results reported in Table
4 would be biased towards zero.
       Nevertheless, to investigate the validity of this conjecture, we used the 1st Principal
Component (1st PC) of all eight activities (see Panel C of Tables 3-6). For each MP, we
calculated the average value of the 1st PC over the months until May 2016, which represents a
summary of the Parliamentary activity of each MP until the enactment of the Constitutional
Amendment. Ranking all 550 MPs of the Parliament by this average enables us to order them by
the intensity of their Parliamentary activities before the "treatment." There are 138 MPs in the
top quartile (550/4) of this activity distribution. Of these, 79 MPs are members of the opposition
parties, and 43 of them (54%) lost their immunity. There are 137 MPs in the second quartile of
pre-treatment activity. Fifty-six percent of these (77 MPs) are members of the opposition parties,
and 35 of the 77 lost their immunity. Similarly, there are 37 opposition MPs in the 3rd quartile,
and 21 of them (58 %) lost their immunity.
       This information, which is displayed in Appendix Table A12 (and also graphically below
the table), indicates that the proportion of the opposition MPs who lost their immunity is similar
between the three quartiles of Parliamentary pre-activity distribution. Put differently, opposition
MPs who are more outspoken, aggressive, and active (those who are in the top quartile of pre-
treatment Parliamentary activity) have not lost their Parliamentary immunity disproportionally.
                                                64
Note that there are no opposition MPs in the bottom quartile of the activity distribution, which is
partly the reflection that there are 85 percent more government bloc MPs in the Parliament in
comparison to the number of opposition MPs (357 vs. 193), but also because opposition MPs
have been more active in the Parliament. 35
        Appendix Table A13 presents the estimation results obtained from the sample of the
opposition MPs who were most active (i.e., in the top quartile of the activity distribution) before
the enactment of the Constitutional amendment. The results are consistent with the ones
reported in Table 4 and indicate that revocation of immunity has muted these MPs as well and
reduced their effort in Parliament. The coefficient estimates are larger in Appendix Table A13,
but the mean values of the outcomes are also proportionately larger because the MPs in this
sample are more active than the rest of the MPs.


Are "More Valuable MPs" of the Opposition Parties Targeted?
        In the closed-list proportional representation election system used in Turkey, voters cast
their votes for political parties and not for the candidates. Each party submits a list of "N"
candidates in a given province (which is an election district), where N is the number of contested
MP seats. Parties announce the rank of their candidates in descending order, where candidate
Number 1 (Number N) is the first (last) person who would be an MP from that party in that
province. The vote share of each party determines the number of MP seats won by that party in
that province, which in turn determines who on the party list becomes an MP. Parties typically
rank their more senior and important/valuable candidates higher on their list as higher-ranked
candidates are more likely to get elected. For example, party leaders are ranked at the top of the
party list in their respective provinces.
        Appendix Table A14 and the graphs below the table present the distribution of the 193
opposition MPs by their immunity status and their rank on their party ticket in their province.
Seventy-six MPs were ranked at the top of their lists. Thirty-nine MPs of this group lost
immunity (51%), and 37 MPs (49%) retained it. Of the 39 MPs who were ranked second, 21 lost


35
  A regression of whether an opposition MP's immunity is lifted on an indicator of whether that MP was
in the top quartile of the pre-treatment activity distribution and party fixed effects generated a coefficient
of 0.05 (se=0.07). When we included two indicators for being in the top quartile of the activity
distribution and for being in the second quartile, the estimates were -0.02 (se=0.10) and -0.11 (se=0.10),
respectively.

                                                      65
immunity, and 18 retained it. Half of those who are ranked third or lower on their party ticket
lost immunity (39/78), while the other half retained it. Thus, there is no indication that higher-
ranked opposition MPs have been targeted. 36
        Appendix Table A15 displays the results of the performance regressions in the sample of
top-ranked opposition MPs. The impact of losing immunity is always negative. The magnitudes
of the point estimates are similar to those obtained from the full sample of opposition MPs
reported in Table 4, although the precision of the estimates is lower, likely because of the small
sample size. This finding indicates that MPs, who are top-ranked on their party tickets and who
are party leaders in their respective cities, respond to the loss of immunity no differently than
other MPs.




36
   A regression of immunity status on an indicator of whether an opposition MP was at the top of the
party ticket generated a coefficient of 0.00 (se=0.07). When we included two indicators for being ranked
at the top of the ticket and as the second candidate on the ticket, the estimates were 0.01 (se=0.08) and
0.04 (se=0.10), respectively.
                                                      66
                                  Appendix Table A12
      Distribution of Opposition MPs by Immunity Status and Pre-Treatment Activity
                                      Top     Second      Third     Bottom
                                    Quartile Quartile    Quartile   Quartile
           Immunity Lifted             43       35          21         0
           Immunity Retained           36       42          16         0
           Number of Opposition
           MPs in the Quartile         79       77          37         0
Activity is measured by the 1st Principle Component of all 8 outcomes, averaged during the pre-treatment period
(before May 2016). The ranking of all 550 MPs enables the determination of the MPs within the quartiles of the
Activity distribution.




                          Top Quartile                                  Second Quartile



                         43 MPs                                           35 MPs
                                    36 MPs
                                                                                    42 MPs




                              Immunity Retained                              Immunity Retained
                              Immunity Lifted                                Immunity Lifted

                          Third Quartile



                          21 MPs
                                     17 MPs




                              Immunity Retained
                              Immunity Lifted




                                                        67
                                  Appendix Table A13
             The Impact of Losing Immunity on MPs' Legislative Activities
 Opposition MPs in the Top Quartile in the Distribution of Pre-Treatment Period Activity
                              Panel A: Speech Outcomes
                                 (1)         (2)           (3)           (4)
                                                     Interruptions Interruptions
                             Speeches      Words       Targeting     Targeting
                                                      Gov. MPs Non-Gov. MPs
       Immunity Lifted        -24.43* -1414.53*        -4.65***       -0.98**
          × Post              (14.17)     (758.52)       (1.32)        (0.48)
                               [0.11]      [0.10]        [0.01]        [0.08]
       N                       2,188        2,188        2,188         2,188
       Mean of the Outcome     21.61      2045.13         3.70          0.94

                                         Panel B: Legislative Effort
                                             (1)           (2)           (3)                      (4)
                                          % Votes Investigation
                                                                      Drafts of                Formal
                                          Against      Inquiries
                                                                     Legislation               Queries
                                            Gov.          Filed
            Immunity Lifted                 -1.61      -0.95***        -0.76*                    -0.58
              × Post                       (2.00)        (0.32)        (0.45)                   (5.65)
                                           [0.46]        [0.02]        [0.11]                   [0.92]
            N                              2,188         2,188         2,188                    2,188
            Mean of the Outcome            96.07          0.81          0.59                      9.59

                             Panel C: First Principal Components
                                        (1)             (2)              (3)
                                     st              st           st
                                    1 PC of         1 PC of     1 PC of Effort in
                                   All Effort        Speech      Other Legislative
                                    Measures       Outcomes          Activities
             Immunity Lifted        -1.91***        -1.54**          -1.01***
               × Post                 (0.65)         (0.68)            (0.36)
                                      [0.02]         [0.06]            [0.02]
             N                                2,188               2,188                   2,188
             Mean of the Outcome               1.47                1.06                    1.07
See notes to Table 4. The results pertain to the same specification and the sample as in Table 4. The sample
contains opposition MPs who are in the top quartile of the pre-treatment period activity distribution. There are 79
opposition MPs in the sample, 43 of which are treated by immunity revocation. Activity is measured by the 1st
Principle Component of all 8 outcomes, averaged during the pre-treatment period.




                                                         68
                                Appendix Table A14
Distribution of Opposition MPs by Immunity Status and Rank on Their Parties' Tickets
                                  Top     Second      Third   Ranked 4th
                                Ranked    Ranked     Ranked    or Lower
           Immunity Lifted         39       21         16         23
           Immunity Retained       37       18         12         27
           Total MPs               76       39         28         50




                Top Ranked MPs                    Second Ranked MPs



                           37 MPs                              18 MPs
                  39 MPs                              21 MPs




                     Immunity Retained                   Immunity Retained
                     Immunity Lifted                     Immunity Lifted

                Third Ranked MPs                MPs Ranked 4th or Lower



                            12 MPs                             27 MPs

                  16 MPs                              23 MPs




                     Immunity Retained                   Immunity Retained
                     Immunity Lifted                     Immunity Lifted




                                         69
                                    Appendix Table A15
               The Impact of Losing Immunity on MPs' Legislative Activities
                              Top Ranked Opposition MPs
                                Panel A: Speech Outcomes
                                   (1)        (2)         (3)           (4)
                                                    Interruptions Interruptions
                               Speeches     Words     Targeting     Targeting
                                                      Gov. MPs Non-Gov. MPs
          Immunity Lifted        -17.30   -1106.39     -2.77**         -0.71
            × Post              (15.20)   (822.49)      (1.24)        (0.51)
                                 [0.27]     [0.22]      [0.14]        [0.22]
          N                      2,092      2,092       2,092         2,092
          Mean of the Outcome    12.13     1342.83       1.84          0.47

                                         Panel B: Legislative Effort
                                             (1)           (2)           (3)                     (4)
                                          % Votes Investigation
                                                                      Drafts of              Formal
                                          Against      Inquiries
                                                                     Legislation             Queries
                                            Gov.          Filed
           Immunity Lifted                  -2.69       -0.50**        -0.44*                  -3.67
             × Post                        (1.93)        (0.24)        (0.25)                 (3.29)
                                           [0.22]        [0.14]        [0.18]                 [0.27]
           N                               2,092         2,092         2,092                  2,092
           Mean of the Outcome             96.73          0.42          0.30                    4.98

                             Panel C: First Principal Components
                                        (1)             (2)              (3)
                                     st              st           st
                                    1 PC of         1 PC of     1 PC of Effort in
                                   All Effort        Speech      Other Legislative
                                    Measures       Outcomes          Activities
             Immunity Lifted         -1.29*           -1.07           -0.66**
               × Post                (0.68)          (0.74)            (0.29)
                                     [0.17]          [0.22]            [0.14]
             N                               2,092               2,092                   2,092
             Mean of the Outcome              0.63                0.40                    0.55
See notes to Table 4. The results pertain to the same specification and the sample as in Table 4. The sample
contains opposition MPs who are in the top-ranked in their parties' tickets. There are 76 such opposition MPs in the
sample, 39 of which are treated by immunity revocation.




                                                        70
                                    Appendix Table A16
         Models that Account for MPs' Pre-treatment Level Parliamentary Activity
                                Panel A: Speech Outcomes
                        (1)         (2)               (3)                    (4)
                                                Interruptions     Interruptions Targeting
                    Speeches      Words
                                             Targeting Gov. MPs       Non-Gov. MPs
Immunity lifted        -9.53     -505.52          -1.92***                -0.41**
   × Post             (5.91)    (321.36)            (0.58)                 (0.20)
                      [0.13]      [0.13]            [0.01]                 [0.07]
Pre-activity 25-50   14.84*    1292.44***          2.94***                  0.42
   × Post             (7.82)    (421.15)            (0.75)                 (0.26)
Pre-activity 50-75   12.77*     948.25**           2.59***                  0.38
   × Post             (7.27)    (393.82)            (0.70)                 (0.25)
N                      5330        5330              5330                   5330

                                       Panel B: Legislative Effort
                                   (1)                  (2)                            (3)                 (4)
                            % Votes Against       Investigation                     Drafts of            Formal
                                  Gov.           Inquiries Filed                   Legislation           Queries
 Immunity lifted                -2.08**             -0.38***                         -0.32*               -0.21
   × Post                        (0.97)               (0.13)                         (0.19)              (2.13)
                                 [0.07]               [0.02]                         [0.12]              [0.92]
 Pre-activity 25-50            -4.19***              0.59***                        1.06***               -2.69
    × Post                       (1.06)               (0.18)                         (0.24)              (2.93)
 Pre-activity 50-75              -2.16*              0.44***                        0.97***               -1.95
    × Post                       (1.18)               (0.16)                         (0.23)              (2.61)
 N                                5330                 5330                           5330                5330

                               Panel C: First Principal Components
                                       (1)             (2)              (3)
                                    st              st           st
                                  1 PC of         1 PC of       1 PC of Effort in
                                  All Effort       Speech       Other Legislative
                                  Measures        Outcomes          Activities
             Immunity lifted      -0.76***         -0.60**          -0.42***
                × post              (0.28)          (0.29)            (0.16)
                                    [0.02]          [0.07]            [0.02]
             Pre-activity 25-50    1.43***         1.07***          0.81***
                × post              (0.36)          (0.38)            (0.19)
             Pre-activity 50-75    1.20***          0.88**          0.70***
                × post              (0.34)          (0.35)            (0.19)
             N                       5330            5330              5330
See notes to Table 4. The results pertain to the same specification and the sample as in Table 4, except that
indicators that represent the interactions of MP's pre-treatment activity (see Appendix Table A12) with Post are
included as control variables.


                                                         71
     Appendix Section 3: Analyses of SUTVA Violations. Have the MPs who
     Retained Their Immunity Been Impacted by Those who Lost Immunity?
        To investigate whether the MPs who retained their immunity have adjusted their
parliamentary activity in response to their colleagues' loss of immunity, we first focus on
opposition MPs who retained their immunity, and we analyze whether the intensity of the
parliamentary activities of these MPs (who are in the control group) have been positively
impacted by having peers from the same party who lost immunity. We proxy the extra workload
imposed (outsourced) on each MP (i) by the variable % Immunity-Losing Peersipjt, which is
calculated in each province for each party as (MPs who Lost Immunity from a Party &
Province)pj / (Total Number of MPs from the Party & Province)pj, where p and j represent parties
and provinces, respectively. 37 % Immunity-Losing Peersipjt is zero for all MPs in the control
group until the enactment of the Constitutional Amendment. It then switches to a positive value
if MP i herself/himself retained immunity but has same-party colleagues from the same province
who lost immunity. 38 The reason for considering spillovers between MPs of a given party of the
same province is that these MPs arguably would be concerned with the issues related to their
province and that they could have a stronger rapport between them. We, however, also consider
peer effects at the national level (see footnote 39 below).
        Appendix Table A17 below displays the results obtained from a regression, which is the
same as equation (1), except that the sample includes only the untreated MPs, and that instead of
Immunity Lifted × Post variable, we include % Immunity-Losing Peersipjt as the key explanatory
variable. The sample contains 2,616 MP-month observations generated by those MPs who
retained their immunity. As described above, % Immunity-Losing Peers is zero for everyone
until the Constitutional Amendment. The variable varies both between provinces and between
parties after the enactment of the Constitutional Amendment. Most of the estimated coefficients
in Appendix Table A17 are negative (as opposed to being positive), and none is different from
zero. As shown in Panel C, aggregate indicators are not impacted either. Thus, the results


37
  For example, if an opposition party has 4 MPs from a city and if one of these MP's lost immunity, the
variable takes the value of 1/4 for the three MPs who retained immunity. If no MP lost immunity from
that party in a city, the value of the variable for all MPs of that part from that city is equal to zero,
reflecting no extra workload.
38
  In other words, this variable is the same as the product of the post-treatment dummy and the percent of
immunity-losing MPs from the same city and province.
                                                      72
indicate that having same-party colleagues who lost immunity has no impact on the work effort
of those MPs who retained their immunity.
        We also estimated an alternative specification, which utilizes all opposition MPs (those
who lost immunity, as well as those who retained immunity). Thus, the sample used in this
specification is identical to the one employed in the benchmark model (Table 4). We estimated
the same specification as Equation (1), but we added a second "treatment," which is relevant
only for those who are in the control group. Specifically, we estimated

(A1)     = 0 + 1   ×  + 2 %  -   +
                 +  +  +  ,

where, as discussed earlier, % Immunity-Losing Peersipjt is equal to zero for all MPs before the
enactment of the Constitutional Amendment. It also equals zero after the amendment if the MP
has lost his/her immunity (if Immunity Lifted=1), but it takes positive values if the MP has
retained immunity and if she/he has peers who lost immunity. Thus, 1 represents the impact of
losing immunity, and 2 is the impact of the extent of having peers from the same province and
same party who lost immunity on those MPs who themselves retained immunity.
        The results, which are reported in Appendix Table A18 below, reveal that potential extra
workload, which could have been shouldered by the MPs who retained their immunity, has no
impact on these MPs' parliamentary activities. This is because the coefficients of % Immunity-
Losing Peers are always very small and never statistically different from zero, indicating that the
behavior of the MPs in the control group is not influenced by the extent to which their peers lose
immunity. On the other hand, the coefficients of Immunity Lifted × Post are similar in
magnitude and in statistical significance to those reported in Table 4. Thus, the results in
Appendix Tables A17 and A18 indicate that lifting parliamentary immunity had an impact on the
behavior of those MPs whose immunities have been lifted but that it had no spillover effects on
those who retained their immunity. 39


39
  The formulation of the variable %Immunity-Losing Peers assumes that the MPs of a given party, who
are elected from a particular province, share the extra workload created by the loss of immunity of
colleague(s) who are also from the same party and the same province. Alternatively, it is also possible
that colleagues of a given party pick up the slack regardless of whether those who lost immunity are from
their own province. Therefore, we also calculated the variable % Immunity-Losing Peersip at the
parliament level. This means that in each party, MPs who are in the control group (i.e., those who
retained immunity) are assigned the same value, which is the ratio of those who lost immunity from their
party to the total number of MPs in that party. With the proviso that in this formulation % Immunity-
                                                      73
        Finally, we ran aggregate regressions at the party level. Here each political party
contributes one observation per month, where the outcome variables are the 11 performance
measures of the MPs of the party, averaged at the party level as shown by Equation (A2)

(A2)     = 0 + 1 %   ×  +  + 2  x  +  ,

where %   is the proportion of the MPs who lost their immunity in party p.
The regressions also include party fixed effects and a separate time trend for each party. The
sample consists of 112 party-month observations (4 political parties × 28 months). Under the
assumption of complete outsourcing, the proportion of MPs who lost immunity from a party
should have no impact on that party's Parliamentary activities, and 1 should be zero. Similarly,
under the hypothesis that MPs whose immunity are lifted are not impacted, while their
immunity-intact peers increased their effort is true, then 1 should be positive and significant.
The results are displayed in Appendix Table A19. Party activities listed in Panel B are not
impacted by MPs' losing immunity, although the impact on % Votes Against Government is
large. The estimates on party-level speech-related outcomes, displayed in Panel A, are negative
and statistically significant, and the same is true for the average of speech-related outcomes
(Panel C, column 2) as well as the average of all eight outcomes (Panel C, column 1). Thus,
consistent with the results presented in Tables A15 and A16, the results of Appendix Table A19
also indicate that there is no compelling evidence of notable shifting of Parliamentary activities
from immunity-losing to immunity-retaining MPs.




Losing Peers suffers from lack of variation, consistent with the results of Appendix Tables A17 and A18,
the impact of the % Immunity-Losing Peers was not different from zero.

                                                   74
                                   Appendix Table A17
          Spillover Impact on the Opposition MPs Who Retained Their Immunity
                                Panel A: Speech Outcomes
                                     (1)        (2)         (3)           (4)
                                                      Interruptions Interruptions
                                  Speeches    Words     Targeting     Targeting
                                                       Gov. MPs Non-Gov. MPs
       % Immunity Lifted from       1.83       25.82       -0.94         0.18
         same Province & Party     (4.13)    (316.43)     (1.40)        (0.31)
       N                            2616       2616        2616          2616

                                Panel B: Legislative Effort
                                      (1)           (2)                             (3)             (4)
                                   % Votes Investigation
                                                                                Drafts of        Formal
                                   Against       Inquiries
                                                                               Legislation       Queries
                                     Gov.          Filed
        % Immunity Lifted from       -3.85         -0.25                           -0.45           -6.95
          same Province & Party     (4.02)        (0.30)                          (0.30)          (7.03)
        N                            2616          2616                            2616            2616

                            Panel C: First Principal Components
                                          (1)             (2)                               (3)
                                       st              st                             st
                                     1 PC of          1 PC of                        1 PC of Effort in
                                     All Effort        Speech                        Other Legislative
                                     Measures        Outcomes                           Activities
         % Immunity Lifted from         -0.34           -0.04                              -0.62
           same Province & Party       (0.39)          (0.27)                             (0.46)
         N                              2616            2616                               2616
Only the opposition MPs who retained their immunity enter into the regressions. The specification is same as
equation (1), except that instead of Immunity Lifted × Post, we include % Immunity Lifted From Same City & Party.
This variable measures the share of MPs that also represent the same city and party as the MP. In the pre-treatment
period, this variable is equal to zero. All regressions include MP fixed effects and month-by-year dummies. Standard
errors, clustered at the MP level, are in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at 1%, 5% and
10% levels.




                                                         75
                                      Appendix Table A18
            The Impact of Losing Immunity on Opposition MPs' Legislative Activity
                          Controlling for Potential Spillover Impacts
                                  Panel A: Speech Outcomes
                                      (1)         (2)           (3)           (4)
                                                          Interruptions Interruptions
                                  Speeches      Words       Targeting     Targeting
                                                           Gov. MPs Non-Gov. MPs
         Immunity Lifted             -9.56     -533.14      -2.29***         -0.38
            × Post                  (6.50)    (358.60)        (0.84)        (0.24)
                                    [0.16]      [0.16]        [0.03]        [0.16]
         % Immunity Lifted from      2.00       60.52          -0.93         0.18
          same Province & Party     (4.07)    (330.56)        (1.38)        (0.31)
         N                           5330        5330          5330          5330

                                Panel B: Legislative Effort
                                      (1)            (2)                             (3)             (4)
                                   % Votes Investigation
                                                                                 Drafts of        Formal
                                   Against       Inquiries
                                                                                Legislation       Queries
                                     Gov.           Filed
        Immunity Lifted            -3.12*         -0.47**                         -0.49**           -1.81
          × Post                    (1.75)         (0.18)                          (0.21)          (3.73)
                                    [0.12]         [0.03]                          [0.05]          [0.63]
        % Immunity Lifted from       -3.73          -0.25                           -0.43           -6.82
          same Province & Party     (4.00)         (0.30)                          (0.30)          (6.90)
        N                            5330           5330                            5330            5330

                             Panel C: First Principal Components
                                           (1)             (2)                               (3)
                                        st              st                             st
                                      1 PC of          1 PC of                        1 PC of Effort in
                                      All Effort        Speech                        Other Legislative
                                      Measures        Outcomes                           Activities
          Immunity Lifted             -0.90***         -0.65**                            -0.62**
            × Post                      (0.34)          (0.33)                             (0.24)
                                        [0.03]          [0.09]                             [0.03]
          % Immunity Lifted from         -0.31           -0.02                              -0.60
            same Province & Party       (0.39)          (0.27)                             (0.45)
          N                              5330            5330                               5330
Only the opposition MPs enter into the regressions. The specification is the same as equation (1), except that we
additionally include % Immunity Lifted From Same City & Party. This variable measures the share of the MP's
peers who also represent the same city and party as the MP. In the pre-treatment period, this variable is equal to
zero. All regressions include MP fixed effects and month-by-year dummies. Standard errors, clustered at the MP
level, are in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at 1%, 5% and 10% levels. P-values,
adjusted for multiple hypothesis testing, are displayed in [brackets].




                                                         76
                                                Appendix Table A19
                                               Party Level Regressions

                                             Panel A: Speech Outcomes
                                              (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)
                                                                   Interruptions Interruptions
                                          Speeches       Words       Targeting     Targeting
                                                                    Gov. MPs Non-Gov. MPs
        % Immunity Lifted                 -0.16***     -14.32***     -0.02***      -0.01***
          × Post                            (0.04)       (4.12)        (0.01)        (0.00)
        N                                    112          112           112           112

                                              Panel B: Legislative Effort
                                                  (1)           (2)            (3)                          (4)
                                               % Votes Investigation
                                                                           Drafts of                    Formal
                                               Against      Inquiries
                                                                          Legislation                   Queries
                                                 Gov.          Filed
             % Immunity Lifted                   0.00       -0.00***       -0.00***                     -0.03***
               × Post                           (0.02)        (0.00)         (0.00)                       (0.01)
             N                                   112            112           112                          112

                              Panel C: First Principal Components
                                         (1)             (2)              (3)
                                     1st PC of       1st PC of   1st PC of Effort in
                                    All Effort        Speech      Other Legislative
                                     Measures       Outcomes          Activities
              % Immunity Lifted      -0.01***        -0.01***         -0.01***
                × Post                 (0.00)          (0.00)           (0.00)
              N                         112             112              112
The unit of observation is a party-month. % Immunity Lifted measures the percent of MPs whose immunity is lifted in May 2016
from that party. Post stands for the post-treatment period. Outcomes are the averages for the party. Panel A: (1) Number of
speeches delivered on the Parliament floor by the MP; (2) Number of words in those speeches; (3) Number of times the MP
interrupted the speech of another MP who is a member of the government party; (4) Number of times an MP interrupted the
speech of another MP who is a member of the opposition parties. Panel B: (1) % of the rollcall votes the MP voted the same way
as the majority of the government party; (2) the number of times the MP filed an investigation inquiry into the activities of the
government (3) the number of bills sponsored by the MP; (4) the number of times MP passed a formal query to the members of
the government. Panel C: (1) first principal component of all outcomes in Panels A and B; (2) first principal component of
outcomes in Panel A; (3) first principal component of outcomes in Panel B. All regressions include party fixed effects and linear
party-specific trends. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at 1%, 5% and
10% levels.




                                                               77
          Appendix Section 4: Are the Months of May and June Different?


        We investigated whether the months of May and June of 2016 (the two months between
the Constitutional Amendment and the coup attempt) were different from previous years' May
and June in terms of the workload of the Parliament. Analyzing the number of days the
Parliament was in session each month since the beginning of the 22nd Parliament in 2002 (when
AKP first came to power), we find there was no drop in the workload in May or June 2016.
Specifically, the Parliament was in session for 13 days in May 2016 and 15 days in June 2016,
whereas the average days in session for the period of 2003-2017 was 12 days for May and 11.6
days for June.
        We also analyzed seasonality in general. The summary of this analysis is presented in
Appendix Figure AF2, where we display the coefficients of 10 monthly dummies and their 95
percent confidence intervals in comparison to the left-out category of August and September,
during which the Parliament is usually closed for the Summer vacation. 40 The dependent
variable is the number of session days each month, and the regression has 162 observations,
spanning January 2003 ­ June 2016. As the figure demonstrates, the workload of the Parliament
is rather evenly distributed throughout the year, with the exception of the month of December in
which the Parliament is in session for a larger number of days, generally because of the budget
discussions for the upcoming year.




40
   Between January 2003 and June 2016 (the period between the formation of the first AKP government
and the coup attempt, the average number of days in which the Parliament held sessions is 11.9 in
January, 12.6 in February, 12.8 in March, 12.4 in April, 11.7 in May, 11.6 in June, 8.4 in July, 11.3 in
October, 12.8 in November and 16.1 in December. On the other hand, the average number of session days
in August is 1.9, and it is 2.6 in September.
                                                   78
                                            Appendix Figure AF2

                          Average Days the Parliament is in Session by Month 2003-2016

                 20
                 15
            Coefficient
               105
                 0




                             1    2     3    4    5      6    7       8      9     10     11     12
                                                         Months

The figure displays the coefficients of ten monthly dummies and their 95 percent confidence intervals in comparison
to the left-out category of the months of August and September, during which the Parliament is usually closed for
the summer vacation. The dependent variable is the number of days per month in which the Parliament was in
session. The regression has 162 observations, spanning January 2003 ­ June 2016.




                                                        79
          Appendix Section 5: The Impact on the Speed of Legislation

        The 26th Parliament analyzed in this paper passed 491 laws. The majority of these were
laws that ratify international treaties. Specifically, when the government signs a treaty with a
foreign nation or an international organization, the treaty becomes effective if the Parliament
ratifies it, i.e., when the Parliament votes to agree with its clauses. The overwhelming majority of
these treaties are approved in the Parliament with no discussion and with the unanimous support
of all MPs, including those of the opposition parties. 41 Of the 491 laws passed, 383 were
ratifications of international agreements and treaties. The remaining 108 laws were about
domestic issues.
        Appendix Figures AF3 and AF4 present the average number of days it took in the
Parliament each month to ratify treaties and to pass laws. The vertical axes measure the average
number of days the laws or international treaties were discussed before being approved by the
Parliament. Each dot corresponds to a month with at least one law/treaty being passed/ratified,
and the numbers next to the dots represent the number of laws/treaties passed/ratified in that
month. The solid vertical line marks the end of the pre-treatment period (April 2016), and the
dashed vertical line indicates the coup attempt (July 2016).
        As Appendix Figure AF3 reveals, on average, international treaties are discussed and
ratified in one day. Appendix Figure AF4, on the other hand, shows that there is variation in the
speed with which laws are passed. For example, two laws were passed in February 2016, and the
average speed of legislation was about five days. In March 2016, three additional laws were
passed, and the average number of days of the debate was three between these two laws. As the
figure makes it clear, laws were passed very quickly in some months of 2017: the average was
about 1.5 days in February 2017. There are also outliers. For example, two laws were passed in
December 2016 and in January 2017. In both cases, the average duration was seven days. 42



41
  Examples of such ratification include "The law regarding the Parliament's endorsement of the Defense
Cooperation Agreement between the Republic of Turkey and the Federal Republic of Somalia" and "The
law regarding the Parliament's endorsement of our participation in the protocols of the amendments to the
Convention on the International Hydrography Organization."
42
  These week-long Parliamentary debates at the end of a year is observed because these are laws related
to the next year's budget, which involve a lot of detail and debate. The unusually high debate days in
                                                     80
       To formally investigate the impact of the Constitutional Amendment, which allowed
lifting MP immunities, we used the data presented in Appendix Figures AF3 and AF4 and ran
regressions of the following form:
       (A3)  = 1   + 2  +  +  +  ,

where  , , and  are indices for laws, months, and years, respectively.  stands for the
number of days it took the Parliament to pass law  (which was passed in month  of year ).
  represents the period after the Constitutional Amendment.   is equal
to one for the months following the coup attempt in July 2016. We also control for the month
and year dummies in the regression, represented by  and  , respectively.
       The results are presented in Appendix Table A20. Columns (1)- (3) display the results
where the speed of ratification of treaties is analyzed. Columns (4) -(6) use the sample that
employs domestic laws. Consistent with Appendix Figure AF3, Appendix Table A20 shows that
the Constitutional Amendment had no impact on the speed of ratifications. On the other hand,
the coefficient of the Post-Treatment is about -1.6 in column (6). This indicates that the
enactment of the Constitutional amendment reduced the number of days it took to pass laws by
more than a day and a half, where the average is 2.2 days. Put differently, after the Parliamentary
action, which lifted the immunity of some MPs, the laws are passed 1.5 days faster than before,
presumably because of shorter and/or fewer debates in the Parliament. Although the increase in
the speed with which legislators pass laws makes the Parliament more efficient, if the quality of
these laws is lower (in their comprehensiveness or in the propensity to be challenged in courts) in
comparison to the quality that would have been observed had these laws been enacted slower,
and with more deliberation, the welfare implications are unclear.




January 2017 was due to the discussions regarding another Constitutional Amendment that ultimately
resulted in Turkey switching to a Presidential system.
                                                    81
                                                                    Appendix Figure AF3
                                                    The Speed with which International Treaties are Ratified




                                 2
               Average No. Sessions to Pass a Law
                                           1.5



                                                                                                    3


                                                                8
                               1




                                                    1 16 5 16       2 5 6 5   4 3 2        79 155       11       21   2   5    34
                   .5            0




                                                    2016m1           2016m7      2017m1                 2017m7        2018m1

The vertical axis measures the average number of days the ratifications were discussed before being approved by the
Parliament. Each month corresponds to a month with at least one ratification, and the number below the dots
represents the number of ratifications in that month. The solid red vertical line marks the end of the pre-treatment
period (April 2016), and the dashed vertical red line indicates the coup attempt (July 2016).




                                                                                      82
                                                                                Appendix Figure AF4
                                                                        The Speed with which Laws are Passed




                                 8
                                                                                                   2                             2
               Average No. Sessions to Pass a Law
                                            6



                                                            2
                                                        2
                                                                                                                    2
                               4




                                                                                                                                                  3
                                                                    4
                                                                             4 2                                        1                             2
                                                                3                                                            4
                                                    3
                                                                                   6       8                    1
                   2




                                                                         3                     3       6                                                  4
                                                                                       3                                             3
                                                                                                                                             27
                                                                                                            6                            2
                                 0




                                                    2016m1                   2016m7            2017m1               2017m7           2018m1                   2018m7

The vertical axis measures the average number of days the laws were discussed before being approved by the
Parliament. Each month corresponds to a month with at least one law, and the number next to the dots represents the
number of laws in that month. The solid red vertical line marks the end of the pre-treatment period (April 2016), and
the dashed vertical red line indicates the coup attempt (July 2016).




                                  Appendix Table A20
 The Impact of the Constitutional Amendment on the Speed with which Laws Are Passed
                                  Ratifications                  Laws
                           (1)          (2)       (3)      (4)      (5)     (6)
   Post-Amendment         -0.02       -0.12      -0.19 -1.39*** -1.93* -1.64+
                         (0.02)      (0.07)     (0.12)   (0.53)   (1.15) (1.07)
   Post-Coup                                     0.11                      -0.52
                                                (0.08)                    (1.30)
   N                       383         383        383     108      108      108
   Year & Month FEs        No          Yes        Yes      No      Yes      Yes
   Mean of Y              1.01         1.01      1.01     2.22     2.22    2.22
The unit of observation is a piece of legislation. The outcome is the number of parliamentary sessions (days) it took
to pass this legislation. Post-Treatment (Post-Coup) indicates May 2016 (July 2016) and later. Ratification stands for
whether the legislation is for ratification of an international treaty. Robust standard errors are presented in
parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at 1%, 5% and 10% levels. The coefficient, denoted by
+, is significant at 13%.




                                                                                                       83
                        Appendix Section 6: Trust in Institutions


                                Appendix Figure AF5
  Provinces in the Eurobarometer Turkey Sample and Whether MPs from that Province
                                   Lost Immunity




                                                                                             Not in the sample
                                                                                             No MPs' Immunity is Lifted
                                                                                             Only some Gov. MPs' Immunity is
                                                                                             Only some Opp. MPs' Immunity is
                                                                                             Some of Both Gov. and Opp. MPs'



White: Not sampled in Eurobarometer
Light Gray: No MPs of this province lost immunity
Medium Gray: Some government bloc MPs but no opposition MPs of this province lost immunity
Dark Gray: Some opposition MPs but no government bloc MPs of this province lost immunity
Black: Some of both government and opposition bloc MPs of this province lost immunity




                                                    84
                        Appendix Table A21
Provinces in the Eurobarometer Turkey Sample and Whether MPs
                 from that Province Lost Immunity
                      =1 if Some Gov.     =1 if Some Opp.
                         Bloc MPs'           Bloc MPs'
                     Immunity is Lifted Immunity is Lifted
       Adana                  1                   1
       Agri                   0                   1
       Ankara                 0                   1
       Antalya                0                   1
       Aydin                  0                   1
       Balikesir              1                   1
       Bursa                  0                   1
       Erzurum                0                   0
       Gaziantep              1                   0
       Hatay                  1                   1
       Istanbul               1                   1
       Izmir                  1                   1
       Kastamonu              0                   0
       Kayseri                1                   1
       Kirikkale              0                   0
       Kocaeli                0                   0
       Konya                  1                   1
       Malatya                1                   1
       Manisa                 0                   1
       Mardin                 0                   1
       Samsun                 0                   1
       Sanliurfa              0                   1
       Tekirdag               0                   1
       Trabzon                0                   1
       Van                    0                   1
       Zonguldak              0                   1




                             85
