                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               MARKET POWER IN NEOCLASSICAL GROWTH MODELS

                                      Laurence M. Ball
                                     N. Gregory Mankiw

                                     Working Paper 28538
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28538


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2021




We are grateful to Robert Barro, Susanto Basu, Mark Gertler, and Michael Whinston for helpful
comments and discussion. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Laurence M. Ball and N. Gregory Mankiw. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Market Power in Neoclassical Growth Models
Laurence M. Ball and N. Gregory Mankiw
NBER Working Paper No. 28538
March 2021
JEL No. E13,E22,E62,H63,O41

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper examines the optimal accumulation of capital and the effects of government debt in
neoclassical growth models in which firms have market power and therefore charge prices above
marginal cost. In this environment, the real interest rate earned by savers is less than the net
marginal product of capital. We establish a new method for evaluating dynamic efficiency that
can be applied in such economies. A plausible calibration suggests that the wedge between the
real interest rate and the marginal product of capital is more than 4 percentage points and that the
U.S. economy is dynamically efficient. In addition, government Ponzi schemes can have different
implications for welfare than they do under competition. Even if the government can sustain a
perpetual rollover of debt and accumulating interest, the policy may nonetheless reduce welfare
by depressing steady-state capital and aggregate consumption. These findings suggest that even
with low interest rates, as have been observed recently, fiscal policymakers should still be
concerned about the crowding-out effects of government debt.


Laurence M. Ball
Department of Economics
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218
and NBER
lball@jhu.edu

N. Gregory Mankiw
Department of Economics
Littauer 223
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
ngmankiw@fas.harvard.edu
        This paper explores the role of market power in neoclassical models of economic growth
with a focus on the implications for the real rate of interest. Our analysis is based on a well-known
principle: When firms with market power set their prices as a markup over marginal cost, they also
choose a capital stock at which the marginal product of capital exceeds the cost of capital. Other
things being equal, this wedge between the marginal product of capital and the cost of capital
depresses the real interest rate.

        The link between market power and the real interest may be especially important in the
contemporary economy. Over the past few decades, the U.S. economy, along with many other
economies around the world, has experienced a dramatic decline in real interest rates. Many
observers have suggested that, during this period, markets have become less competitive, and
markups have increased. [See, for example, Philippon (2020) and De Loecker, Eeckhout, and
Unger (2020).] If they are correct, then increasing market power may be one reason for the
declining real interest rate. In this environment, understanding the role of market power may be
necessary to correctly interpret data on the real interest rate.

        The connection between market power and the real interest rate provides a new lens
through which to view fiscal policy and optimal national saving and investment. Discussions of
fiscal policy often emphasize that government budget deficits can impede economic growth by
crowding out capital. Recently, however, some observers have pointed to low real interest rates to
suggest that crowding out may now be of little concern. [See, for example, Blanchard (2019) and
Furman and Summers (2020).] The existence of market power calls this inference into question.
If market power is depressing the real interest rate, then the real interest rate does not reflect the
social value of additional capital.

        To make these points as simply as possible, we start by building on Solow's (1956) model
of economic growth and Phelps's (1961) analysis of optimal capital accumulation. The main
change we make to this textbook model is to add firms with market power. We show that this
amendment profoundly alters how the standard growth framework is applied to interpret the data,
especially data on the real interest rate. Market power can push the real interest rate below the
economy's growth rate. Under competition, this condition is associated with the overaccumulation
of capital--a condition known as dynamic inefficiency. But that is not the case in an economy
with market power.

        We produce a new method for evaluating dynamic efficiency in the presence of market
power. The method starts with measured capital income per unit of capital, which is commonly
used to gauge rates of return in competitive economies. It then applies two corrections. An estimate
of the typical markup in the economy corrects for the underpayment of capital that arises from
market power. An estimate of Tobin's q corrects for the fact that the national accounts include the
pure profits that firms receive in measured capital income.




                                                                                                    1 
 
        To get a sense for the practical importance of these effects, we calibrate this expanded
Solow model to roughly match data for the U.S. economy. If typical prices are marked up 20
percent over marginal cost, as some of the literature suggests, the real interest rate is more than 4
percentage points below the social return on capital. Correcting for the effects of market power
yields an estimate of the social return of more than 8 percent. Because this estimated social return
on capital is much higher than the economy's growth rate, it indicates that the U.S. economy is
dynamically efficient.

        After examining these effects in the Solow model, we consider the sustainability and
welfare effects of government debt. To so do, we build on the classic work of Diamond (1965) on
capital accumulation in an overlapping-generations model. Recall that, in competitive economies,
there is a close connection between dynamic efficiency and government Ponzi schemes. [See, for
example, O'Connell and Zeldes (1988).] If the real interest rate is below the growth rate, indicating
dynamic inefficiency, the government can run a permanent primary deficit: it can give a transfer
to every generation and roll over the resulting government debt forever. The crowding out that
results from the debt issuance increases welfare because the economy has more capital than is
optimal.

        This close connection between dynamic efficiency and Ponzi schemes breaks down in an
economy with market power. We show that if market power pushes the real interest rate below the
growth rate, the government can again run a Ponzi scheme. However, such a Ponzi scheme, though
feasible, may not be a free lunch. Even a successful Ponzi scheme may reduce welfare in the steady
state.

        The impact of a government Ponzi scheme on welfare depends on two effects. The first we
call the aggregate effect. Because government debt crowds out capital, it depresses aggregate
consumption if the net marginal product of capital exceeds the growth rate and increases aggregate
consumption in the opposite case. [This is parallel to the classic Phelps (1961) result.] The second
we call the generational effect: the introduction of government debt improves the allocation of
aggregate consumption between the young and the old. This effect is similar to the Pareto
improvement that can result from pay-as-you-go social security when the growth rate exceeds the
interest rate (Samuelson, 1958; Weil, 2008). In a competitive economy, the aggregate and
generational effects of debt work in the same direction. In an economy with market power, when
the economy's growth rate is greater than the real interest rate but less than the net marginal
product of capital, the two effects conflict.

        The relative size of the two effects depends on parameters. For example, the magnitude of
the generational effect depends on the intertemporal elasticity of substitution in consumption. If
that elasticity is small, the generational effect is small, and the aggregate effect dominates. More
generally, these findings show that, in the presence of market power, the real interest rate is a poor
guide by itself for judging the impact of increased government indebtedness.


                                                                                                    2 
 
        To be sure, while this paper studies the role of market power, the real interest rate and the
marginal product of capital can differ for other reasons. Capital returns are risky, and other things
being equal, the risk premium depresses the risk-free rate. [See, for example, Abel et al. (1989)
and more recently Barro (2020).] This phenomenon does not arise here because we consider
models with certainty. Of course, in the world, both uncertainty and market power influence the
real interest rate. But we believe we can best clarify matters by considering only one of these
forces. Just as much previous work has focused on the case of uncertainty without market power,
here we focus on the case of market power without uncertainty.

        Our analysis is related to several strands of the literature. Farhi and Gouria (2018) and Basu
(2019) note that market power can drive a wedge between the marginal product of capital and the
cost of capital, but they do not explore the implications for optimal capital accumulation or fiscal
policy. Judd (1997) suggests that imperfect competition can imply that the optimal tax on capital
is negative. He aims to use tax policy to correct the distortion that we take as given. Reis (2020)
examines debt policy in an economy where credit-market imperfections cause the interest rate to
fall below the marginal product of capital. Though the wedge in his model arises from a very
different source, his analysis shares with ours the importance of distinguishing between the social
return on physical capital and the private return on financial assets. Finally, much of the
endogenous growth literature, such as Aghion and Howitt (1992), emphasizes the role of market
power as a driver of technological innovation. By contrast, we follow in the neoclassical tradition
of taking technological change as given to explore the implications of market power for optimal
capital accumulation and fiscal policy.



The Solow Model with Market Power

       We incorporate market power into the Solow model in four steps. First, we consider the
behavior of individuals firms. Second, we imbed these firms into the standard Solow framework.
Third, we reconsider Phelps's conclusions about optimal capital accumulation in this model.
Fourth, we provide a numerical calibration to roughly match the U.S. economy.



The Behavior of Individual Firms

        The economy consists of N identical firms, each of which sells a differentiated product.
Each firm produces its good using capital, labor, and intermediate goods purchased from other
firms. The firm's output can be used as consumption, investment, or an intermediate good for other
firms.




                                                                                                    3 
 
       Following Rotemberg and Woodford (1995), we assume that producing one unit of the
firm's output requires one unit of a composite of capital and labor and  units of intermediate
goods. The composite is produced by the function

                            ,          

where Q is the composite (which in turn equals the quantity of the firm's output), K is capital, L is
labor, A is a measure of the state of labor-augmenting technology, X is a constant that represents
fixed overhead labor, and F() is homogenous of degree one. If X = 0, firms have constant returns
to scale. If X > 0, then because of this fixed cost, firms exhibit increasing returns to scale.1
Increasing returns to scale are not required for our analysis, but it is important to allow for this
possibility. A sizable markup with constant returns would imply implausibly high pure profits as
a share of national income. Similarly, intermediate goods are not crucial for the theory but are
important when calibrating the model to actual economies.

        Each firm has market power and charges a markup  over marginal cost:

                     MC

where P is the price of the firm's output. In this part of the paper, we take the markup as
exogenously given. The markup is presumably determined by the elasticity of demand and perhaps
other aspects of market structure, which for now we do not need to specify. To ensure the solution
to the model is well-behaved, we assume  < 1.

       Each firm hires labor at rate W and rents capital at rate R in competitive factor markets. It
also buys goods from other firms, which it uses as its intermediate goods, at price Pi. An extra unit
of output can be produced with either additional capital or additional labor, plus the necessary
intermediate goods. Therefore, cost minimization implies that

                                                  



where F1 and F2 are the partial derivatives of F() with respect to the first and second arguments.

        Because of the symmetry among the many identical firms, all firms' prices are the same,
so

                        .

As a result, the share of revenue each firm spends on intermediate goods equals the parameter .
Combining the last three equations, the price of output can be written as


                                  
1
  We use this formulation of fixed costs as overhead labor because it prevents fixed costs from vanishing in
importance as the economy grows.

                                                                                                          4 
 
                                                    
                                                              .
                         1                      1      

The price of the firm's output depends on its markup, the cost of capital and labor, its production
function, and the intermediate-goods share.

        To relate these firm-level variables to measures in the national income accounts, note that
the firm's real value added is its gross output Q minus the value of intermediate goods Q:

                      1                   1               ,       .

The marginal products of capital and labor in terms of value added are

                          1          


                       1                 .

From these equations and the preceding equation for P, we obtain

                                                       
                                 /              /

where

                         1        
                                  .
                         1       

Equivalently,

                             /
                   
                             

                             /
                                     .
                             

This equation shows the wedge  between the marginal products of capital and labor and their real
factor prices. This wedge plays a crucial role in what follows.

        The variable  can be interpreted as the economy-wide markup: the ratio of the price to the
social cost of producing a marginal unit of output. As Rotemberg and Woodford (1995) and Basu
(2019) emphasize, when expenditure on intermediate goods is a substantial share of firm revenue,
the economy-wide markup is much larger than the firm-level markup . This difference arises
because of double marginalization: the cost of producing intermediate goods is marked up
repeatedly along the chain of production. Hereafter, we work mostly in terms of the economy-

                                                                                                 5 
 
wide markup. The firm-level markup and the intermediate-goods share will return, however, when
we calibrate the model.

       The economy-wide markup determines the pure profits that accrue to firms. Each firm's
share of profits in its value added:

                            ­    ­ 
                                      .

Using the above relationships and Euler's theorem, we can express the profit share as

                            1
                    1             
                            

where =WL/(PY) is the labor share of value added. A firm's profit share depends on the economy-
wide markup  and the size of the fixed labor cost X relative to its labor input L. Though there may
be sizable pure profits in this economy, that need not be the case, depending on the magnitude of
the fixed cost.

       In this classical model, only relative prices matter. Therefore, without loss of generality,
we can hereafter normalize P, the price of output for these identical firms, to equal one.



The Aggregate Economy

        Now let's embed these firms with market power in an otherwise standard Solow growth
model as presented, for example, in the first chapter of Romer (2019). The economy's final output
is the sum of the valued added of the N firms. The economy's aggregate production function is

                        1         ,            

where Y, K, and L now represent aggregate output, capital, and labor. Because the firms are
identical and the function F() is homogenous of degree one, this aggregate production function
follows from the individual firms' production functions for value added.

        Final output can be used for consumption or investment. Labor is inelastically supplied and
grows at rate n. Technological progress increases A at rate g. The economy saves an exogenous
fraction s of output, and a fraction  of capital depreciates each period. To ensure balanced growth,
we assume the number of firms grows with the population:

                      

where  is a constant. Its reciprocal is the number of workers in each firm. As a result, the aggregate
production function becomes


                                                                                                    6 
 
                       1                     ,      1             .

      As is standard, we define AL to be the effective labor force, which grows at rate n + g. The
economy's production function per effective worker is

                                

where y= Y/(AL), k = K/(AL), and f (k) = (1 - )F(k, 1 ­ X). Throughout the analysis, we hold ,
, and X constant, so these arguments in the production function can be suppressed. Except for the
fixed cost and the correction for intermediate goods, the production function is standard. We
assume that f (k) > 0 and f (k) < 0.

       The equation for capital accumulation is also standard:

                                         ­                  .

Therefore, the steady-state capital stock k*, defined by dk/dt = 0, is determined by
                                                        
                                                           .

As is usual, output per effective worker is constant in steady state, and total output grows at rate
n + g. Notice that the markup  does not affect the steady-state capital stock and output. This result
follows from the Solow model's assumption of an exogenously fixed saving rate. The markup
does, however, affect the distribution of national income among capital, labor, and profit.

        The markup also affects real interest rate r. In particular, recall that each unit of capital is
paid the following:
                                
                                      
                             

where  is the economy-wide markup. The return on holding capital is R - . Arbitrage requires
that this return equals the return on holding a financial asset r. In other words, as is standard, the
rental price of capital R equals the cost of capital r + . Therefore,
                                         
                    
                                      

or
                                
                                         .
                             

This equation shows that, other things being equal, increased market power reduces the real
interest rate.

                                                                                                      7 
 
        In essence, market power reduces firms' demand for capital. Because the Solow model
assumes a fixed saving rate, the supply of capital is inelastic, so the reduced demand is reflected
in a lower cost of capital. Hence, the economy has a lower real interest rate. For example, suppose
that the gross marginal product of capital f  is 13 percent and the intermediate goods share  is
0.5--numbers consistent with our calibration below. Then an increase in the firm-level markup 
from 1.0 to 1.2 increases the economy-wide markup  from 1.0 to 1.5 and reduces the real interest
rate by 4.3 percentage points.



Dynamic Efficiency

      Let's now examine the optimal accumulation of capital. In this economy, steady-state
consumption per person is
                                            
                                               .

As a result, the consumption-maximizing steady-state capital stock, which Phelps (1961) dubbed
the Golden Rule capital stock, is determined by:
                     
                                    .

At the Golden Rule capital stock, the net marginal product of capital f  ­  equals the growth rate
of the economy n + g. If the saving rate is larger than necessary to yield this capital stock, the
economy is said to be dynamically inefficient because the economy can reduce saving and increase
consumption at all points of time. The existence of market power does not alter these familiar
results.

       How can one judge whether an economy is dynamically efficient? The key is to compare
the net marginal product of capital f  ­  with the economy's growth rate n + g. Because of
diminishing marginal product, if f  ­  < n + g, the economy has more capital than at the Golden
Rule steady state, and if f  ­  > n + g, it has less.

        The real interest rate might seem useful here. Under competition, the markup  equals one,
and the real interest rate equals the net marginal product of capital f  ­ . That is one reason why
comparisons of the real interest rate with the growth rate appear so often in discussions of
economic growth. This approach is not robust, however. With market power, the real interest rate
equals f / ­ . If f  ­  > n + g > f / ­ , an observer who assumed the economy is competitive
would measure the net marginal product of capital with the interest rate and erroneously conclude
that the economy is dynamically inefficient.

         Another approach to judging dynamic efficiency, rather than relying on the real interest
rate, is to measure the marginal product of capital with capital income per unit of capital. [For


                                                                                                 8 
 
example, see Abel et al. (1989)2 and Reis (2020).] But this approach does not solve the problems
introduced by market power. If capital income reported in the national accounts combines the net
payments to capital RK - K and pure profits Y, then the measured net return per unit of capital,
which we denote as m, is

                                               
                                                      .

This can be written as

                                            
                                               .
                            

As a gauge of the true marginal value of capital f  - , this measure suffers from two problems.
First, the markup reduces the payments to capital below its marginal product, which tends to
decrease the measured return on capital. Second, pure profits appear to accrue to capital, which
tends to increase the measured return on capital. These two biases push in opposite directions.
Depending on the size of the markup and the size of the fixed costs, either bias could be larger.

        We can, however, correct the measured return m for these biases. To do so, it is useful to
define steady-state Tobin's q: the ratio of the market value of existing firms to the replacement
cost of capital. If firms are infinitely lived,3 we can use the well-known Gordon growth formula to
evaluate their market value:

                                                          
                                                             .

The numerator is the firms' dividends: their income RK + Y minus their expenditure on capital
investment K + gK. (To maintain growth at rate g, firms must both replace depreciating capital
and increase their capital stocks at rate g.) Dividends are discounted at r ­ g because they grow at
rate g in the steady state. Tobin's q is

                               .



                                     
2
  In particular, Abel et al. (1989) recommend comparing the gross cash flow generated by capital [which in
our notation equals (m + )K] with gross investment [which equals (n + g + )K in the steady state]. In our
framework, this is equivalent to comparing net capital income per unit of capital m with the growth rate
n + g. Abel et al. show that this condition works under uncertainty and argue, therefore, that it is better than
drawing inferences from the risk-free real interest rate. Throughout their analysis, they assume constant
returns to scale and competitive markets.
3
  If firms are not infinitely lived but instead die with a hazard rate of d, then future profits are discounted at
rate r + d - g. All the expressions that follow remain the same, except g is replaced with g - d. Firm death
would also allow for the possibility of r < g without sending the market value of firms to infinity.

                                                                                                                9 
 
Using these expressions and the fact that R = r + , Tobin's q can be written as

                                 
                        1                  .

The excess of q over 1 equals the present value of pure profits from existing firms per unit of
capital.

       We can use now derive an expression for the marginal product of capital as a function of
variables that can be observed or estimated:

                                                .

This equation follows from the equation for q, the equation for m, and the equation for r. In the
competitive case in which  = 1 and q = 1, it simplifies to the familiar f  = m + . More generally,
we can infer the true marginal product of capital from the measured net return m with two
corrections. The multiplication by  accounts for the underpayment of capital that arises from
market power. The division by q accounts for the pure profits that firms receive.4

       In short, evaluating dynamic efficiency in an economy with market power is tricky. An
observer requires an estimate of the marginal product of capital. The real interest rate is an
unreliable gauge because it is depressed by market power. Measuring the return on capital as firm
income per unit of capital yields an estimate that can be either above or below the marginal product.
Fortunately, our last equation provides a way to estimate the marginal product of capital, which
we will apply shortly.



An Approximate Calibration to the U.S. Economy

       Let's now calibrate this model with some numbers that roughly describe the U.S. economy
today. We use the following figures as our baseline:

           The capital stock is three times annual output. That is, K/Y = 3.
           Depreciation is 15 percent of output. That is, K = .15Y.
           Measured gross capital income is 33 percent of gross output. That is, 1 -  = 0.33.
           Income per person grows at 2 percent per year. That is, g = .02.
           The share of intermediate goods in firm revenue is 50 percent. That is,  = 0.5
                                     
4
      Abel et al. (1989) note that q was averaging around 1 when they were writing, and they use that fact to
justify their assumption of constant returns and competition. We can now see the flaw in that inference. A
value of q equal to 1 could arise because fixed costs are large enough to eliminate pure profits, but that fact
by itself does not render the measured capital return m a useful gauge for the net marginal product of capital
f  - . If q equals 1, the measured capital return understates the net marginal product of capital if  > 1.

                                                                                                            10 
 
        The market value of firms is twice the replacement cost of their capital. That is, q = 2.
        Firms mark up prices 20 percent over their marginal cost. That is,  = 1.2.

The first five numbers are based on the national income accounts and related BEA data. The sixth
is based on estimates of Tobin's q as we write this paper in the year 2021. This number is hard to
pin down because stock market valuations vary substantially over time, so we will examine the
sensitivity of our conclusions to plausible variations in it.

        The most challenging number in the model to calibrate is the markup . Basu (2019) offers
a good overview of the literature on estimating markups, which has not reached a consensus. Many
studies find that markups have increased over the last several decades, though there is also not a
consensus whether that is the case and, if so, by how much. We use an estimate of 1.2 as our
baseline value of , but our sensitivity analysis allows  to range from 1.05 to 1.4. Most of the
markup estimates cited by Basu lie within this range.

        Taking these seven numbers as our baseline and applying the above equations, we can
infer the other key variables in the model. From the firm-level markup  and the intermediate-
goods share , the economy-wide markup  is computed using the equation derived earlier:

                       1           
                                   .
                       1          

We find that  equals 1.5.

       Our numbers for the depreciation share and the capital­output ratio imply that the
depreciation rate  is 5 percent. Using the definition of the labor share , we can then compute the
measured capital return m as follows:

                          1       
                                       .
                              /

From m, we then obtain an estimate of the marginal product of capital:

                                               .

Next, we compute the implied real interest rate:

                              .
                       

In the end, we find a real interest rate r of 4 percent, a measured net return on capital m of 6 percent,
and a social return on capital f  -  of 8.5 percent. This estimate of the social return on capital is
well above the economy's average growth rate of about 3 percent, indicating that the U.S. economy
is dynamically efficient.

                                                                                                      11 
 
        The share of pure profits in gross national income is calculated as follows:

                             1              / .

With the above numbers, pure profits are 6 percent of income. Given the intermediate-goods share
of one half, pure profits are 3 percent of each firm's gross revenue.

       Finally, we can also infer the degree of increasing returns, as measured here by the
percentage of workers in the economy that represent a fixed cost:

                              1
                         1      
                              
                                 .
                              

This equation follows from the earlier equation for an individual firm's profit share  and the fact
that there are N firms. For our calibration, NX/L is 41 percent. Such a large number is required to
explain why a substantial economy-wide markup of 50 percent generates relatively small pure
profits of only 6 percent of income. Given that the intermediate-goods share is one half and that
labor represents 67 percent of value added, the cost of this overhead labor is 14 percent of firms'
gross revenue.5

        It is worth noting the real interest rate in our calibration of 4 percent is higher than the
return on risk-free assets like Treasury bills, which in recent years have returned close to zero (and
sometimes less) in real terms. No doubt, this discrepancy occurs because our model excludes
uncertainty. As many authors have noted, other things being equal, uncertainty together with risk
aversion drives down the risk-free rate. It might be best to interpret the real interest rate in our
model not as the risk-free rate but as the average return on the financial assets that fund capital
accumulation. From this perspective, the calibrated estimate of 4 percent seems reasonable.

        Table 1 shows the sensitivity of our results to plausible changes in  and q. For comparison,
the top line shows the competitive benchmark ( = 1, q = 1). In this case, all three measures of the
rate of return (r, m, and f  - ) give an estimate of 6 percent, and there are no pure profits. The
second panel shows the effect of varying  around our baseline calibration ( = 1.2, q = 2), and the
third panel shows the effect of varying q. In all these cases, the real interest rate r is depressed
below the social return on capital f  - . Except in the case when the economy is close to
competitive ( = 1.05), the size of this wedge is at least 2 percentage points and often much larger.


                                   
5
  The results change only slightly if firms are not infinitely lived (see footnote 3). Suppose that firms live
on average for 50 years, so d is 2 percent. Then under our baseline, the real interest rate r is 3.0 percent, the
measured net return on capital m is 6.0 percent, and the social return on capital f  -  is 7.0 percent. Thus,
in this case, market power depresses the real interest rate below the social return on capital by 4.0 percentage
points. The profit share  is 9.0 percent, and the fixed cost NX/L is 36 percent. 


                                                                                                              12 
 
The social return on capital is always above the economy's average growth rate of about 3 percent,
often by a large margin, indicating dynamic efficiency.

       Table 2 shows what happens to the social return on capital f  -  as Tobin's q and the
markup  vary together. Here we exclude entries that would imply negative fixed costs (which
occurs when  = 1 and q > 0). Note that for every plausible combination of these parameters, the
estimated social return is substantial.

       The bottom line is that, when firms have market power, the social return on capital
necessary to gauge dynamic efficiency can be much larger than the real return earned by savers in
the economy. In our main calibration, the gap is more than 4 percentage points. The next section
examines what this conclusion implies for fiscal policy.




                                                                                               13 
 
Table 1

Sensitivity check

All numbers in the table are in percent.



                              r            m     f-           NX/L

Competitive benchmark

 = 1.0, q = 1                 6.0          6.0    6.0   0     0



Effect of varying  (with q =2)

 = 1.05                       4.0          6.0    4.9   6.0   5

 = 1.1                        4.0          6.0    6.0   6.0   18

 = 1.2 (baseline)             4.0          6.0    8.5   6.0   41

 = 1.3                        4.0          6.0   11.7   6.0   60

 = 1.4                        4.0          6.0   16.0   6.0   76



Effect of varying q (with  = 1.5)

q=1                           6.0          6.0   11.5   0     50

q = 1.5                       4.7          6.0    9.5   4.0   44

q = 2 (baseline)              4.0          6.0    8.5   6.0   41

q = 2.5                       3.6          6.0    7.9   7.2   39

q = 3.0                       3.3          6.0    7.5   8.0   38




                                                                   14 
 
Table 2

Sensitivity check, continued

All numbers in the table represent the net marginal product of capital f  -  and are in percent.




                = 1.0           = 1.05        = 1.1          = 1.2           = 1.3          = 1.4




q=1            6.0             7.2            8.4           11.5            15.4           20.7

q = 1.5        ---             5.7            6.8             9.5           13.0           17.6

q=2            ---             4.9            6.0             8.5           11.7           16.0

q = 2.5        ---             4.5            5.5             7.9           11.0           15.1

q = 3.0        ---             4.2            5.2             7.5           10.6           14.4




                                                                                                   15 
 
The Sustainability and Welfare Effects of Government Debt

       We now consider the effects of government debt in an economy with market power. For
this purpose, we move from the Solow model to Diamond's (1965) overlapping-generations
(OLG) model, a fully specified general equilibrium model with optimizing agents. The Diamond
model is a classic tool for analyzing fiscal policy.

        We focus on the questions of whether the government can run a Ponzi scheme and, if so,
to what effect. In other words, can the government run up a debt and then roll over the principal
and the accumulating interest forever? And if it can avoid future taxes to service or repay the debt,
how does such a policy affect welfare? This longstanding issue has received renewed interest
recently, with prominent economists suggesting that low interest rates make such a policy feasible
and perhaps desirable. [See, for example, Blanchard (2019).] As we will see, the answers to these
questions are markedly different in economies with market power than they are under competition.

        In competitive OLG models with certainty, the effects of fiscal policy are closed linked to
whether the economy is dynamically efficient. In that setting, dynamic efficiency can be
determined by comparing the growth rate of the economy with either the net marginal product of
capital or the real interest rate (because the two are equal). Under dynamic efficiency, a Ponzi
scheme is infeasible in the sense that the government must eventually raise future taxes to service
any debt it issues. Moreover, because government debt crowds out capital, it reduces welfare for
future generations. On the other hand, if the economy is dynamically inefficient, Ponzi schemes
are feasible, and issuing debt can yield a Pareto improvement by reducing the overaccumulation
of capital.

        As in the Solow model, the key effect of market power is to introduce a wedge between
the marginal product of capital and the real interest rate. This wedge raises the possibility that the
net marginal product of capital exceeds the economy's growth rate while the real interest rate is
less than the growth rate.6 In that case, the low interest rate allows the government to run a
perpetual Ponzi scheme by making debt-financed transfers to every generation. The scheme is
feasible because the debt­income ratio, rather than exploding, converges to a constant level. In
contrast to the competitive case, however, the feasibility of this Ponzi scheme does not imply that
it increases welfare. With the marginal product of capital above the growth rate, the crowding out
of capital reduces aggregate consumption, and the welfare loss from this effect can exceed the
welfare gains that individuals obtain from the transfers.




                                  
6
  Reis (2020) focuses on this scenario as well, though the wedge in his model comes from a credit-market
imperfection rather than from market power.

                                                                                                     16 
 
Assumptions

        Aside from the introduction of market power, our essential assumptions follow the
Diamond model. [See, for example, the second chapter of Romer (2019)]. A cohort of individuals
is born each period and lives for two periods. For simplicity, we assume that the number of
individuals in a cohort is constant over time and normalize it to one. An individual works when
young, receives earnings, and divides the earnings between consumption and saving. Saving is
used to buy capital and any bonds issued by the government. When old, the individual receives a
transfer from the government (which can be positive or negative) and consumes this transfer plus
the gross return on savings.7

        To introduce market power, we assume that each young person is a yeoman farmer who
produces and sells a differentiated good. A farmer produces her good using an endowment of one
unit of her own labor along with capital that she rents from the old in a competitive factor market.8
We assume the same production function as in the Solow model, except that we exclude
intermediate goods for simplicity. With one unit of labor, the farmer produces

                            ,       1          ,

where Y is output, K is the capital rented by the farmer, and the technology parameter A grows at
the rate g each period. We again use the notation of y = Y/A for output per unit of effective labor,
k = K/A for capital per unit of effective labor, and y = f(k) = F(k,1 - X) for the production function
in terms of y and k. Again, we assume that f (k) > 0 and f (k ) < 0.

       Each farmer consumes the goods produced by all the farmers. We let Ci denote an
individual's consumption of good i, with i distributed uniformly on [0,1]. Following the canonical
Dixit-Stiglitz (1977) model, a farmer's utility depends on a consumption aggregate C:




where  is the elasticity of substitution between different goods. The lifetime welfare of a farmer
born in period t is

                                ,                  ,   ,    0,

where Cy and Co are the farmer's levels of consumption C when young and old. In addition, the


                                         
7
      Our main results do not depend on whether the transfer is received when old or young. We assume it is
received when old because doing so will make it easier to see the equivalence between government debt
and unfunded social security.
8
    In our choice of pronouns, we assume the economy is entirely female, as in Themyscira. Our results are
robust if instead the farmers are male, non-binary, or a mixture of genders. 

                                                                                                        17 
 
utility function is

                                 ,   0.
                          1   
This functional form for U(C) implies a constant elasticity of intertemporal substitution 1/, which
is necessary for a steady state with balanced growth.

       The same aggregate of individual goods that produces one unit of consumption C can also
produce one unit of capital K. Therefore, as in the original Diamond model, one unit of
consumption is freely tradable for one unit of capital. Capital produced in period t is used in
production in period t + 1 and then fully depreciates.



Equilibrium in the Goods and Capital Markets

         In each period, a young farmer chooses a price for her good to maximize profit, which is
the difference between revenue from selling the good and the cost of renting capital to produce the
good. We can think of this profit as a mixture of wages for the farmer's labor and economic profits
derived from her market power.

        As is usual in the Dixit-Stiglitz model, the elasticity of demand for each farmer's product
equals the substitution parameter , and the profit-maximizing price equals the farmer's marginal
cost times a markup  = /( - 1). (Here, because there are no intermediate goods, the economy-
wide markup and the firm-level markup are the same.) In equilibrium, every farmer charges the
same price, produces the same level of output, and rents the same amount of capital. We normalize
the price of each farmer's good to one.

       Each farmer divides her consumption expenditure equally among all the differentiated
goods: Ci is the same for every good i. This fact and the definition of the consumption aggregate
C imply that C equals the common Ci, and that the price of a unit of C equals one, the price of an
individual good.

       With the prices of all goods equal to one, the condition for profit-maximization becomes
1 = (MC). Marginal cost MC is R/MPK, where R is the rental price of capital and MPK is the
marginal product of capital f (k). Therefore, as in the Solow model, R = MPK/. This condition
defines a farmer's demand for capital. The supply of capital is determined by the saving decision
made by the currently old generation in the previous period, as described below. The supply and
demand for capital determine the equilibrium value of R.




                                                                                                18 
 
Intertemporal Optimization

        Given the period-by-period equilibrium in the goods and capital markets, an individual
who is young in period t chooses a level of saving St to maximize welfare Vt. Saving is divided
between capital accumulation and purchases of government debt. The gross return on capital
equals the rental price of capital in the next period, Rt+1. In our non-stochastic model, the gross
return on government debt must also equal Rt+1 because capital and debt are perfect substitutes for
savers.

        The individual's budget constraint is

                    ,             ,   1                     1 

                    ,                         

where  is the transfer from the government to the old (or tax if  < 0). The first equation says
that consumption when young equals earnings (the farmer's output minus the cost of renting
capital) minus saving. The second equation says that consumption when old equals the return on
saving plus the transfer. We assume that the government announces the transfer t+1 in period t so
the individual accounts for it in choosing St.

      Given the utility function U(C), the first-order condition for a person's optimal
consumption path is

                    ,                     /
                                              . 2 
                        ,

The ratio of a person's consumption when old and young is determined by Rt+1 with an elasticity
equal to 1/, the elasticity of substitution between consumption in the two periods. This equation
and the budget constraint define Cy,t, St, and Co,t+1 in terms of the interest rate in periods t and t + 1,
the government transfer, and the level of Kt, which was determined in period t - 1.



Fiscal Policy

        We focus on the following fiscal policy, which is always feasible. Initially, the transfer 
is zero, and there is no government debt. Then, in some period t0, the government issues some
bonds, which it sells to the young, and uses the proceeds to make a positive transfer to the old (an
intervention announced at least one period prior to t0).9 Let B be the level of government debt. At
every t t0, the government keeps Bt/At constant at the level established in t0, which we call b, and
sets the transfer t as needed to achieve that outcome. A constant Bt/At means that debt increases
                                     
9
  If instead the policy is a surprise (a so-called MIT shock), some of the details that follow are different, but
the main results regarding the feasibility and welfare effects of the policy are the same.

                                                                                                              19 
 
at the same rate as productivity, which in steady state implies a constant ratio of government debt
to the economy's output.

       The transfers or taxes implied by this policy are determined as follows. The level of debt
evolves according to 

                                  

where the first term on the right is the interest and principal on the debt rolled over from the
previous period and the second is the current transfer. For t > t0, the government's policy of holding
b constant implies Bt = Atb and Bt-1 = At-1b = Atb/(1 + g), which lead to 

                            1            .
                                1

In a steady state with a constant R, there is a constant level of transfers per unit of effective labor,
 = /A:

                                    
                        1

where r = R - 1 is the net return on capital and the interest rate on debt.

         Notice that the sign of the steady-state  depends on g - r. If r > g, then  < 0: in steady
state, the government levies a perpetual tax to service the debt that it created through its transfer
in period t0. If r < g, however,  > 0: the government provides a perpetual transfer that is never
financed with taxes. In this case, the government runs a Ponzi scheme. This policy is feasible
because the debt­income ratio tends to fall when the economy's growth rate exceeds the interest
rate.

         The feasibility of a Ponzi scheme when r < g is a well-known result in OLG models. This
economy, however, differs from those in previous work that assumes competitive markets.
Because market power places a wedge between the marginal product of capital and the interest
rate, a Ponzi scheme may be feasible even if the economy is dynamically efficient. As we will see,
this difference has important implications for the welfare effects of government debt.



Debt and Steady-State Capital

         Let's now consider the evolution of the capital stock after period t0 when the government
first issues debt. An individual's saving in all periods t t0 is divided between government bonds
and investment in capital, which will be productive at t + 1. This implies that Kt+1 = St - Bt. As
described above, St is determined by an individual's optimal saving problem. The levels of Rt and
Rt+1, which appear in the individual's optimization problem, are determined in equilibrium by the

                                                                                                     20 
 
condition R = f (k)/, and the transfer t is determined by the condition that the government
maintains a constant level of b.

         In the Appendix, we use these results to derive an equation that defines Kt+1 as a function
of Kt and Bt. As is common in work on the Diamond model, we assume that this equation
determines a unique stable steady state for k, the level of capital per unit of effective labor, and
that k approaches the steady state monotonically. (This assumption implicitly puts restrictions on
the utility and production functions.) This steady state k* depends on b, the level of government
debt per unit of effective labor: k* = k*(b).

         While the condition defining k* is complex, our main results follow from a simple property
of k*:
                   
                         0.

That is, an increase in government debt reduces steady-state capital. This result is proved in the
Appendix. It is a conventional crowding-out effect: an increase in debt diverts part of saving from
capital accumulation to purchases of government bonds. We will see that all the steady-state effects
of debt on welfare, whether positive or negative, flow from this crowding out.



Steady-State Welfare

        To understand the effects of debt, it is useful to analyze the basic determinants of welfare
as follows. Consider the lifetime welfare of a person born in period t:

                              ,          ,    .        

In steady state, Cy,t = Atcy and Co,t+1 = At+1co, where cy and co are the consumption of the young and
old per unit of effective labor. We can rewrite Co,t+1 as At(1 + g)co. Aggregate consumption per
unit of effective labor is c = cy + co. Letting z equal co/cy, the ratio of consumption of the old and
young, we can write cy = c/(1 + z) and co = cz/(1 + z). Combining these expressions, the steady-
state welfare of a person born at t is

                      
                                                   1
                                                           . 3
                                  1               1

       The last equation shows that steady-state welfare can be expressed in terms of two
variables: c, aggregate consumption per unit of effective labor, and z, the old-to-young
consumption ratio. This result will prove to be helpful because both c and z are determined in
simple ways by k, the steady-state level of capital per unit of effective labor.

         Specifically, the steady-state level of c is determined by:

                                                                                                   21 
 
                            4 

                                   1           

where y and i are output and investment per unit of effective labor. The second line uses the fact
that investment equals capital in the following period, which is (1 + g) times capital in the current
period. This equation is the same as the equation for consumption per unit of effective labor in the
Solow model with the assumptions here that the depreciation rate is one and the population growth
rate is zero.

       An expression for z = co/cy follows from the first-order condition for an individual's
optimization, which in steady state is:

                  ,                    /
                               R           .
                      .

Using the facts that Cy,t = Atcy, Co,t+1 = At(1 + g)co, and R = f (k)/, we obtain:
                                   /
                                               1
                                                   . 5 
                                           1

The ratio z depends on the marginal product of capital f (k) because the marginal product
influences the real interest rate and hence an individual's allocation of resources over time.

        We now have a compact way to express steady-state welfare. Welfare is a function of
aggregate consumption per unit of effective labor c and the ratio z = co/cy, as shown by equation
(3). Both c and z are determined by capital per unit of effective labor k, as shown by equations (4)
and (5).



Welfare Effects of Debt

         How does this fiscal policy of issuing government debt affect welfare? The answer is
potentially different for different generations. At least one generation benefits: the generation that
is old in period t0 and therefore receives the first of the government transfers.

        To see this result, recall that the transfer at t0 is assumed to be positive, so the generation
that receives it can use the transfer to increase consumption. We have assumed that the transfer is
anticipated when that generation is young, so there is also a more subtle benefit: the extra resources
when old lead the generation to reduce their saving, which reduces the capital stock when they are
old and therefore increases the interest rate they receive on their saving. There is no adverse effect
on the generation; in particular, no crowding out of capital has yet occurred when they are young,



                                                                                                    22 
 
so there is no loss of earnings when young.10

        What are the effects of this debt on the welfare of future generations? We address this
question by examining the steady-state effects of debt. If the policy lowers steady-state welfare, it
obviously does not yield a Pareto improvement. In this case, the debt increases welfare in the short
run but imposes a long-run burden.

       Recall that steady-state welfare is determined by the variables c and z = co/cy, and that both
these variables are determined by k, the steady-state level of capital per unit of effective labor.
Therefore, the effect of the debt level b on steady-state welfare operates through its effect on k.
Differentiating the expression for welfare (3) yields:
                             
                                    ,
                                           .

This expression can in turn be expanded:
                                               
                                                            .

                            (+) (?)        (?) (-)   ( -)



                   AGGREGATE               GENERATIONAL
                     EFFECT                  EFFECT


Under this equation, we have written the signs of the various derivatives that determine dVt*/db
and labels to identify the two different effects of debt on steady-state welfare. To interpret this
equation, recall first that dk/db is negative: debt crowds out capital. This fact implies that the effect
of debt on welfare has the opposite sign of the effect of greater capital accumulation on welfare.
The effect of capital on welfare consists of two effects operating through aggregate consumption
c and the ratio z = co/cy. In general, both these effects have ambiguous signs.

        We call the effect operating through c the aggregate effect. It is clear from an individual's

                                    
10
   Formally, the welfare of an individual born in period t can be written as a function of the variables in her
budget constraint: Vt (Kt, Rt, St, Rt+1, t+1). For the first generation to receive a transfer, t = t0 - 1. The
introduction of debt and transfers at t0 does not affect Kt or Rt for this generation. It does affect an
individual's choice of St, but there is no welfare effect through this channel because Vt/St = 0 (this is the
first-order condition for optimal saving). The policy intervention increases t+1, and it increases Rt+1
because it reduces Kt+1. Both the higher t+1 and the higher Rt+1 raise the individual's consumption when
old and hence her welfare.


                                                                                                            23 
 
utility function that Vt*/c > 0: holding constant the distribution of consumption between the old
and young, higher aggregate consumption raises welfare. The sign of the aggregate effect is
determined therefore by the sign of dc/dk. Differentiating equation (4) yields a familiar condition:

                      0iff              1     .
                  
This condition is the usual one for dynamic efficiency: more capital increases consumption if the
net marginal product of capital [f (k) minus the depreciation rate of 1] exceeds the growth rate of
the economy. When this condition holds, the aggregate effect of capital on welfare is positive;
because debt crowds out capital, the welfare effect of debt through this channel is negative. When
the condition does not hold, debt raises welfare by reducing the overaccumulation of capital.

       We call the effect operating through z, the ratio of consumption when old and young, the
generational effect. It is easy to show using equation (5) that dz/dk < 0: more capital shifts
consumption away from the old. The reason is that more capital reduces the real interest rate and
thereby causes individuals to reduce consumption when old relative to consumption when young.

        We can derive Vt*/z using the expression for welfare, equation (3). Taking the partial
derivative with respect to z leads after some algebra (see Appendix) to
                  
                       0iff         .

Recall that dz/dk < 0 and dk/db < 0, which together mean that an increase in debt leads to an
increase in z. (The mechanism is that debt crowds out capital, which raises the interest rate, which
in turn causes individuals to shift their consumption toward old age). Combining these results, we
find that an increase in debt raises welfare through the generational channel if g > r and reduces
welfare through this channel if g < r.

        What explains this result? An increase in z for a given c means that more aggregate
consumption is shifted from the young to the old within each period. Over a person's life cycle,
she loses consumption when young and gains consumption when old. Because c grows at rate g in
steady state, the extra consumption that a person receives when old is 1 + g times the consumption
she loses when young. From the first-order condition for optimal saving, the marginal utility of
consumption when old equals 1/(1 + r) times the marginal utility of consumption when young.
Combining these facts, the ratio of the utility gain when old to the loss when young is
(1 + g)/(1 + r). The net effect on welfare is positive if this ratio exceeds one, that is, if g > r.

        We can build intuition for these results by recognizing that in this model, as in many OLG
models, the steady-state effects of government debt are the same as those of a pay-as-you-go social
security system. Specifically, in our model, the steady state with an amount b of debt per unit of
effective labor is equivalent to a social security system that transfers bAt from the young to the old
in period t. We can see this from the cash flows between an individual born in period t and the

                                                                                                   24 
 
government. In our steady state with debt, a young individual gives the government bAt to purchase
its debt. When that person is old at t + 1, she receives (1 + r)bAt = [(1 + r)/(1 + g)]bAt+1 on the
maturing debt and a transfer t+1 = At+1b(g - r)/(1 + g). The total receipts when old sum to bAt+1.
The individual's payment to the government when young and total receipts when old are the same
as in the social security system.

        To focus on the generational effect of government debt or social security, it is useful to
consider an endowment economy (Samuelson, 1958; Weil, 2008). In this setting, aggregate
consumption is fixed, and social security shifts consumption toward the old: the policy affects
welfare only through z. In an endowment economy, social security raises welfare if g > r, where r
is the interest rate on consumption loans (which in equilibrium are in zero supply and demand).
As in our model, g > r implies that the utility gain from shifting consumption toward the old
exceeds the loss when young. An endowment economy, however, does not have the aggregate
effect because fiscal policy cannot alter total consumption c.



The Overall Welfare Effect of Debt

        To summarize: Debt raises steady-state welfare through the aggregate effect if the
economy's growth rate g exceeds the net marginal product of capital f (k) - 1. Debt raises welfare
through the generational effect if g exceeds the interest rate r. Because of market power, we know
that r < f (k) - 1, so our results imply the following about the total effect of debt:
                                     
               1. If      , then         0.
                                                   
               2. If                    1, then       isambiguous.
                                              
               3. If         1     , then         0.

These results arise because the two effects of debt have the same sign in the first and third cases
and opposite signs in the second case.

       Note that the competitive benchmark of  = 1 implies r = f (k) - 1. In this case, the middle
case of opposing aggregate and generational effects disappears, and the two effects always have
the same sign. This result explains why previous research on debt in OLG models has not
emphasized the difference between the two effects: this work has studied competitive models in
which the two effects always operate in the same direction.

         For the middle case of r < g < f (k) - 1, the sign of the overall effect depends on how close
g is to r and to f (k) - 1. It also depends on the parameter  in the utility function and the shape of
the production function. Recall that 1/ is the elasticity of intertemporal substitution in
consumption. The key feature of the production function is the elasticity of substitution between

                                                                                                   25 
 
capital and labor, which we denote by . In general, the condition determining the sign of the net
welfare effect is complex, but we can gain some intuition from special cases:

               If                    1,
                           
                                   0as  or  ,

                            
                                   0as  0or  0.

That is, the net welfare effect of debt is negative for the middle range of g if the substitutability of
consumption when young and old is very low (a high ) and when the substitutability of labor and
capital in production is very high (a high ). The net welfare effect is positive in the opposite cases.

       These results, which are proved in the Appendix, arise because of how  and  affect dz/dk
and hence the size of the generational effect. Consider the limiting cases when or. In
both these cases, dz/dk0: the level of capital has no effect on the ratio of consumption when old
and young. That is, the generational effect vanishes, and debt affects welfare only through the
aggregate effect, which is negative because f (k) ­ 1 > g.

        To understand why dz/dk0 for high values of  and , recall that an increase in k reduces
r and the fall in r reduces z due to intertemporal substitution:

                               .

When , dz/dk0 because dz/dr0. Consumption when old and young are not substitutable,
so individuals keep the ratio fixed when the return on saving changes. When , dz/dk0
because dr/dk0. In this case, the production function approaches linearity, which implies a
constant f (k) and hence a constant r.



Conclusion

        This paper has addressed a classic topic: the optimal accumulation of capital and the
welfare effects of government debt in neoclassical growth models. Over the past several decades,
the thinking of many economists has been shaped by the Solow (1956) growth model and the
Diamond (1965) overlapping-generations model, which assume certainty and competitive
markets. In these models, the real interest rate reflects the marginal product of capital. As a result,
the low real interest rates experienced in recent years have tempted some economists to conclude
that capital accumulation now has only small social value at the margin and, therefore, that the
crowding out of capital by government debt is of little concern.


                                                                                                     26 
 
         The innovation in this paper is to expand these models to include firms with market power.
In this environment, the real interest rate earned by savers is below the net marginal product of
capital. For a plausible calibration of the expanded Solow model, the wedge between them can be
more than 4 percentage points. The calibration also suggests that the U.S. economy is dynamically
efficient. When market power is introduced into the Diamond model, government Ponzi schemes
can have different implications for welfare than they do under competition. Even if a perpetual
rollover of government debt and accumulating interest is feasible, the crowding out of capital may
still reduce steady-state welfare.

        Previous work has established a close connection between the feasibility of government
Ponzi schemes and the possibility of rational speculative bubbles. [See, for example, Tirole (1985),
O'Connell and Zeldes (1988), and Martin and Ventura (2018).] This equivalence suggests that in
an overlapping-generations model with market power, rational bubbles are possible whenever
government Ponzi schemes are. But unlike under competition, these bubbles may reduce welfare
because they could occur even in dynamically efficient economies. By diverting saving away from
capital accumulation, bubbles may depress aggregate consumption. This topic could be addressed
in future research.

       Much previous work on dynamic efficiency and Ponzi schemes has stressed the role of
uncertainty about capital returns. Under uncertainty, the risk-free real interest rate is below the
expected marginal product of capital, and attempted Ponzi schemes by the government are risky
(Abel et al., 1989; Ball, Elmendorf, and Mankiw, 1998; Blanchard 2019). In this paper, we abstract
from these issues by considering models with certainty. A more realistic analysis of the U.S.
economy would include both uncertainty and market power. We also leave that topic for future
work.




                                                                                                 27 
 
APPENDIX

Determination of the Steady-State Capital Stock

       Combining an individual's first-order condition for optimal saving, equation (2), and the
budget constraint, equation (1), leads to an expression for saving:

                            ,      1                      
                                                                     .
                                       1   

To study the dynamics of the capital stock, we substitute St = Kt+1 + Bt and
t+1 = At+1[1 - Rt+1/(1 + g)]b into the last equation. We also use R = f (k)/ and divide by At to
derive a relationship between kt and kt+1, the levels of capital per unit of effective labor in periods
t and t+1:

                                                              
           1                       1                                          1                     
                                                                                            


                                                                     .
                                                               

In this equation, notice that kt+1 and b appear only on the left side and kt appears only on the right.
We will therefore write the equation as H(kt+1,b) = J(kt), where H() and J() are the two sides of the
equation.

          We assume that this equation defines a unique kt+1 for a given kt. We also assume that the
dynamics of the implied functional relationship kt+1(kt) have a unique stable steady state, k*, and
that k converges monotonically to k*. These conditions require 0 < dkt+1/dkt < 1 at kt = k*, which
holds if utility and production functions are sufficiently well-behaved. (One much-studied case
that satisfies this condition is a Cobb-Douglas production function and  = 1, that is, logarithmic
utility.)



The Effect of Debt on Steady-State Capital

        Using the notation developed above, the steady-state level of capital per unit of effective
labor, k*, is defined by H(k*,b) = J(k*). The effect of debt on k* is given by

                   
                         

                                

                                                                                                    28 
 
with all derivatives evaluated at k*. Using the formula for H(), the numerator of this expression is

                                            
                         1      1                                0.
                                               

It is easy to see that dJ/dk > 0. Because dkt+1/dkt = (dJ/dkt)/(H/kt+1), our assumption that
0 < dkt+1/dkt < 1 at the steady state implies H/k > dJ/dk. Therefore, the denominator of dk*/db is
negative. Together these results imply
                   
                         0.

That is, a higher level of debt reduces steady-state capital.



The Sign of the Generational Effect

        We show above that the sign of the generational effect of debt on welfare is the same as
the sign of Vt*/z, where Vt*(c,z) is given by equation (3). Differentiating equation (3) yields
                      
                                                         1                                      1
                                    ,                                            ,   1   
                                                     1                                      1

                                        ,                    ,        1      .

The first-order condition for optimal consumption implies U (Cy,t) = RU (Co,t+1). Substituting
this fact into the previous equation and simplifying yields:
                   
                                .

As claimed in the text, Vt*/z has the same as g ­ r.



Special Cases for the Effect of Debt on Steady-State Welfare

        As described in the text, if r < g < f (k) ­ 1, the net effect of government debt on steady-
state welfare is ambiguous because the aggregate effect is negative but the generational effect is
positive. However, we can determine the net effect in the limiting cases in which 1/, the
intertemporal elasticity of substitution in consumption, or , the elasticity of substitution between
capital and labor in production, approach zero or infinity.

       In each of these cases, the term dz/dk approaches zero or infinity. In the equation for
dVt*/db, dz/dk affects the size of the generational effect. One can show that both dc/dk and

                                                                                                    29 
 
(Vt*/c)/(Vt*/z), the ratio of the marginal effects of c and z on utility, remain bounded away
from zero and infinity. Therefore, if dz/dk approaches zero, the generational effect vanishes in
importance and the aggregate effect dominates, implying dVt*/db < 0. The opposite occurs if dz/dk
approaches infinity.

       To determine the behavior of dz/dk, we use the fact that k affects z through the interest rate
r:

                               .

To see the effect of the parameter , notice first that this utility function parameter does not affect
dr/dk, which is determined by the production function and the markup . The expression for z,
equation (5), can be written as

                        1
                                       
                        1

which implies

                           1
                                          .
                           1

Combining the last two equations yields

                                   .
                           1

We consider the effect of varying  while holding constant the steady-state level of capital, and
hence z. (Implicitly this requires an adjustment in .) We can see that if , dz/dr  0. In this
case, dz/dk0 and the generational effect vanishes. If 0, dz/dr. In this case, dz/dk and
the generational effect dominates the aggregate effect.

       To see the effect of the elasticity of substitution in the production function, , note again
that

                               .

The term dz/dr does not depend on the production function, so the effect of  on dz/dk depends on
its effect on dr/dk. We know r = f (k)/ ­ 1, so dr/dk = f (k)/. We consider the effect of changing
 while holding constant the equilibrium y, k/y, and capital income, which means that f (k) changes
as  changes. In essence, the elasticity of substitution determines how rapidly diminishing returns
set in.

                                                                                                   30 
 
       As , f (k)0 (the production function becomes linear), so dr/dk0 and dz/dk0. The
generational effect vanishes. As 0, f (k) (the production function approaches Leontief), so
the generational effect dominates the aggregate effect.




                                                                                        31 
 
References

Abel, Andrew B., N. Gregory Mankiw, Lawrence H. Summers, and Richard J. Zeckhauser, 2019.
"Assessing Dynamic Efficiency: Theory and Evidence," The Review of Economic Studies 56 (1):
1­19.

Aghion, Philippe, and Peter Howitt, 1992. "A Model of Growth Through Creative Destruction,"
Econometrica 60 (2): 323-351.

Ball, Laurence, Douglas W. Elmendorf, and N. Gregory Mankiw, 1998. "The Deficit Gamble," Journal
of Money, Credit and Banking 30 (4): 699-720.

Barro, Robert J., 2020. "r minus g," NBER working paper no. 28002.

Basu, Susanto, 2019. "Are Price-Cost Markups Rising in the United States? A Discussion of the
Evidence," Journal of Economic Perspectives 33 (3): 3-22.

Blanchard, Olivier, 2019. "Public Debt and Low Interest Rates," The American Economic
Review 109 (4): 1197-1229.

De Loecker, Jan, Jan Eeckhout, and Gabriel Unger, 2020. "The Rise of Market Power and the
Macroeconomic Implications," The Quarterly Journal of Economics 135 (2): 561-644.

Diamond, Peter A., 1965. "National Debt in a Neoclassical Growth Model," The American Economic
Review 55 (5): 1126­1150.

Dixit, Avinash K., and Joseph E. Stiglitz, 1977. "Monopolistic Competition and Optimum Product
Diversity," The American Economic Review 67 (3): 297­308.

Farhi, Emmanuel, and François Gourio, 2018. "Accounting for Macro-Finance Trends: Market
Power, Intangibles, and Risk Premia," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. Fall: 147-223.

Furman, Jason, and Lawrence H. Summers, 2020. "A Reconsideration of Fiscal Policy in the Era
of Low Interest Rates," working paper.

Judd, Kenneth L., 1997. "The Optimal Tax Rate for Capital Income is Negative," NBER working
paper 6004.

O'Connell, Stephen, and Stephen Zeldes, 1988. "Rational Ponzi Games," International Economic
Review 29 (3): 431-450.

Martin, Alberto, and Jaume Ventura, 2018. "The Macroeconomics of Rational Bubbles: A User's
Guide," Annual Review of Economics 10 (1): 505-539.

                                                                                             32 
 
Phelps, Edmund, 1961. "The Golden Rule of Accumulation: A Fable for Growthmen," The
American Economic Review 51 (4): 638-643.

Philippon, Thomas, 2020. The Great Reversal: How America Gave Up on Free Markets, Harvard
University Press.

Reis, Ricardo, 2020. "The constraint on public debt when r < g but g < m," working paper, London
School of Economics.

Romer, David, 2019. Advanced Macroeconomics, fifth edition, New York: McGraw-Hill.

Rotemberg, Julio J., and Michael Woodford, 1995. "Dynamic General Equilibrium Models with
Imperfectly Competitive Product Markets," in Frontiers of Business Cycle Research, edited by
Thomas F. Cooley, 243­93. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Samuelson, Paul A., 1958. "An Exact Consumption-Loan Model of Interest with or without the
Social Contrivance of Money," Journal of Political Economy 66 (6): 467-482.

Solow, Robert M., 1956. "A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth, The Quarterly
Journal of Economics 70 (1): 65­94.

Tirole, Jean, 1985. "Asset Bubbles and Overlapping Generations," Econometrica 53 (6): 1499­1528.

Weil, Philippe, 2008. "Overlapping Generations: The First Jubilee," Journal of Economic
Perspectives 22 (4): 115-34.




                                                                                               33 
 
