                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   DO MONETARY POLICY FRAMEWORKS MATTER IN LOW INCOME COUNTRIES?


                                           Alina Carare
                                         Carlos de Resende
                                         Andrew T. Levin
                                          Chelsea Zhang

                                        Working Paper 28536
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w28536



                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2021


Carare is a deputy division chief in the Western Hemisphere Department at the International
Monetary Fund (IMF). De Resende is assistant director of the IMF's Africa Technical Institute
in Mauritius. Levin is a professor of economics at Dartmouth College, research associate of the
NBER, and international research fellow of the Centre for Economic Policy Research (CEPR).
Zhang is an associate at Morgan Stanley. This study is part of an IMF research project on
macroeconomic policy in low-income countries supported by the U.K.'s Department for
International Development, and was initiated when Levin was a visiting scholar at the IMF and
Zhang was an IMF staff member. We appreciate helpful comments from Rahul Anand, Andrew
Berg, Ravi Balakrishnan, Tamim Bayoumi, Corinne Delechat, Christopher Erceg, Gaston Gelos,
Inci Otker, Chris Papageorgieou, and other IMF colleagues. We are grateful to Laila Boufraine
and Xiomara Jordan for editorial assistance. The authors have no financial interests nor any other
conflicts of interest related to this study. The views expressed here are those of the authors and
do not necessarily represent the views of the IMF, the IMF Executive Board, IMF management,
or any other person or institution, nor do these views necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau for Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not
been peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that
accompanies official NBER publications.
© 2021 by Alina Carare, Carlos de Resende, Andrew T. Levin, and Chelsea Zhang. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Do Monetary Policy Frameworks Matter in Low Income Countries?
Alina Carare, Carlos de Resende, Andrew T. Levin, and Chelsea Zhang
NBER Working Paper 28536
March 2021
JEL Codes: E02, E52, E58, O23

                                            ABSTRACT

Microeconomic evidence indicates a very high frequency of price adjustment in low income
countries (LICs), raising the question of whether LICs may be reasonably characterized as
exhibiting monetary neutrality. To address this question, we analyze a cross-country panel dataset
of 79 LICs over the period 1990 to 2015 to assess the impact of external shocks on real GDP
growth, and we find highly significant differences between LICs where the central bank targets
monetary aggregates or inflation compared to LICs that maintain rigid nominal exchange rates.
We also conduct an event study of the surprise devaluation of the Central African Franc (CFA)
in January 1994 and find that it had highly significant effects on the output growth of 10 CFA
countries relative to 18 similar countries outside the CFA zone. Consequently, the hypothesis of
monetary neutrality is decisively rejected, and these findings provide strong support for the role of
monetary policy frameworks in fostering price stability and macroeconomic stability in LICs.



Alina Carare                                          Carlos de Resende
Western Hemisphere Dept.                              Africa Technical Institute
International Monetary Fund                           International Monetary Fund
Washington, DC 20431                                  Washington, DC 20431 USA
acarare@imf.org                                       cderesende@imf.org

Andrew T. Levin                                       Chelsea Zhang
Dartmouth College and NBER                            Morgan Stanley
Economics Department                                  New York, NY 10019 USA
Hanover, NH 03755 USA                                 chelsea.zhang1@morganstanley.com
andrew.t.levin@dartmouth.edu
        Figure 1: Monthly Frequency of Price Adjustment and Levels of Development




           Sources: See Appendix I.


1. Introduction
In recent years, numerous low-income countries (LICs) have been engaged in substantial reforms
to strengthen their monetary policy frameworks, with technical support from the International
Monetary Fund and other policy institutions in higher-income economies. 1 In particular, many
LICs have been moving towards frameworks that foster price stability while allowing for greater
exchange rate flexibility. Nonetheless, the analytical and empirical basis underpinning these efforts
has remained relatively unclear.

Indeed, one plausible view is that LICs could be characterized by monetary neutrality. As shown
in Figure 1, the available evidence suggests a much higher frequency of price adjustment in LICs
compared to advanced countries or emerging market economies (EMEs). Thus, as in the earlier
literature on real business cycle (RBC) models, one might simply presume that economic and
financial transactions in LICs are conducted in spot markets with flexible prices. 2 Under that


  1
    International Monetary Fund (2015).
  2
    Aguiar and Gopinath (2007) suggested that macroeconomic data for developing countries could be interpreted in
terms of an RBC model driven primarily by productivity shocks, whereas García-Cicco, Pancrazi, and Uribe (2010)
found that such a model could not explain key patterns in macroeconomic data for Argentina and Mexico.
                                                          1


assumption, changes in money or nominal interest rates would be fully reflected in the domestic
price level, while the determination of real economic activity in LICs would be unrelated to the
choice of nominal anchor or other characteristics of the monetary policy framework. 3

In this paper, we conduct empirical analysis to assess whether the characteristics of monetary
policy frameworks in LICs have significant effects on real economic activity. We follow a two-
pronged strategy: (i) reduced-form regression analysis of the impact of external shocks in a large
cross-country panel dataset, and (ii) event study analysis of the surprise devaluation of the Central
African Franc (CFA) in January 1994. Both aspects of our analysis are aimed at estimating and
testing reduced-form relationships, thereby avoiding any structural assumptions about the type and
degree of nominal rigidities in LICs.

Our regression methodology follows Jorda (2005) in estimating the lagged effects of external
shocks on real GDP growth. For this purpose, we use a cross-country panel dataset of 79 LICs
over the period from 1990 to 2015, and we focus on three types of external shocks that are highly
relevant for LICs and that can reasonably be viewed as exogenous with respect to domestic
developments in LICs: unanticipated changes in world GDP, shifts in the terms of trade, and
fluctuations in the price of oil. 4 Next, we compare the estimated coefficients in the reduced-form
regressions to determine whether the impact of these external shocks is linked to the monetary
policy framework. In particular, we interact the impact of the shock with a dummy constructed
based on the classification based on the IMF's AREAER database, to reflect the difference in
impact in economies that de facto targeting monetary aggregates or inflation with the ones
targeting exchange rate (in different degrees) to ensure price stability. Failure to find a statistically
different impact across alternative monetary policy frameworks would be consistent with the
money neutrality hypothesis.

Our event study analysis of the CFA devaluation encompasses 28 Sub-Saharan African (SSA)
LICs. That event can be interpreted as an unanticipated monetary policy shock and hence provides
an ideal "natural experiment" for assessing the hypothesis of monetary neutrality, because that


  3
    See Kydland and Prescott (1980) and Long and Plosser (1981).
  4
    IMF (2005) shows that country specific shock contributed the most to output growth volatility until 2000, and that
output growth volatility declined over time in developing countries. IMF (2011) emphasizes that there is mixed
evidence on the relative importance of external versus idiosyncratic shocks in explaining output volatility in LICs,
and that external shocks contribute to large output losses and protracted growth slowdowns in LICs.
                                                            2


hypothesis implies that the CFA devaluation would have a negligible impact on real GDP growth.
Thus, we use a difference-in-difference approach to test whether the shock had a significant effect
on real GDP growth of 10 countries within the CFA zone compared to a control group of 18 SSA
countries with broadly similar characteristics apart from maintaining their own independent
currencies and monetary policy frameworks.

Our findings decisively reject the hypothesis of monetary neutrality and provide strong support for
the role of monetary policy frameworks in fostering macroeconomic stability in LICs. Surprises
in global GDP, shifts in the terms of trade, and fluctuations in the price of oil all have a significant
real output effect in countries with rigid nominal exchange rates, and the magnitude of those effects
is significantly larger than in LICS that target monetary aggregates or inflation. These results are
robust to various specifications, control variables, and subsamples of countries used. Moreover,
similar results are evident for the subsample of very low income LICs, indicating that monetary
policy frameworks matter in those economies as well. Similarly, our event study indicates a highly
significant differential between the real GDP growth rates of countries in the CFA zone compared
to the control group over the two-year period following the devaluation of the CFA franc.

Our regression analysis builds on the seminal work of Broda (2004), who analyzed the economic
impact of terms of trade shocks using a panel dataset of 75 developing countries (including 30
LICs) over the period from 1973 to 1996 and found highly significant differences between regimes
with fixed vs. flexible exchange rates. 5 The results of our event study analysis are broadly
consistent with the findings of Hoffmaister et al. (1998), who estimated a structural vector
autoregression (VAR) using panel data for sub-Saharan African countries from 1971 to 1993 and
found that external shocks contributed to greater output volatility in the eight CFA zone members
compared to the other fifteen countries in their sample.




  5
     Edwards and Levy Yeyati (2005) analyzed terms of trade shocks in a larger panel dataset but did not report
disaggregated results for LICs. Kose et al. (2003), Raddatz (2007) and Barrot et al. (2018) used panel data to analyze
the influence of external shocks but did not assess the role of monetary policy frameworks. Calderón and Fuentes
(2014) analyzed business cycles in advanced economies and EMEs but their sample did not include any LICs. Rose
(2014) studied the impact of the global financial crisis in a large panel dataset but did not report disaggregated results
by level of development; see also Terrone (2020).
                                                             3


Finally, our empirical approach is complementary but distinct from other recent studies that have
used structural VAR models or dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) models to analyze
macroeconomic data for developing economies. 6

The remainder of our paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the methodology of our
reduced-form regression analysis. Section 3 summarizes the characteristics of the panel dataset.
Sections 4, 5, and 6 provide the results for global demand shocks, terms of trade shocks, and oil
price shocks, respectively. Section 7 presents our event study analysis of the January 1994 CFA
devaluation. Section 8 concludes.

2. Methodology

Given the wide variation in the frequency of monthly price changes in LICs, we set up a research
strategy allowing us to be agnostic about the degree of price stickiness in LICs. The null hypothesis
we are testing is that external shocks would have the same impact on domestic output growth in
every LIC once we control for differences in their real economic structure. This hypothesis is
consistent with an absence of, or much smaller, nominal rigidities (price stickiness, information
setting, incomplete knowledge). By contrast, under the alternative hypothesis that monetary policy
frameworks matter for LICs, we would expect to find that the domestic impact of external shocks
differs across LICs depending on the characteristics of each country's monetary policy framework.

To estimate the dynamic response of GDP growth to specific shocks, we use a parsimonious, single
equation model. This approach, like Jordà (2005), is a flexible alternative to VARs to estimating
impulse-response functions without imposing the dynamic restrictions embedded in VAR
specifications. It is particularly suited to capture nonlinearities in dynamic responses. In particular,
our analysis is focused on reduced-form shocks, which are a composite of the underlying structural
shocks and don't require any identifying assumptions, and as opposed to most of the literature we
do not rely on any specific economic theory or macro model. By construct, an approach that
focused on structural shocks would require a set of identifying assumptions, which might be
particularly problematic for LICs where the existing set of macro models may not be very suitable.




  6
     For structural analysis of monetary transmission mechanisms in LICs, see Mishra and Montiel (2012), Portillo et
al. (2016), Barajas et al. (2018), Berg and Portillo (2018), and Li et al. (2019). For structural analysis of the effects of
government spending in LICs, see Shen et al. (2018).
                                                        4


Our strategy is to uncover the effect of innovations in the real GDP growth, according to the
monetary policy framework, through the following equation:

yi,t+k ­ yi,t = i,k + t,k + k* 1*FE(xi,t)*MP_ERi,t + k* 2*FE(xi,t)*(1-MP_ERi,t) +  z i,t + ei,t,k

where yi,t is the logarithm of real GDP for country i in year t, and yi,t+k ­ yi,t is the percent change
in real GDP from year t to year t+k. The country-specific and time-specific effects are denoted by
i,k and t,k , respectively. FE(xi,t) denotes the forecast error for a specific exogenous variable xi,t.
The vector of control variables is denoted by z i,t. 7 The binary indicator MP_ERi,t denotes the
monetary policy framework, i.e., MP_ERi,t = 1 if country i has a rigid exchange rate during year
t, and MP_ERi,t = 0 if country i targets monetary aggregates or inflation during year t. The pair of
coefficients k (k=1,2) allow us to construct the impulse response function (IRF) of real GDP yi,t+k
to a specific shock xi,t at a horizon of k years. Since forecast error variance increases rapidly with
the forecast horizon, considering values of k exceeding 2 years would add unnecessary noise and
diminish the prospect of obtaining any statistically significant or economically meaningful results.

In this analysis, we use specific shocks that are highly relevant for LICs, namely, surprise changes
in global demand, terms of trade, and oil prices. 8 If there is a significant response in the impact
(coefficient of the monetary policy framework dummy interacted with the shock), for certain type
of frameworks, and if the difference in impact is statistically significant according to the monetary
policy framework used, then the design of the monetary policy framework matters in LICs.

The vector of control variables is specified as follows. First, we control for the impact of wars,
because output growth volatility in LICs, especially sub-Saharan African LICs, depends a lot of
internal or external conflicts, and we want to ensure that the results do not reflect this causality
rather than a different growth impact due to the monetary policy framework employed. Second,
when we test for terms of trade and oil price shocks, we control for the role of the external demand,
to ensure we identify only the impact of these shocks on output growth, and not of a change in
external demand. Third, to ensure that certain characteristic of the countries do not determine
endogenously the choice of a certain monetary policy regime, and therefore alter the impact of the



7
 Introducing lag domestic GDP growth as a control variable would reduce autocorrelation in the error term at the
expense of making more difficult to disentangle the difference in the impact of the shock relative to the monetary
policy framework. To account for the possibility of autocorrelation in residuals we used robust standard errors.
  8
    We ensure that we capture in each estimation a country that has the same framework at year t, and t+1.
                                                            5


shocks on output growth, we also control for those characteristics. Moreover, we control for
outliers, and in the case of the world GDP shock we also show the results for the poorest LICs.

Wald tests are used first to assess the statistical difference between the effect of xi,t on yi,t across
different monetary policy frameworks. In other words, we test to see if 1  2. Afterwards, we test
our baseline hypothesis, that the monetary policy framework does not have a differentiated impact
of the shock on growth. In other words, we test to see if 1 = 0, 2 = 0 and 1 - 2 = 0.



                               Table 1: List of Low-Income Countries (LICs)
                                                                 y
         Afghanistan                     Albania                        Angola                     Armenia
         Azerbaijan                    Bangladesh                       Benin                       Bhutan
           Bolivia                    Burkina Faso                     Burundi                   Cabo Verde
          Cambodia                     Cameroon                Central African Republic              Chad
          Comoros            Congo, Democratic Republic of the   Congo, Republic of              Côte d'Ivoire
           Djibouti                     Dominica                        Eritrea                    Ethiopia
        Gambia, The                      Georgia                        Ghana                      Grenada
           Guinea                     Guinea-Bissau                    Guyana                        Haiti
          Honduras                        India                         Kenya                       Kiribati
       Kyrgyz Republic                 Lao P.D.R.                      Lesotho                      Liberia
         Madagascar                      Malawi                        Maldives                      Mali
         Mauritania                     Moldova                        Mongolia                  Mozambique
          Myanmar                         Nepal                       Nicaragua                      Niger
           Nigeria                       Pakistan                Papua New Guinea                  Rwanda
           Samoa                  São Tomé and Príncipe                Senegal                   Sierra Leone
       Solomon Islands                  Sri Lanka                      St. Lucia        St. Vincent and the Grenadines
            Sudan                       Tajikistan                     Tanzania                  Timor-Leste
            Togo                          Tonga                        Uganda                     Uzbekistan
           Vanuatu                      Vietnam                         Yemen                       Zambia


3. Data
Our analysis encompasses all countries that were classified as LICs at any point during the
period 1990 to 2015; these countries are listed in Table 1. However, our panel dataset only
includes observations for the years in which each country was classified as a LIC. Therefore,
the panel is not fully balanced, and its cross-sectional dimension evolves over time, with
79 countries as of 1990 and only 60 countries as of 2015. 9

Our monetary policy framework indicator distinguishes between (a) regimes that rely primarily
on the exchange rate as the nominal anchor and (b) regimes that target monetary aggregates or



  9
      The sources for the series used in our panel data analysis are indicated in Appendix II.
                                                          6


inflation. 10 The first group includes countries defined in the Annual Report on Exchange
Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions (AREAER, an IMF database) as following a monetary
policy framework where the exchange rate serves as the nominal anchor. 11 For about one-third
of the observations in our sample, the monetary policy framework is focused on targeting money
or inflation; for all other observations, the monetary policy framework is focused on exchange
rate stability. 12 We have verified that our key conclusions are robust to alternative classifications,
and more granular results, varying for inflation versus monetary versus exchange rate targeting
are available on request from the authors. As customary in the literature one observation is
constituted by the framework of a country for a given year, as listed in the AREAER.

The AREAER classification of monetary policy frameworks uses a transparent and consistent
methodology that incorporates judgments of the national authorities as well as Fund country teams.
Of course, occasional misclassifications could occur; for example, Nigeria has been classified as
a monetary targeting regime even though it was regularly intervening in the foreign exchange
market. Such misclassifications would add noise to the data and tend to reduce the statistical
significance of the results. Consequently, our results may be reasonably viewed as providing a
lower bound for the true importance of monetary policy frameworks in LICs.

To construct the shock series, we use forecast errors for different horizons for selected "driver"
variables. We use the k-year-ahead forecast published in the fall issue of the IMF's World
Economic Outlook (WEO). We use this approach for computing forecast errors because the WEO
covers the entire global economy and reflects rigorous analysis as well as the expert judgment of
Fund staff. An alternative approach would be to use forecasts generated mechanically by a
statistical model such as a VAR, but such forecasts would necessarily rely on specific technical
assumptions (e.g., linearity or stationarity).




  10
      It would be ideal to distinguish between monetary targets and inflation targeting, but only a single LIC (Ghana)
initiated an inflation targeting framework prior to 2010.
   11
      These include Hard Pegs (no separate legal tender, currency boards and conventional pegged arrangements), Soft
Pegs (stabilized arrangements, crawling pegs, craw-like arrangements, pegged exchange rates within horizontal bands,
and other managed arrangements), and a few other countries where the exchange rate serves as the intermediate anchor
of monetary policy.
   12
      See Appendix III for a detailed tabulation of observations according to monetary policy framework. For example,
if the category of fixed exchange rate regimes was limited to Hard Pegs and Soft Pegs, that re-classification would
only affect about 4 percent of the observations in our sample.
                                                              7


   Table 2 displays some stylized facts regarding the LICs considered in our sample, summarized in
   selected descriptive statistics for the various control variables used (trade openness, capital account
   openness, financial depth and fiscal policy). 13 As the theory would predict, we observe that
   countries using exchange rate as an intermediate target to achieve price stability tend to be more
   open to trade. We also observe that we have roughly an equal amount of countries in both groups,
   over time, and no other characteristic that could be interpreted as driving the results is strongly
   statistically significant.

                            Table 2: Descriptive Statistics of Panel Dataset, 1990-2015
                                                                                Mean over sample                  Significance
                                                                         Monetary and      Exchange Rate Equality of Means
                                                                       Inflation Targeting   Targeting
1. Trade openness
  Exports / GDP (X, in US$, percentage)                                         29                 31                 0.01
  Imports / GDP (M, in US$, percentage)                                         42                 47                 0.00
  (X + M) / GDP (in US$, percentage)                                            71                 78                 0.00

2. Capital account/financial openness
  Financial Account: Inflows / GDP (in US$, percentage)                        6.1                  5.3               0.20
  Financial Account: Outflows / GDP (in US$, percentage)                       2.3                  2.7               0.33
  Financial Account: Inflows + Outflows / GDP (in US$, percentage)             8.3                  7.8               0.54
  Financial Openness index                                                     -0.3                -0.5               0.00

3. Financial depth
  Financial depth                                                               14                 25                 0.00

4. Governance
  Corruption                                                                    2.1                2.3                0.00
  Composite Risk rating                                                        58.1               58.2                0.76
  Economic Risk rating                                                         29.8               31.0                0.00
  Fincial Risk rating                                                          31.5               31.1                0.44
  Political Risk rating                                                        54.8               54.3                0.39

5. GDP per capita US$
  All LICs (79 countries)                                                      848                1498                0.00
 LICs with GDP per capita below US$800                                         428                436                 0.48

6. Central bank independence
  Component 1: CB CEO (0.20)                                                   0.5                 0.6                0.00
  Component 2: CB objectives (0.15)                                            0.6                 0.6                0.00
  Component 3: Policy formulation (0.15)                                       0.6                 0.6                0.03
  Component 4: CB lending (0.50)                                               0.5                 0.5                0.05
  CBI Cukierman                                                                0.5                 0.4                0.00


      13
        Measures of price flexibility were not included as control variables, since they are generally not available across
   time and countries.
                                                        8


Source: IMF World Economic Outlook.

4. Global Demand Shocks
For many developing countries that embrace an export-led growth strategy, external demand is
crucial. Indeed, Rand and Tarp (2002) find that shocks originating from OECD economies are
critically important drivers of short-run output fluctuations in developing economies.

To compute our measure of external demand shocks, we compare actual and forecast data from
country-specific world GDP growth, which is weighted by trade flows from all trading partners.
The difference between actual data, measured at year t, and the WEO forecast of the same variable
made at year t-1 for realization at year t, (i.e., the one-year and two-year ahead forecast error
realized at year t) is interpreted as the unanticipated shock to world GDP growth. We test to see if
the effect of 1 percent shock to the world GDP 14 on domestic output growth rate would be the
same regardless of the monetary policy framework employed.

The intuition is that a positive unanticipated external demand shock increases aggregate demand,
pushing up money demand and prices. Since the shock was unanticipated, and money supply was
set up ex ante, interest rates rise. In frameworks where the nominal exchange rate should remain
unchanged, the central bank offsets this decline in real money balances and lowers interest rates
to maintain the exchange rate parity. Aggregate demand increases further, but interest rates remain
unchanged. In countries where the exchange rate is not kept fixed to achieve price stability, the
change in real money balances can be offset, and the nominal exchange rate would adjust to bring
aggregate demand back in equilibrium. As a result, interest rates change (especially if inflation
forecast deviated from target), but aggregate demand may not change. 15

This is what we observe in Table 3 where we present the results. In response to an unanticipated
positive one-percent shock to the world GDP, there is a positive effect on domestic output growth
(by about 0.5 percentage points) only in frameworks maintaining price stability through fixed
exchange rates. Moreover, this effect is highly statistically significant (mostly at 1 percent level)
in the year when the shock occurs (horizon 0), and, also in the subsequent year. And there is a




  14
      This is a reasonable normalization, as commonly used in the literature. The forecast errors of the world GDP
vary from -3.6 to +1.9 percent, and the standard deviation is 1.1 percent.
  15
     Standard case of perfect capital mobility and no impediments to transmission mechanism, like dollarization.
                                                           9


statistically significant difference between the effects in frameworks based on countries targeting
the exchange rates versus monetary or inflation targeting frameworks.

For the inflation or monetary targeting economies to respond in the way we described above, prices
would need to adjust relatively slowly. Otherwise the response to the shock would occur relatively
fast through prices. 16

  Table 3: Effect of a One-Percent Shock to World GDP on Domestic Output Growth

                                                  Sample: All LICs
                                          (79 countries, 1578 observations)
                                                                            k (horizon in years)
                       MP Framework
                                                                     0                              1
       Exchange Rate                                              0.49***                          0.54***
       Inflation or Monetary Targeting                            0.16                         -0.09
       Difference                                                 0.33*                            0.63***
                                 Sample: LICs with GDP Per Capita below US$800
                                           (62 countries, 870 observations)

       Exchange Rate                                              0.43**                           0.86***
       Inflation or Monetary Targeting                           -0.18                         -0.03
       Difference                                                 0.62**                       0.88***

       Note: The regression is estimated using Panel Least Squares. The asterisks ***, **, * denote
       statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively. The regression variables are
       specified as follows:
       Dependent : domestic real GDP growth rate at time t+k, (100*(log GDPt+k - log GDPt+k-1))
       Independent: (i) country fixed effects, (ii) forecast error world GDP at time t, interacted with monetary
       policy framework dummy coefficients (exchange rate versus inflation or money targeting), and (iii)
       battle-related deaths (war)




In principle, such results could differ according to relative income levels. For example, one could
presume that in countries with preponderant agricultural sectors and small manufacturing sectors
(the lowest income countries) prices and wages might be particularly flexible and hence global
demand shocks might have different effects compared to moderately more developed LICs.



  16
      Anand and others (2015) show that in a small open developing economy with incomplete markets and food
expenditures representing a high share of total consumption expenditures; a central bank, can maximize welfare by
replicating the flexible price equilibrium, under certain conditions (e.g. targeting core inflation).
                                                          10


Thus, we can check the robustness of the results by testing this hypothesis for a sub-sample of the
poorest LICs. The intuition is that those are the countries that have the largest share of the economy
operating as a self-subsistence economy, and if there is employment outside the house it will be
largely informal. In these cases, intertemporal contracts will be non-existent, and prices for the
basic goods in the consumer basket will adjust faster.

To undertake this analysis, we select the observations below the median GDP per capita. To ensure
robustness, we calculate the median using two different statistics, and report the results for both
subsamples as follows. First, with a subsample containing countries that in 1990 were below the
median GDP per capita calculated across the sample (US$800), and second, with a subsample
containing countries that in 1990 were below the cross-country median for 1990 (US$541).
The country has to remain in this category for at least a year to be in subsample of the poorest
LICs. About sixty percent of our sample are in the first subsample.

We show the results in the first case in Table 3 and observe that the results are stronger than the
average for the sample. For example, the impact of the shock in frameworks centered around more
rigid exchange rates, is stronger by up to sixty percent in the year following the shock (horizon 1)
than in the case of our entire sample of LICs, and the difference in impact among the two types of
frameworks almost doubles in the year of the shock. 17

The results are also robust according to a variety of methods and controls used. Table 4 reports the
difference in coefficients for various monetary policy frameworks when controlling for various
factors (outliers, and one control variable at a time, as follows). First, the difference in coefficients
associated with the monetary policy framework remains significant at 1 percent when we use
different ways to eliminate outliers. Second, the control variables are statistically significant and
introducing these controls weaken the results somewhat: (i) the results at the impact of the shock
(horizon 0) are now insignificant (they remain significant at 1-year horizon), and (ii) introducing
the controls lower the impact of shocks at horizon 1 for financial depth. This is in line with other
results found in the literature. 18


  17
      The results hold including for the poorest LICs (with income below US$540.7), especially in the year following
the shock. For countries above the median the results still hold, and the impact is stronger in the year of the shock;
results available by request.
   18
      Broda (2004) finds that trade openness is the only systematically significant control, and that introducing such a
control makes the difference among regimes less significant.
11
                                                          12


      Table 4: Sensitivity Analysis of World GDP Shocks on Domestic Output Growth
                   Difference in Coefficients between Monetary Policy Frameworks

                                                   Sample: All LICs;
                                          (79 countries 1552 observations)
                                                                                k (horizon in years)
                          Horizon
                                                                           0                             1

 Baseline, controling for outliers                                       0.19                           0.66***

 Additional Controls:
   Trade Openness                                                        0.20                           0.60***
   Capital Openness (Inflows + Outflows / GDP)                           0.19                           0.62***
   Capital Openness (Ito's index)                                        0.20                           0.48***
   Financial Depth (Bank assests / GDP)                                  0.17                           0.52***
   Financial Depth (Credit to private sector / GDP)                      0.14                           0.59***
   Fiscal Policy                                                         0.15                           0.34**


 Note: In each regression, outliers are excluded using the studentized residual method. The regressions are
 estimated using Panel Least Squares. The asterisks ***, **, * denote statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10
 percent levels, respectively. The regression variables are specified as follows:
 Dependent : domestic real GDP growth rate at time t+k, (100*(log GDPt+k - log GDPt+k-1))
 Independent : (i) country fixed effects, (ii) forecast error world GDP at time t , interacted with monetary policy
 framework dummy coefficients (exchange rate versus inflation or money targeting), (iii) battle-related deaths
 (war ) and (iv) one control variable at a time, listed above




The introduction of such control variables ensures that correlations between the monetary policy
framework and other characteristics of that country are not captured by the monetary policy
framework variable. A number of control variables are also included in the regressions, as
commonly used in the literature: trade openness (the share of trade in the country's output, defined
as the sum of nominal exports and imports divided by the nominal GDP), capital account openness
(measured as the sum of capital inflows and outflows as a share of GDP), financial depth
(measured as deposit money bank assets as a percent of GDP), and the overall fiscal balance for
central government (also as a percent of GDP).

To summarize, we find strong and robust evidence the effect on domestic output growth of
unanticipated surprises to external demand depends on the monetary policy framework used. This
implies that even in monetary policy frameworks targeting inflation and money, prices adjust
                                                            13


relatively slowly to allow for the exchange rate to act as a shock absorber. 19 The results hold even
for the poorest LICs. The source and size of this nominal rigidity (price stickiness, informational
friction, etc.) needs to be further studied to properly assess impacts of shocks on LICs, and the
appropriate policy response, especially as many of these LICs are modernizing their monetary
policy frameworks.

5. Terms of Trade Shocks

Developing countries (which include LICs) tend to have growth strategies centered on integrating
their economies into the global supply chain and developing through exports growth. Therefore,
understanding the effects of a terms of trade shock 20 on domestic growth and how it varies with
the monetary policy framework used is also very important.

To the extent that LICs are price takers in the commodity markets, the monetary policy framework
affects the impact of a change in terms of trade on domestic output growth. 21 A rise in the value
of a country's currency lowers the domestic prices of its imports but may not directly affect the
prices of the commodities it exports. As some countries could be price makers, we expect weaker
results than in the previous case of an external demand shock.

The shock is defined as before, the difference between the actual variable (here a country's terms
of trade) and its forecast at horizon k. We consider a typical shock size of 10 percent. 22 Such an
unanticipated improvement to a country's terms of trade should expand its net exports and hence
raise its aggregate demand. The intuition is similar as before. In the monetary policy framework
centered around a fixed exchange rate, the rise in aggregate demand puts pressure on interest and


  19
     In frameworks with fixed exchange rates, liquidity management becomes crucial. In such a case an exogenous
external shock induces fluctuations in foreign exchange reserves that may generate greater volatility in the liquidity
of the banking system, and the central banks' effective use of various tools--including the policy rate, reserve
requirements and other sterilization instruments-- can dampen the transmission of exogenous shocks to the real
economy (see El Hamiani and Veyrun, 2019).

  20
      The terms of trade are the relative price of imports in terms of exports in domestic currency. An improvement of
a nation's terms of trade benefits that country; it can buy more imports for any given level of exports.

  21
    There are some cases where a particular country has a dominant role in the production of a specific commodity.
For example, in 2012 Cote d'Ivoire produced about one-third of the world's supply of cocoa and Madagascar
accounted for about one-fifth of the global supply of bourbon vanilla.
  22
       The standard deviation of the forecast error of the terms of trade is about 15 percent.
                                                        14


exchange rates. Since the value of the exchange rate should remain fixed, the central bank would
offset this effect. If we observe a distinct response of this shock in a monetary policy framework
targeting money or inflation, it would be because the exchange rate would be able to adjust, and
other prices do not adjust instantaneously.

The top panel of Table 5 confirms this intuition. In response to an unanticipated ten-percent shock
to the terms of trade, there is a positive effect on domestic output growth (about 0.2 percentage
points) mainly in frameworks maintaining price stability through rigid exchange rates. This effect
is statistically significant at the 5 percent level in the year when the shock occurs (horizon 0), and
at 10 percent in the subsequent year. Moreover, there is a highly statistically significant difference
between the effects in frameworks with rigid exchange rate versus monetary or inflation targeting
frameworks (1 percent at 1-year horizon).

The lower panel of Table 5 examines the robustness of these results when we eliminate the
influence of outliers and control for other characteristics of the countries studied. Indeed, the
precision and statistical significance of our key results is generally strengthened by doing so.

Our sensitivity analysis also highlights potential interactions between monetary and fiscal policy
in determining the propagation of shocks. In principle, accommodative fiscal policy could offset
restrictive monetary policy, in which case the effects of monetary policy framework might not be
readily apparent from the reduced-form impact on economic growth. However, as shown in the
final row of Table 5, such interactions are not strong enough to mask the difference in the growth
impact of a global demand shock across monetary policy frameworks. By contrast, as shown in
the final row of Table 4 (inclusion of fiscal policy), it does not allow us to pinpoint the role of the
monetary policy framework in the propagation of terms of trade shocks on GDP growth. 23




  23
      Broda (2014) finds that when including all control variables results weaken. Furthermore, Catao and Chang
(2015) show that when imported food price shocks are substantial, in the presence of sticky prices and incomplete
international risk sharing, the real exchange rate and terms of trade can move in opposite directions and there are
trade-offs between (monetary) policy rules.
                                                           15


Table 5: Effect of a 10 Percent Terms of Trade Shock on Domestic Output Growth

                                                          Sample: All LICs
                                           (76 countries, 1504 observations)
                                                                               k (horizon in years)
                    MP Framework
                                                                      0                                1
Exchange Rate                                                        0.28**                           0.16*
Inflation or Monetary Targeting                                     -0.17                           -0.16*
Difference                                                           0.45***                         0.32***

                   Sensitivity analysis: Difference in monetary policy framework coefficients


                                                              Sample: All LICs
                                           (76 countries, 1484 observations)

Baseline, controling for outliers                                    0.44**                           0.29**

Additional Controls:

  Trade Openness                                                     0.44**                           0.29**
  Capital Openness (Inflows + Outflows / GDP)                        0.40**                           0.27**
  Capital Openness (Ito's index)                                     0.47**                           0.37**
  Financial Depth (Bank assests / GDP)                               0.52***                          0.37***
  Financial Depth (Credit to private sector / GDP)                   0.45***                          0.37***
  Fiscal Policy                                                      0.13                             0.04

Note: The regressions are estimated using Panel Least Squares. The asterisks ***, **, * denote statistical
significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively. In the sensitivity analysis regressions, outliers are
excluded using the studentized residual method. The regression variables are specified as follows:
Dependent : domestic real GDP growth rate at time t+k, (100*(log GDPt+k - log GDPt+k-1))

Independent : (i) country fixed effects, (ii) forecast error world GDP at time t , interacted with monetary policy
framework dummy coefficients (exchange rate versus inflation or money targeting), (iii) battle-related deaths (war ),
and (iv) country specific external demand (to control for world GDP). Results available by request for introducing
one additional control variable at a time, as in Table 2
                                                          16


6. Oil Price Shocks

Next, we turn to the impact of oil price shocks. In a monetary policy framework that targets
inflation, a central bank would respond to such shock only to the extent that the second-round
effects will push the expected inflation at the targeting horizon to deviate from the inflation target.
As before, a difference in the impact on the domestic output growth according to the monetary
policy framework used would be present only to the extent to which prices do not adjust
immediately, and the exchange rate adjust to buffer the economy instead.

Previous research analyzing the effects of oil price shocks in LICs find that the effect of the most
recent oil price shock (starting in 2014) on the output growth of oil importing countries has been
muted; see Obstfeld et al. (2016) and Cerdeiro and Plotnikov (2017). One explanation is that most
countries, especially the LICs, use oil price subsidies. Since their economy was somewhat
insulated when the prices were high, then the aggregate demand did not expand when the prices
collapsed, if they were importers. That is the case regardless of the monetary policy framework
used.

We also find that the impact of a ten percent oil price shock (the shock defined as before,
unanticipated surprises between the forecast of the prices at a year horizon and the actual price)
does not differ across monetary policy frameworks for oil importing countries. 24 The results are
not reported here but are available on request from the authors.

For big oil exporters (countries that have crude oil production exceeding 5% of their nominal GDP
in at least one year of our sample), an unanticipated 10 percent change in oil prices leads to an
increase in net exports, and therefore aggregate demand. 25 In the presence of rigidities and
frictions, the exchange rate would adjust to buffer the economy from the shock, rather than the
prices. As such, we expect a significantly different impact of such shock on domestic output
growth across different monetary policy frameworks.




  24
      Specifying the magnitude of the oil price shock at 10 percent is conventional in the literature. The forecast error
of oil price varies in our sample between -60 and +40 percent, the median of the oil price forecast error is 12 percent.
  25
     We converted the IEA measure (in metric ton) into barrels using the standard conversion factor of 7.33 bbl/ton,
then we computed the US$ value of crude oil production by multiplying oil price, and then computed the ratio to
nominal GDP. While this is a relatively low threshold, given the size of the sample, it is useful.
                                                  17


Table 4 supports this intuition. In response to an unanticipated ten-percent shock to global oil
prices, there is a positive effect on domestic output growth (by about 0.45 percentage points in the
year of the shock and higher in the subsequent year) only in frameworks maintaining price stability
through rigid exchange rates. The impact is statistically significant at the 99 percent confidence
level, especially one year after the shock, and there is a statistically significant difference between
the effects in frameworks with rigid exchange rate versus monetary or inflation targeting
frameworks in the year after the shock.

These findings are robust to removing outliers and adding other control variables, especially in the
year following the shock. These results are broadly consistent with the findings of Grigoli et al.
(2017), who found that the 2014 oil price shock affected disproportionately the oil exporters
targeting an exchange rate. This strong and robust statistical difference in the effect on domestic
output growth of an oil price shocks for big oil exporters, implies that big oil exporters using a
fixed exchange rate as a nominal anchor have a very volatile domestic output growth. They benefit
tremendously when oil prices increase and suffer a lot when oil prices plunge.

Good demand management, as well as a consistent policy mix, adjustment strategies, and strong
built-in automatic stabilizers and safety nets are needed to best take advantage of natural resources,
if the LICs choose a monetary policy framework geared towards achieving price stability by
maintaining a rigid exchange rate. Nominal wage flexibility also becomes very important as part
of the needed adjustment to restore competitiveness.
                                                            18


Table 6: Effect of a 10 Percent Global Oil Price Shock on Domestic Output Growth


                                              Sample: LICs big oil exporting
                                             (9 countries, 183 observations)
                                                                                k (horizon in years)
                     MP Framework
                                                                      0                                  1
  Exchange Rate                                                      0.46**                            0.69***
  Inflation or Monetary Targeting                                    0.62*                             -0.03
  Difference                                                        -0.16                               0.66***


                    Sensitivity analysis: Difference in monetary policy framework coefficients


                                              Sample: LICs big oil exporting
                                             (9 countries, 183 observations)

  Baseline, controling for outliers                                  0.30                              0.71***

  Additional Controls:

    Trade Openness                                                   0.32                              0.71***
    Capital Openness (Inflows + Outflows / GDP)                      0.24                              0.66***
    Capital Openness (Ito's index)                                   0.27                              0.87***
    Financial Depth (Bank assests / GDP)                             0.28                              0.62***
    Financial Depth (Credit to private sector / GDP)                 0.29                              0.68***
    Fiscal Policy                                                    0.10                              0.43*


  Note: The regressions are estimated using Panel Least Squares. The asterisks ***, **, * denote statistical
  significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively. In the sensitivity analysis regressions, outliers are
  excluded using the studentized residual method. The regression variables are specified as follows:
  Dependent : domestic real GDP growth rate at time t+k, (100*(log GDPt+k - log GDPt+k-1))

  Independent : (i) country fixed effects, (ii) forecast error world GDP at time t , interacted with monetary policy
  framework dummy coefficients (exchange rate versus inflation or money targeting), (iii) battle-related deaths
  (war ), (iv) country specific external demand (to control for world GDP)

  Big oil exporters: Angola, Cameroon, Chad, Rep. of Congo, Ghana, Mauritania, Nigeria, Sudan, Yemen
                                                        19


7. Event Study of the January 1994 CFA Devaluation

The CFA zone consists of fourteen countries, belonging to two currency unions, the West African
Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU), and Central African Economic and Monetary
community (CEMAC). The common currency used in each union is the Central African Franc
(CFA), fixed to the French franc since 1980, and to the euro since 1999. Many of these countries
have relied heavily on exports of primary commodities: cocoa and coffee (Cote d'lvoire),
petroleum (Congo, Gabon, Cameroon), cotton (Chad, Burkina Faso, Mali), and phosphate (Togo).

Heavy dependence on commodity exports posed a problem between 1984 and 1989 when the
commodity prices (denominated in U.S. dollar) declined--more than 60% for cocoa and petroleum
US$ prices, with the cocoa price reaching a fourteen-year low. In addition, the variation of the
U.S. dollar-French franc exchange introduced more volatility in the CFA prices, and worsened the
countries' economic plight. The loss of income and purchasing power for exporters was
accompanied by a loss of domestic demand as the imports became cheaper, such that these
economies grew little or not at all for most of the late 1980s and at the start of the 1990s. 26

In response, most CFA countries implemented one austerity program after another to adjust their
real exchange rate. However, by late 1993 the extent of the overvaluation was 30 percent on
average. To address this situation, the CFA countries engaged in highly confidential consultations
with the IMF and France, leading to the decision to devalue the CFA franc by 50 percent on
January 1st, 1994. 27 Thus, while a devaluation in the CFA zone had been expected at some point,
its timing and magnitude were not anticipated.

Our event study focusses on assessing the impact of this monetary policy shock on output growth.
We examine the evolution of real GDP growth of 10 African LICs within the CFA Zone: Benin,
Burkina Faso, Cameron, Central African Republic, Chad, Cote d'Ivoire, Mali, Niger, Senegal, and
Togo. 28 To provide a benchmark for comparison, we also examine a control group of 18 other
African LICs: Burundi, Cabo Verde, Comoros, Ethiopia, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,


  26
      A report issued by the Overseas Development Institute (1990) noted that highly publicized nominal wage cuts in
the CFA zone countries had sparked significant political unrest in the late 1980s.
   27
      As discussed by Beaudry and Sowa (1994), the experience of Ghana showed that a currency devaluation could
help reduce real wages and improve external competitiveness.
   28
      We exclude two high-income countries (Gabon and Equatorial Guinea) and three countries that were severely
affected by military conflict during the early 1990s (Democratic Republic of Congo, Republic of Congo, and Rwanda).
                                                               20


Kenya, Lesotho, Madagascar, Malawi, Mozambique, Nigeria, Sao Tome & Principe, Tanzania,
Uganda, and Zambia. 29 In contrast to the members of the CFA zone, these countries maintained
their own independent national currencies and had more flexible monetary policy frameworks.

       Table 6: Comparison of Key Indicators for CFA Zone vs. Control Group Countries

                                                                    CFA Zone                Control Group


Indicator                                                    Mean     Min      Max   Mean       Min         Max


 Population (millions)                                        9        3       15      18        0          108
 Real GDP Per Capita ($US)                                   409      197      777    489       148         1,342
 Trade/GDP (Export + Imports / GDP, percentage)               24       17      36      28        10          81
 Capital Flows/GDP (Inflows + Outflows / GDP, ooercentage)    2        -1      11      5         -1          18
 Financial Depth (Bank Assets / GDP, percentage)              14       6       29      13        4           25
 Corruption Index                                             3        2        4      3         2           4
 Political Risk Rating                                        50       41      63      54        41          65
 Composite Risk Rating                                        53       48      59      53        39          64



As shown in Table 6, as of 1993 the countries in the control group were broadly similar to the
countries in the CFA zone, thereby bolstering the rationale for treating the January 1994
devaluation as a natural experiment. In particular, both groups of countries had relatively similar
levels of development (real GDP per capita), trade and capital account openness, financial depth,
and measures of governance and political risk. The average level of real GDP per capita is similar
across the two groups, and while the range of values is somewhat wider in the control group, we
can account for that characteristic in our sensitivity analysis. Finally, Lesotho is the only country
in the control group for which the degree of trade openness is much higher than any of the countries
in the CFA zone, but the results are not sensitive to its inclusion or exclusion from our analysis.

To assess the impact of the CFA devaluation, we use a difference-in-differences approach to
compare the average real output growth outcomes before and after the shock within the CFA zone
to the countries in the control group. Concretely, we measure the difference in average real GDP



  29
      This control group excludes three sub-Saharan African countries that were not classified as LICs as of 1993
(Botswana, Gabon, and South Africa) and four other countries for which GDP data was not available in 1992-95
(Angola, Eritrea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone). It should also be noted that Guinea-Bissau had its own currency during
this period and subsequently joined the CFA zone in 1997.
                                                         21


growth before and after 1994. We allow two-years after devaluation to capture all effects and
compare the average growth rate over 1994­1995 with that during 1992­1993 (Figure 2), with the
differences reported for the two groups in Table 6. 30 To ensure that the results are not driven by
country specific events, we report in Figure 2 and Table 6 the demeaned rates (over the 1990­2015
sample) for each group. In addition, we present in Figure 3 the distribution of the differences in
these two-year growth rates (pre- and post-1994).

                  Figure 2: Contrast in Real GDP Growth in 1992-93 vs. 1994-95


              4
                                                                      Before         After

              2


              1


              0


             -1
                                CFA Zone                              Control Group

Since we observe a statistically different growth performance post devaluation in the CFA zone,
and not one in the control group, then we could infer that the devaluation had real effects: the
nominal devaluation led to an instant and full adjustment in prices. In particular, as shown in Figure
2, the results are clearly inconsistent with the hypothesis of monetary neutrality. Real GDP growth
on average improved by 5 percent after the devaluation in the CFA zone, while the control group's
growth performance was roughly similar before and after 1994.

As shown in Table 7, this result is statistically significant and robust. Indeed, the impact on real
growth of the devaluation in the CFA zone is estimated between 2¾ and 5½ percent once we
exclude outliers.


  30
      The specification of the 2-year time window is intended to capture a high proportion of the impact of a monetary
policy shock on real output while minimizing the degree of noise that could result from other types of shocks. Results
for a one-year window are similar to those presented here.
                                                        22


                Table 7: Contrast in Real GDP Growth in 1992-93 vs. 1994-95

                                          Sample: 28 sub-Saharan African LICs 1/

                                                                                                            Difference in
  Difference in Growth (1994-1995 versus 1992-1993)                 CFA            Control group
                                                                                                             difference
Baseline                                                           5.21**               -0.23                   5.44*
                                                                   (2.06)               (1.23)               p-value 0.07

                                 Sensitivity Analysis: selected sub-Saharan African LICs

Exclude CFA outlier with very high 1994 growth (Togo)               2.81**              -0.23                   3.04*
                                                                   (1.13)               (1.23)               p-value 0.06

Exclude Highest Income LICs 2/                                      5.32**              -0.34                   5.66*
                                                                   (2.18)               (1.35)               p-value 0.08

Exclude Lowest Income LICs 3/                                       5.52**              -0.54                   6.06*
                                                                   (2.30)               (1.48)               p-value 0.08


Note: The regression is estimated using Panel Least Squares. The asterisks ***, **, * denote statistical significance at th
5, and 10 percent levels, respectively. the standard deviation is reported under each coefficient. The p-value refers to th
chi-squared test of equality between the coefficients for the CFA zone and the control group. The regression variables a
specified as follows:
Dependent : Change in two year real GDP growth rate (1994-1995 versus 1992-1993), demeaned
Independent : Constant, CFA zone dummy, and battle related deaths (to control for wars)

1/ 10 countries CFA (Benin, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, CAR, Chad, Cote d'Ivoire, Mali, Niger, Senegal, and Togo). 18
control group countries (Burundi, Cabo Verde, Comoros, Ethiopia, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Kenya,
Lesotho, Madagascar, Malawi, Mozambique, Nigeria, Sao Tome & Principe, Tanzania, Uganda, and Zambia).
2/ Exclude countries where GDP per capita exceeded US$ 800 in 1995 (Cabo Verde and Nigeria).
3/ Exclude countries where GDP per capita was below US$180 in 1995 (Burundi, Ethiopia, Mozambique, and Tanzania)
                                                23


Figure 3 shows the cross-country distribution of the growth performance in the CFA zone and the
control group in 1992-93 vs. 1994-95, with the same implications as Figure 2. The average growth
in the CFA zone was about 4 percent after the devaluation, and the difference between before and
after 1994 two-year windows was about 5 percent and statistically significant.

       Figure 3: Cross-Country Distribution of Real GDP Growth in 1992-93 vs. 1994-95

                                                 CFA
    30%

                                                                      Difference = 4.98
    20%                                                  4.2

             -0.8
    10%


      0%
               -1     0        1    2      3         4        5       6    7       8       9       10

                                          Before             After


                                         Control Group
    30%                                                                                                 3
                                               2.2           2.4
    20%                                                               Difference = 0.2
                                                                                                        2

    10%


      0%
              -4    -3    -2   -1    0    1     2        3        4    5   6   7       8       9   10

                                          Before             After
                                                       24


8. Conclusions

In recent years many LICs have been modernizing their monetary policy frameworks. The results
of our paper provide strong empirical support for the importance of that progress. We
overwhelmingly reject the hypothesis that monetary policy frameworks do not matter in LICs.
First, we analyze the response of output growth (real GDP) to shocks stemming from abroad
(including surprises in the world GDP, shifts in the terms of trade, and fluctuations in the price of
oil) using panel data for 79 LICs over the period 1990­2015. Second, we use event study analysis
and find that a large surprise devaluation of the CFA franc in early 1994 had highly significant
effects on the real GDP growth of 10 African LICs within the CFA zone compared to an otherwise
broadly similar group of 18 other African LICs that had different monetary policy frameworks.
The results are robust to various specifications--including shocks, control variables, and
subsamples--and hold even for the poorest LICs, indicating that nominal rigidities are present in
those economies as well.

In particular, we find highly significant differences in the response to shocks on real output growth
between LICs with monetary policy frameworks implemented through rigid nominal exchange
rates and LICs implementing monetary or inflation targeting. The countries that use exchange rate
targeting to ensure price stability see a statistically larger response in real domestic output growth
than countries targeting inflation or money.

Our empirical analysis reaches these conclusions without imposing a model or economic structure
borrowed from advanced economies. While the paper does not shed light on the underlying causes
of money non-neutrality, our findings have broader implications for the formulation of structural
models of the monetary transmission mechanism in LICs. In particular, given the relatively high
frequency of price adjustment in LICs (as evident from Figure 1), monetary non-neutrality may
not reflect the forms of price rigidity that have been embedded in conventional New Keynesian
models for more advanced economies. 31 Other potential sources of nominal rigidity might arise
from informational frictions, including incomplete knowledge about the underlying structure of
the economy as well as misperceptions of the central bank's monetary policy goals, strategies, and



  31
    In discussing macroeconomic models of advanced economies, Stiglitz et al. (2006) emphasized that "it is by no
means clear that applying these theories [to LICs] is either justified or appropriate."
                                                      25


operations. 32 Clarifying the sources of these rigidities in LICs, as well as their magnitude should
be a priority for future research, which will in turn provide further insights into analyzing how
policymakers in LICs can respond effectively to domestic and external shocks.

More broadly, the building blocks needed for a successful monetary policy framework in LICs are
remarkably similar to the best practice for advanced economies and emerging markets (see IMF,
2015). Unsal and others (2020) have recently emphasized the joint relevance of de jure and
de facto characteristics of monetary policy frameworks. Indeed, having a systematic and
transparent monetary policy framework may become even more important as LICs face the
aftermath of the COVID-19 pandemic and its associated economic disruptions across the globe.




  32
     See Mankiw and Reiss (2002), Erceg and Levin (2003), Mackowiak and Wiederholt (2009). Walsh (2017)
provides a comprehensive review of structural forms of nominal rigidities that have been implemented in various
dynamic stochastic general equilibrium macroeconomic models.
                                                26


                               Appendix I: Data Sources for Figure 1
                                     Price Adjustment
                       Sample           Frequency
    Country            Period        (monthly, percent)                  Source
    Barbados         1994-2008               65                  Craigwell et al. (2011)
      Brazil            2007                 32                      Gouvea (2007)
      Chile             2008                 40                     Julio et al. (2008)
    Colombia            2008                 42                     Julio et al. (2008)
    Eurozone         1996-2001               25                    Dhyne et al. (2006)
      Ghana          1997-2013               94                      Alidou (2014)
      Japan          1989-2003               21                Masahiro and Saita (2007)
     Lesotho         2002-2009               36                       Nchake (2012
   Sierra Leone         2006                 51                     Kovanen (2006)
   South Africa      2002-2010               62               Creamer and Rankin (2012)
     Turkey          1988-2006               26              ahinöz and Saraçolu (2011)
  United States      1988-2004               29               Klenow and Kryvtsov (2008)


Note: For each country listed in this table, the level of PPP-adjusted real GDP per capita in 2017
(measured in constant 2017 international dollars) was obtained from the World Bank's online
database at https://data.worldbank.org.
                                            27


                    Appendix II: Sources for Panel Data Analysis

           Variable              Notation        Source            Transformation/Unit
  Monetary policy indicator      MP_ER        AREAER            Dummy
  Real GDP                       GDP          WEO               In logs; 2005 = 100
  World GDP                      WGDP         WEO               In logs; 2005 = 100
                                                                Unit value of exports / unit
                                                              value of imports, in logs;
  Terms of trade                 ToT          WEO / IFS
                                                              2005 = 100
  Oil prices                     Oil          WEO                In logs; 2005 = 100
  Oil producing indicator        OilExp       IEA               Crude oil production
                                                              exceeding 5% of NGDP
  Wars                           War          Uppsala           Number of battle-related
                                            Conflict Data /   deaths / number of total
                                            UN                population
  Nominal GDP                    NGDP         WEO
  Trade Openness                 TO           WEO               Nominal exports +
                                                              Nominal imports (US$) /
                                                              Nominal GDP (US$)
  Capital Account                FA           WEO               Financial account inflows
Openness                                                      + outflows (US$) / Nominal
                                                              GDP (US$)
  Capital Account                CAI          Chinn-Ito
Openness: Ito index
   Financial Depth: deposit      BA           Global
money banks assets (percent                 Financial
of domestic currency GDP)                   Development
   Financial Depth: credit to    CPS          Global
the private sector (percent of              Financial
domestic currency GDP)                      Development
  Fiscal Policy: central         CGBAL        WEO               Percent of nominal GDP
government overall balance                                    (domestic currency)
(domestic currency)
  International Country          ICRG         PRS group
Risk Guide index and main
subcomponents
  Central bank                   CBI          Cukierman
independence index and
subcomponents
                                        28


         APPENDIX III: MONETARY POLICY FRAMEWORKS IN LICs, 1990­2015

                                Exchange rate regimes

                       Hard Pegs Soft Pegs     Flexible   Total

     ER targeting         845          195        24       1,064     Monetary
 Money targeting           0           82        472         554      Policy
 Inflation targeting       0           4         29           33   Frameworks

         Total            845          281       525       1,651

Source: IMF AREAR.
                                              29


References

Aguiar, Mark and Gita Gopinath. 2007. "Emerging Market Business Cycles: The Cycle Is the
   Trend", Journal of Political Economy, vol 115 (1). pp. 69-102.
Alidou, Sahawal. 2014. "Degree of Price Rigidity in LICs and Implication for Monetary Policy",
   Munich Personal RePEc Archive (MRPA) Paper No. 58944.
Anand, Rahul, Eswar S. Prasad, Eswar and Boyang Zhang. 2015. "What Measure of inflation
   Should a Developing Country Central Bank Target?" Journal of Monetary Economics,
   Elsevier, vol. 74(C), pp. 102­116.
Auerbach, Alan J and Yuriy Gorodnichencko. 2013. "Output Spillovers from Fiscal Policy",
   American Economic Review, vol 103 (3), pp. 141­146.
Barajas, Adolfo and Ralph Chami and Christian Ebeke and Anne Oeking. 2018. "What's
   Different about Monetary Policy Transmission in Remittance-Dependent Countries?"
   Journal of Development Economics, vol. 134, pp. 272-288.
Barrot, Luis-Diego and César Calderón and Luis Serven. 2018. "Openness, Specialization, and
   the External Vulnerability of Developing Countries," Journal of Development Economics,
   vol. 134, pp.310-328.
Beaudry, P. and N. K. Sowa .1994. "Ghana", in S. Horton and others (eds.) "Labor Markets in an
   Era of Adjustment", vol. 2. EDI Development Studies, World Bank, Washington D.C.
Berg, Andrew and Rafael Portillo. 2018. Monetary Policy in Sub-Saharan Africa. Oxford
   University Press.
Brandao-Marques, Luis, Gaston Gelos, Ratna Sahay, Thomas Harjes and Yi Xue. 2020.
   "Monetary Policy Transmission in Emerging Markets and Developing Economies", IMF
   Working Paper 20/35.
Broda, Christian. 2004. "Terms of Trade and Exchange Rate Regimes in Developing Countries",
   Journal of International Economics, vol. 64, pp. 31­58.
Calderón, César and J. Rodrigo Fuentes. 2014. "Have Business Cycles Changed over the Last
   Two Decades? An Empirical Investigation," Journal of Development Economics, vol 109,
   pp.98-123.
Catao, Luis, A.V. and Roberto Chang. 2015. "World Food Prices and Monetary Policy", Journal
   of Monetary Economics, vol. 75, pp. 69­88.
Cerdeiro, Diego A and Dmitriy Plotnikov. 2017. "Taking Stock: Who Benefited from the Oil
   Price Shocks?", IMF Working Paper No. 17/104.
Craigwell, Roland, Winston Moore, and DeLisle Worrell. 2011. "Does Consumer Price Rigidity
   Exist in Barbados?" Munich Personal RePEc Archive Paper #40928.
Creamer, Kenneth, Greg Farrell and Neil Rankin. 2012. "What Price-Level Data Can Tell Us
   About Pricing Conduct in South Africa," in South African Journal of Economics, vol. 80(4),
   pp. 490­509.
Dhyne, Emmanuel, Luis J. Alvarez, Herve Le Bihan, Giovanni Veronese, Daniel Dias, Johannes
   Hoffmann, Nicole Jonker, Patrick Lunnemann, Fabio Rumler, and Jouko Vilmunen. 2006.
                                              30


   "Price Changes in the Euro Area and the United States: Some Facts from Individual
   Consumer Price Data", Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol 20 (2), Spring 2006, pp. 171­
   192.
Erceg, Christopher and Andrew T. Levin. 2003. "Imperfect Credibility and Inflation
   Persistence", Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 50 (4), pp. 915­944, May.
Edwards, Sebastian and Eduardo Levy Yeyati. 2005. "Flexible Exchange Rates as Shock
   Absorbers", European Economic Review, vol 49 (8) pp. 2079­2105.
El Hamiani Khatat, Mariam, Romain Veyrun. 2019. "Liquidity Management Under Fixed
    Exchange Rates with Open Capital Account", IMF Working Paper 19/58.
Federal Reserve Board (2020), "Monetary Policy Review: Strategy, Tools and
   Communications." Posted at https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-
   monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and-communications.htm
Friedman, Milton R. 1953. The Case for Flexible Exchange Rates. Essays in Positive Economics.
    University of Chicago Press, Chicago, pp. 157­303.
García-Cicco, Javier, Roberto Pancrazi, and Martin Uríbe. 2010. "Real Business Cycles in
   Emerging Countries"? American Economic Review, vol 100 (5), pp. 2510­2531.
Gagnon, E. 2009. "Price Setting During Low and High Inflation: Evidence from Mexico", The
   Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol 124(3) pp. 1221­1263.
Gelos, Gaston and Yulia Ustyugova. 2017. "Inflation Responses to Commodity Price Shocks ­
   How and Why Do Countries Differ?", Journal of International Money and Finance, vol. 72
   (C), pp. 28­47.
Grigoli, Francesco, Alexander Herman, and Andrew J. Swinston. 2017. "A Crude Shock:
   explaining the Impact of the 2014­16 Oil Price Decline Across Exporters", IMF Working
   Paper No. 17/160.
Gouvea S. 2007. "Price Rigidiy in Brazil: Evidence from CPI Micro Data", Banco Central do
   Brasil, Working Papers Series 143, September.
Hoffmaister, Alexander W. and Jorge Roldos and Peter Wickham. 1998. "Macroeconomic
   Fluctations in Sub-Saharan Africa," IMF Staff Papers, Vol. 45, pp. 1-29.
Hoffmann, Mathias. 2007. "Fixed Versus Flexible Exchange Rates: Evidence from Developing
   Countries", Economica, vol 74 (295), pp. 425­449.
International Monetary Fund. 2005. "Two Current Issues Facing Developing Countries", in
    World Economic Outlook, Chapter 2, "Globalization and External Imbalances", April.
International Monetary Fund. 2011. "Managing Volatility: A Vulnerability Exercise for Low-
    Income Countries", IMF Policy Paper, March.
International Monetary Fund. 2015. "Evolving Monetary Policy Frameworks in Low-Income and
    Other Developing Countries", IMF Policy Paper, November.
Jordà, Òscar. 2005. "Estimation and Inference of Impulse Responses by Local Projections",
    American Economic Review, vol 95 (1), pp. 161­182.
                                               31


Julio, Juan Manuel, Héctor Manuel Zárate, Manuel Darío Hernández. 2010. "The Stickiness of
    Colombian Consumer Prices", Ensayos Sobre Política Económica, vol 28 (63), Bogotá
    July/December.
Klenow, Peter J. and Oleksiy Kryvtsov. 2008. "State-Dependent or Time-Dependent Pricing: Does
   It Matter for Recent U.S. Inflation?" Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. CXXII (3), August,
   pp. 863­904.
Kose, M. Ayhan and Christopher Otrok and Charles H. Whiteman. 2003. "International Business
   Cycles: World, Region, and Country-Specific Factors," American Economic Review, vol. 93,
   pp.1216-1239.
Kovanen A. 2006. "Why Do Prices in Sierra Leone Change so Often? A Case Study Using Micro-
   Level Price Data", WP/06/53, IMF Working Paper, February.
Li, Bin Grace, Christopher Adam, Andrew Berg, Peter Montiel, and Stephen O'Connell (2019).
    "Structural VARs and the Monetary Transmission Mechanism in Low-Income African
    Countries." Journal of African Economies, Vol 28(4), pp.455-478.
Mackowiak, Bartosz and Mirko Wiederholt. 2009. "Optimal Sticky Prices Under Rational
  Inattention", American Economic Review, vol 99 (3), pp. 769­803.
Mankiw, N. Gregory and Ricardo Reiss. 2002. "Sticky Information versus Sticky Prices: A
  Proposal to Replace New Keynesian Phillips Curve", Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol
  117, pp. 1295­1328.
Masahiro, Higo and Yumi Saita. 2007. "Price Setting in Japan: Evidence from CPI Micro Data,"
  Bank of Japan Working Paper Series 07-E-20, Bank of Japan.
Medina J­P., D. Rappoport D. and C. Soto C. 2007. "Dynamics of Price Adjustments: Evidence
  from Micro Level Data for Chile'', Central Bank of Chile Working Papers N° 432, October.
Mishra, Prachi and Peter Montiel. 2012. "How Effective is Monetary Transmission in Low-
   Income Countries? A Survey of the Empirical Evidence", IMF Working Paper No. 12/143.
Nchake, Mamello. 2012. "Price Setting Behaviour and Product Inflation in Lesotho", University
   of Cape Town, South Africa.
Obstfeld, Maurice, Gian Maria Milessi-Ferretti, and Rabah Arezki. 2016. "Oil Prices and the
   Global Economy, it's Complicated", IMF Blog.
Overseas Development Institute Briefing Paper. 1990. "Crisis in the Franc Zone", July.
Portillo, Raphael, Luis-Felipe Zanna, Stephen O'Connell, and Richard Peck. 2016. "Implications
   of Food Subsistence for Monetary Policy and Inflation", IMF Working Paper 16/70.
Raddatz, Claudio. 2007. "Are external shocks responsible for the instability of output in low-
   income countries?", Journal of Development Economics, vol. 84, pp.155-187.
Rand, John and Finn Tarp. 2002. Business Cycles in Developing Countries: Are They
   Different?" World Development.
Rose, Andrew K. 2014. "Surprising Similarities: Recent Monetary Regimes of Small Economies,"
   Journal of International Money and Finance, vol. 49, pp. 5­ 27.
                                             32


ahinöz, Saygin & Bedriye Saraçolu. 2011. "How do firms adjust their prices in Turkey?
  Micro-level evidence." Empirical Economics, vol. 40, pp.601­621.
Shen, Wenyi, Shu-Chun Yang, Luis-Felipe Zanna. 2018. "Government Spending Effects in Low-
   Income Countries." Journal of Development Economics, vol. 133, pp.201-219.
Stiglitz, Joseph, Jose Antonio Ocampo, Shari Spiegel, Ricardo French-Davis and Deepak Nayyar.
    2006. "Is Macroeconomics Different in Developing Countries?", Chapter 2 in Stability with
    Growth: Macroeconomics, Liberalization and Development, Oxford Scholarship Online.
Stock, James H. and Mark H. Watson. 2007. "Why Has U.S. Inflation Become Harder to
   Forecast", Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol 39 (1), pp. 3­33.
Terrones, Marco E. 2020. "Do Fixers Perform Worse than Non-Fixers During Global Recessions
   and Recoveries", in Journal of International Money and Finance, vol 104, June, pp. 1­16.
Unsal, D. Filiz, Chris Papageorgiou, and Hendre Garbers. 2020. "Monetary Policy Frameworks:
   An Index and New Evidence", IMF Working Paper, forthcoming.
Urama N.E., M. Oduh, E. Nwosu, and A. Odo. 2013. "Price Rigidity and Monetary Non-Neutrality
   in Developing Countries: Evidence from Nigeria." International Journal of Economics and
   Financial Issues. Vol. 3(2), pp.525-536.
Walsh, Carl E. 2017. "Monetary Theory and Policy", 4th Edition, MIT Press.
