                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      `YOU WILL:' A MACROECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF DIGITAL ADVERTISING

                                       Jeremy Greenwood
                                          Yueyuan Ma
                                       Mehmet Yorukoglu

                                       Working Paper 28537
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28537


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                            March 2021, Revised July 2021




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research. "You Will" refers to AT&T's 1994 advertising
campaign. It introduced the first clickable ad. Comments are welcome! Address comments to
Mehmet Yorukoglu at myorukoglu@ku.edu.tr

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Jeremy Greenwood, Yueyuan Ma, and Mehmet Yorukoglu. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
`You Will:' A Macroeconomic Analysis of Digital Advertising
Jeremy Greenwood, Yueyuan Ma, and Mehmet Yorukoglu
NBER Working Paper No. 28537
March 2021, Revised July 2021
JEL No. E1,L1,O3

                                         ABSTRACT

An information-based model is developed where traditional and digital advertising finance the
provision of free media goods and affect price competition. The economy is not efficient. Media
goods are under provided. Additionally, there is excessive advertising when ads cannot be
perfectly directed toward potential buyers. The tax-cum-subsidy policy that overcomes these
inefficiencies in an informationally-constrained economy is characterized. The model is
calibrated to the U.S. economy. Digital advertising increases welfare significantly and is
disproportionately financed by better-off consumers. The welfare gain from the optimal tax-cum-
subsidy policy is much smaller than the one realized by the introduction of digital advertising.


Jeremy Greenwood                               Mehmet Yorukoglu
Department of Economics                        Koc University,
University of Pennsylvania                     Rumeli Feneri Yolu
Perelman Cntr for Pol Sci and Econ             Sariyer 34450 Istanbul
133 South 36th Street                          Turkey
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6297                    myorukoglu@ku.edu.tr
and NBER

Yueyuan Ma
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
Perelman Cntr for Pol Sci and Econ
133 South 36th Street
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6297
yueyuanm@sas.upenn.edu
1     Opening

1.1    The Question
Free media goods are everywhere. Think about Facebook, Google, Google Maps, Pandora,
Twitter, Wikipedia, YouTube, and apps for dating, dieting, exercising, playing guitar, medita-
tion, inter alia. Often these products are ...nanced through advertising or the sale of marketing
information for advertising purposes. Digital advertising has two bene...ts. First, digital adver-
tising costs less than traditional advertising. Second, it can be targeted better to consumers
who might actually purchase the product. As a result it might spur competition among ...rms
resulting in lower prices. As with traditional advertising, digital advertising provides free
goods. It does so in spades. Since media goods are not sold, they do not directly show up in
the national income accounts. Additionally, advertising expenditure is deducted o¤ of ...rms'
pro...ts and consequently does not show up as a ...nal expenditure in the national income ac-
counts in the same way as physical investment spending does. Also, even if GDP is adjusted
for such things, GDP and welfare are not the same thing; think about the welfare bene...t of
vaccines versus their cost.
    To address this question a modernized variant of Butters'     s (1977) information-based ad-
vertising model is used. New theoretical results are presented. Quantitative analysis of the
prototype model is undertaken to illustrate its real world potential. Numerical analysis is
also used to explore properties of the model that can'     t be analyzed analytically. Since the
prototype model'   s structure is simple, and the facts drawn upon to illuminate the framework
are limited, this is somewhat an exercise in theory ahead of measurement.
    Signi...cant hot rodding has to be done to bring Butter'  s (1977) framework up to speed for
the task at hand. First, the framework is modi...ed to allow for both digital and traditional
advertising. Both types of advertising permit ...rms to convey information about products and
prices to consumers, as in Butters (1977). Firms choose how much digital and traditional
advertising to do. This decision depends on the relative cost e¤ectiveness of these two in-
formation delivery mechanisms. Second, advertising is associated with the provision of free
media goods. To incorporate the free provision of media goods, and distinct from Butters
(1977), a fully-  edged consumer sector is added. Consumers choose which varieties of goods
to consume, based on the advertised prices they receive, and how much leisure to enjoy. Free
media goods are taken to complement leisure in utility, in the sense of Edgeworth and Pareto.
Third, consumers di¤er by their income, while in Butters (1977) they are all the same. Un-
like Butters (1977), the maximum prices that consumers are willing to pay are endogenously
determined as a function of the economic environment. These prices change as the economy
evolves. A competitive equilibrium with digital and traditional advertising is characterized.
As in Butters (1977), a distribution of prices emerges for a given product. This distribution
di¤ers from Butter (1977) due both to di¤erences in consumers'incomes and the endogeneity


                                                1
of choke prices.
    The resulting competitive equilibrium is not e¢ cient, unlike Butters (1977), for two rea-
sons. To start o¤ with, free media goods are underprovided. Additionally, both digital and
traditional adverts are sent to individuals who can'   t a¤ord to buy the good at the advertised
price. This wastes resources. The second-best tax-cum-subsidy policy that overcomes these
ine¢ ciencies in an informationally-constrained world is fully characterized. A version of the
model is also considered where advertising can be directed toward only those customers who
may buy the product. This is another advantage of digital advertising. Once again, the free
media goods distributed with advertising are underprovided.
    The developed model is calibrated using data on price markups, the ratio of advertising
expenses to consumption expenditure, the ratio of spending on digital relative to traditional
advertising, the click-through rate for digital advertising, the college premium, and the time
spent on leisure by non-college- and college-educated individuals. This is something Butters
(1977) could not have done at the time of his research. The welfare gain from the introduc-
tion of digital advertising is computed. In the baseline setting the di¤erence between digital
and traditional advertising lies in the former'  s cost advantage and the amount of free media
goods delivered. A hybrid model is presented later where digital advertising is directed and
traditional advertising undirected. In both settings the provision of free media goods boosts
consumer welfare signi...cantly. It also leads to more leisure, since media goods and leisure are
complements in utility. The increase in leisure is more pronounced for the non-college edu-
cated vis à vis the college educated. The gain in utility from the rise in leisure is largely o¤set
by a decline in regular consumption because people earn less now. The analysis suggests that
a- uent consumers may ...nance a disproportionately large share of the cost of media goods
because they purchase goods at higher prices. Yet, the move toward digital advertising may
bene...t a- uent consumers more because it stimulates price competition at the higher price
end of the goods market relative to the lower end.

1.2    The Rise of Digital Advertising
Advertising has been around for eons. Babylonian merchants employed barkers who advertised
their wares by shouting out. The Romans used signage outside of stores to sell wares; a bush
signi...ed a wine shop. Painted notices on the walls of bathhouses in Pompeii told of upcoming
exhibitions. Marshall (1920, p. 271) noted that "A single prominent position in a great
thoroughfare promotes the sale of many various things." After the arrival of the printing
press came newspapers and then magazines. Benjamin Franklin published advertisements in
his newspaper, the Pennsylvania Gazette. He is credited with publishing in 1741 the ...rst
magazine ad in the United States in the short-lived The General Magazine and Historical
Chronicle, for all the British Plantations in America.
    Advertising became an industry in the 19th century. N.W. Ayer & Son was founded in


                                                2
Figure 1: A 1919 toothpaste ad in the Saturday Evening Post magazine for S.S. White Dental
Manufacturing Co. Source : Ad*Access, Duke Digital Repository.

Philadelphia in 1869. It sold complete advertising campaigns for businesses. It is credited
with slogans such as "A diamond is forever" used by De Beers. A typical early 20th century
magazine ad is displayed in Figure 1. Direct mail advertising started in 1872 with Aaron
Montgomery Ward who launched a one page catalog, which was quickly followed by the Sear'          s
Catalog.
    Things changed rapidly in the 20th century with the advent of new technologies. Radio ad-
vertising started in the 1920s. In 1922 the ...rst paid radio ad ran in New York City to promote
the sale of apartments. It cost $50 for 50 minutes of airtime. The ...rst paid television ad was
for Bulova watches. It was broadcast in 1941 before a baseball game between the Brooklyn
Dodgers and Philadelphia Phillies. Television advertising expanded with the introduction of
cable tv in the 1950s. MTV introduced music videos that were really just commercials for
music artists. Additionally, channels were started that were devoted to advertising, such as
HSN and QVC.
    The information age began in the 1970s. A descendent of direct mail advertising is email
marketing. This started in 1978 with an ad sent by Digital Equipment Corporation via the
Arpanet to 400 DEC computer users. It didn'         t really take o¤ until the 1990s when many
people started to use the internet through outlets such as Microsoft'      s Hotmail that o¤ered
free email starting in 1996. Last, online advertising started in the 1990s. The ...rst clickable ad
was on Hotwired.com in 1994, then the online version of Wired magazine­       see Figure 2. It was
part of AT&T'   s "You will"campaign that prognosticated about the future in the information
age. The ad enjoyed a click-through rate of 44 percent and cost AT&T $30,000 for three
months.



   The composition of advertising spending changed as new vehicles for delivering ads cropped
up, as Figure 3 shows. Ads in newspapers and magazines declined with the arrival of TV.

                                                3
Figure 2: The ...rst clickable ad, part of AT&T'
                                               s "You Will"campaign. Source : The Atlantic,
2017.

                                                                                         3.2

                                                                                         3.0
                                            45
                                                         News and Mags                   2.8

                                                                                         2.6          Advertising to GDP, %
                           Ad Spending, %

                                                                                         2.4
                                            30
                                                                                         2.2
                                                               TV
                                                                                         2.0

                                                                                         1.8
                                            15
                                                                Direct                   1.6

                                                                                         1.4
                                                           Radio
                                             0                                           1.2
                                                                       Internet
                                                                                         1.0
                                                 1940   1960    1980     2000     2020         1940   1960    1980   2000   2020
                                                               Year                                          Year


Figure 3: Advertising in the United States, 1935-2019. Advertising has consistently amounted
to approximately 2 percent of GDP. Its composition has seen dramatic changes; however, as
new mediums for communicating emerged. Sources : Douglas Galbi and AdAge.


Digital advertising rose with the advent of the information age. It' s interesting to note that
advertising' s share of GDP has remained roughly constant in the postwar period at around 2
percent.
    Online advertising is dominated by two giants, Facebook and Google. Google was founded
in 1998 and Facebook in 2004. The ad revenue earned by these two companies (and Amazon)
is shown in Figure 4 (right panel). Google'  s ad revenue shot up from around $70 million in
2001 to $135 billion in 2019. Likewise, Facebook'    s ascent is equally dramatic, rising from
roughly $2 to $70 billion between 2010 and 2019. The ...rst search engine was Archie, created
in 1990. Alan Emtage, its creator, developed an indexing technique that allowed Archie to
catalogue "freely available or Public Domain documents, images, sounds and services on the
network." Yahoo! Search was the ...rst popular search engine, arriving in 1995. The next
decade saw the rise of Google Search, which yielded better search results using an iterative
algorithm that ranked web pages on the number of websites that linked to them and the
ranking of these websites.
    The ...rst social media website is generally attributed to Six Degrees, founded in 1997.
The name was based on the idea that people are linked to each other by six, or fewer, social
connections. People could create pro...les and "friend" each other. It had around 3.5 million
users at its pinnacle. Things took o¤ with the creation of MySpace in 2003. Between 2005 and
2008 it was the largest social media site in the world with over 100 million users per month.

                                                                                     4
                                                           Banner
                                 40                        Video
                                                           Search
                                                                                                 140
                                                           Social media
                                                           Classifieds
       Revenue by format, $ bn                                                                   120                                     Google
                                 30




                                                                              Ad Revenue, $ bn
                                                                                                 100


                                                                                                  80                                              Facebook
                                 20

                                                                                                  60


                                 10                                                               40


                                                                                                  20                                              Amazon

                                  0                                                                0
                                      2017          2018                                           2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020
                                             Year                                                                           Year



Figure 4: Right panel, ad revenue earned by Amazon, Facebook, and Google, 2001-2019.
Left panel, distribution of U.S. online advertising revenue by format, 2017 and 2018. Source:
statista.


After 2008 Facebook dominated the social media world. Facebook had 2.5 billion monthly
users in 2019.
    A breakdown of online advertising revenue by format is also displayed in Figure 4 (left
panel). Online search is the dominant vehicle for digital advertising, followed by social media.
Google inserts online ads into its products, such as Google Search, using a pay-per-click pricing
model. The search advertising cost per click was $0.69 in 2019. Google Search handled 5.4
billion search requests per day in 2019. Moving up from the third to the second position
displayed by Google Search'  s results leads to a 31 percent increase in tra¢ c. Advertisers pay
for location. Apparently, only 0.78 percent of Google users make it to the second page of
search results. The return on various mediums of advertising is presented in Figure 5, right
panel. Digital search has the highest return in terms of sales per dollar spent on advertising.
The left panel illustrates that spending by advertisers closely tracks the amount of time that
consumers spend on the mediums.




    A lot of digital content is provided for free via advertising. Think about the free goods
just from Google: Chrome, Google Search, Google Maps, Gmail, Google Drive, YouTube,
etc. Figure 6 shows the number of apps available in Google Play Store. In 2019 this was a
whopping 2.8 million. Interestingly, consumers spend little for these products. Less than 14
percent of Google users spent more than $10 per digital media in the Google Play Store, as
the left panel illustrates.




                                                                          5
                                                                                                                            12
                                                                                                                                                                                  11.0
                             35




                                                                                                  Return, $ Cash Multiple
                             30

                                                                                                                             9
                             25                                     Time
                                                                    Spending
                 Share, %




                             20
                                                                                                                                  6.5
                                                                                                                                         6.0
                             15                                                                                              6
                                                                                                                                                   5.0               4.8
                             10
                                                                                                                                                         4.1

                              5
                                                                                                                             3




                                                                                                                                                           t



                                                                                                                                                                         y
                                                                                                                                                   io
                                                                                                                                  TV



                                                                                                                                          H




                                                                                                                                                                                      ch
                              0




                                                                                                                                                          in



                                                                                                                                                                     la
                                                                                                                                         O



                                                                                                                                               ad



                                                                                                                                                         Pr




                                                                                                                                                                                  ar
                                                                                                                                                                    sp
                                                                                                                                        O
                                   TV       Print         Desktop     Radio    Mobile




                                                                                                                                               R




                                                                                                                                                                                 se
                                                                                                                                                                   di


                                                                                                                                                                             ig
                                                                                                                                                               ig


                                                                                                                                                                             D
                                                                                                                                                               D
Figure 5: Right panel, the return per dollar of advertising by medium in the United States for
2017, measured as a cash multiple, 2001-2019. Left panel, U.S. advertising spending vs time
spent by consumers by medium, 2018. Source: statista.




                                         ebooks
                            1.00         movies & tv
                                         music                                                           3500
                                         audio books
                            0.95         games
                                                                                                         3000
      Consumers, fraction




                            0.90                                                                         2500
                                                                                            1,000's




                                                                                                         2000
                            0.85
                                                                                                                                                         Applications
                                                                                                         1500
                            0.80
                                                                                                         1000

                            0.75
                                                                                                                   500


                            0.70                                                                                             0
                                    $0              $10             $40        $100
                                                                                                                                  Ju 3
                                                                                                                                 N 14
                                                                                                                                 O 9



                                                                                                                                 O 1




                                                                                                                                 D 15

                                                                                                                                 M 6



                                                                                                                                 D 17

                                                                                                                                 D 18
                                                                                                                                         9
                                                                                                                                 D 0



                                                                                                                                  Ju 2




                                                                                                                                 D 7
                                                                                                                                    l '1
                                                                                                                                      '0



                                                                                                                                      '1




                                                                                                                                      '1




                                                                                                                                      '1
                                                                                                                                      '1



                                                                                                                                      '1




                                                                                                                                      '1




                                                    Expenditure, 
                                                                                                                                    l'

                                                                                                                                      '




                                                                                                                                      '

                                                                                                                                      '
                                                                                                                                   ct



                                                                                                                                   ct
                                                                                                                             ec



                                                                                                                                  ec




                                                                                                                                  ov

                                                                                                                                  ec



                                                                                                                                  ec

                                                                                                                                  ec

                                                                                                                                  ec
                                                                                                                                   ar
                                                                                                                            D




Figure 6: Right panel, applications in the Google Play Store, 2009-2019. Left panel, money
spent by U.S. consumers on Google digital media products in 2017, presented in cumulative
distribution form. Source: statista.




                                                                                        6
2       A Brief Review of the Advertising Literature
Advertising has been part and parcel of economic life for a long period of time, as Figure
3 suggests. Until the second part of the twentieth century, however, economists paid little
attention to advertising. The economic analysis of advertising can be traced back to insightful
work by Marshall (1920). This subject area has      ourished since then.1
    At a time when competitive equilibrium and full information were the fundamentals of
economic thinking, economists struggled with the question of why consumers would respond
to advertising. Two views emerged. The ...rst one holds that advertising is persuasive, altering
consumers' tastes and creating brand loyalty. Not surprisingly, according to the persuasive
view, advertising has no real value to consumers. It can have important anti-competitive
e¤ects, resulting in increased economic concentration. Marshall (1920, p. 304 and 306) noted
that "much of the modern expenditure on advertising is not constructive, but combative,"
and that "advertisements which are mainly combative generally involve social waste."
    The second view holds that advertising is informative. According to this perspective,
markets are characterized by imperfect consumer information that leads to ine¢ ciencies. Here,
rather than being a problem, advertising emerges as a remedy o¤ered by the market. Clearly,
according to the informative view, advertising promotes competition. Marshall (1920, p. 305)
also thought that advertising could be constructive by "the assistance, which they a¤ord
to customers by enabling them to satisfy their wants without inordinate fatigue or loss of
time, would be appropriate, even if the business were not in strong rivalry with others." He
noted that "exceptionally constructive are all those measures needed for explaining to people
generally the claims of some new thing, which is capable of supplying a great but latent want."
    In the approach taken here advertising is informative. The foundation of the informative
view of advertising was laid by Ozga (1960) and Stigler (1961). They saw price dispersion
as a re   ection of consumer ignorance and advertising as a valuable source of information for
consumers that results in a reduction in price dispersion. Telser (1964) signi...cantly advanced
the theoretical and empirical foundations for the informative view, concluding that adver-
tising is a sign of competition and is an important source of information for the consumers.
Following these lines, Butters (1977) o¤ered the ...rst equilibrium analysis of advertising in a
multi-...rm model. He showed that advertising in equilibrium is e¢ cient. Stegeman (1991)
extended Butters'   s (1977) work with the assumption that consumers'valuations of products
are heterogeneous. He demonstrated that informative advertising is then ine¢ cient.2
    1
     Bagwell (2007) provides a detailed survey of the literature, so only a capsule summary is given here.
    2
     Digital advertising was not around at the time of Stegeman'    s (1991) paper. Like Butters (1977), he did not
have a fully  eshed-out consumer sector, which wasn'  t needed for their analyses. The latter is important for the
current inquiry for two reasons. First, consumer behavior changes as the economy evolves due to technological
progress in advertising and, second, tastes need to be speci...ed for the welfare analysis. Additionally, Stegeman
did not present the optimal tax-cum-subsidy policy that renders the advertising economy e¢ cient. Last, he



                                                        7
     Extending Butters'  s (1977) model to an economy where ...rms have di¤ering levels of pro-
ductivity, Dinlersoz and Yorukoglu (2008) studied how improvements in advertising technology
a¤ect industry equilibrium. In related work, Dinlersoz and Yorukoglu (2012) analyzed how
advertising technology a¤ects ...rm dynamics. They showed that entry, exit, and volatility
in ...rm size and value, increase as advertising technology improves. The equilibria in both
models are e¢ cient. Along the same lines, Gourio and Rudanko (2014) studied the role in
...rm and industry dynamics that the customer acquisition process has through marketing.
     Incorporating advertising into macroeconomic frameworks is relatively new. Using a
macroeconomic model, Hall (2014) argued that the cyclical behavior of advertising provides
revealing information about the behavior of macroeconomic wedges over the cycle. In more
recent work, Perla (2019) builds a model where consumers learn about ...rms slowly through
a network of connections between consumers and ...rms that endogenously evolves through
the life cycle of an industry. The implications of advertising for ...rm dynamics and economic
growth through its interaction with R&D investment at the ...rm level are analyzed by Cave-
naile and Roldan (2019). They provide empirical evidence supporting substitution between
advertising and R&D using exogenous changes in the tax treatment of R&D expenditures
across U.S. states. Rachel (2019) argues that the rise of leisure goods provided by advertis-
ing has an adverse impact on welfare. As leisure rises the amount of labor going into R&D
declines. This sti   es growth. Both Cavenaile and Roldan (2019) and Rachel (2019) take a
branding approach to advertising, as opposed to the information-based one here. Advertising
bene...ts ...rms by either in  uencing consumer tastes or as a direct input into production. It
operates by allowing a ...rm to get a leg up on a competitors, so it has the counterproductive
element to it in the    avor of Marshall (1920). In neither paper is there digital-speci...c techno-
logical progress in advertising or heterogenous consumer types. Last, Dinlersoz, Goldschlag,
Yorukoglu, and Zolas (2021) incorporate the interaction between advertising and trademarks
in a macroeconomic model to study the impact of trademarking on product quality, the real-
location of resources across ...rms, and welfare.

3    Setup
The analysis starts with the case of undirected advertising and then turns to directed advertis-
ing.3 The modi...cations required to the setup to analyze directed advertising are minimal. To
did not take the model to data; calibration was in its infancy at the time of his research.
    3
      The setup is static. Adding dynamics would greatly complicate things­   see for instance Dinlersoz, Gold-
schlag, Yorukoglu, and Zolas (2021). Clean theoretical results would be di¢ cult to obtain. The static setup
is probably not much of a drawback for the question at hand, however, since issues such as the entry of new
products and growth are abstracted from. For new products the buildup of information over time might be
important. The rise of digital advertising has been very rapid, implying that any transitional dynamics would
need to operate at a fast clip. Also, the depreciation rate on advertising is high, somewhere between 30 and
50 percent, so treating it as a ow rather than a stock is not a great violation for the question entered here.


                                                      8
this end, consider an economy with three types of goods; namely, generic consumption goods,
media leisure goods, and leisure. At most a unit measure of varieties of regular consumption
goods can be produced. There is free entry into the production of each variety of regular
goods, i 2 [0; 1], subject to incurring a ...xed cost of r. To sell its product a regular goods
producer must advertise to potential customers, which is costly. Advertising can be done in
two ways. The ...rst way is through traditional advertising. The second way is via modern
online advertising. A potential customer receives ads for a variety in a random manner. A
producer of regular good i is free to set the price, pi , that it wants. This can di¤er across
variety-i producers because consumers will vary in the advertised prices that they randomly
received in their information sets.
    Ads are delivered via media goods, which are provided to consumers for free. There are m
media goods available. Media goods have a click-through rate that represents the number of
ads that the good will deliver. The supply of media goods, m, is determined by the amount
of advertising that ...rms want to do. The cost of providing these goods is absorbed as an
advertising expense.
    Turn now to the consumer/worker. Regular good-i must be consumed in the discrete
quantity ci 2 f0; 1g. An individual might not consume the full spectrum of regular goods
because either they didn'   t receive an ad for a good or because they couldn' t a¤ord them at
the advertised price. Media leisure good-j is consumed in the discrete quantity mj 2 f0; 1g.
Since media leisure goods are free, the consumer will enjoy the full spectrum of what is
currently available. There is a unit mass of people. Each person is indexed by a talent level
  2 f ; g, where = 1 < . The fractions of the population with and are denoted by t
and 1 t. A person with ability level = is unskilled and earns the wage rate 1. A skilled
person, = , earns the wage , but must incur a ...xed education cost, e, in terms of time. In
other words, the wage rate for unskilled labor is the numeraire, which implies that all goods
prices are measured in terms of unskilled labor. An individual has one unit of time that they
can split between working in the market, h, leisure, l, and education, e. As will be seen, the
education cost operates to make the skilled work more than the unskilled, since the former
must recover their investment in human capital.
    Preferences are given by
                    Z v                                  Z m
                                 (1    )
                 ln(    ci di) +         ln[ l + (1    )(    mj dj ) ], with < 0;           (1)
                    0                                   0

where v and m demarcate the set of available regular and media goods. These preferences are
well de...ned even when particular varieties of consumption goods are not consumed. Media
goods can be mixed with leisure to generate utility; i.e., they are leisure goods. For example,
you must spent time to enjoy an online game. The fact that regular consumption goods are
aggregated linearly is not a undue restriction. Consumption within a variety is indivisible
and hence there is no intensive margin of consumption. The consumer decides whether or not

                                              9
to consume an extra variety, which is a continuous decision. Total consumption for a person
moves smoothly as in the standard macroeconomic model.
     The assumption that        < 0 implies that leisure, l, and leisure goods, the mj '     s, are
Edgeworth-Pareto complements in utility­      in other words, the cross partial in utility is posi-
tive. The idea is that more leisure goods increase the marginal utility of leisure. Therefore,
you will want more leisure at the margin. The notion of leisure complementing goods is
in Greenwood and Vandenbrouke (2008) and Kopecky (2011). Kopecky (2011) suggests the
decline in the price of leisure goods encouraged the elderly to spend a larger fraction of their
life in retirement. Aguiar et al (2017) use this notion to argue that part of the recent decline
in hours worked by young males is due to the advent of recreational computing. Kopytov et
al (2021) ...nd that declining recreation good prices can account for much of the increase in
leisure in both the United States and across the world, due to their complementarity with
leisure.
     Last, the individual's budget constraint is given by
                          Z v                   (
                                                   (1 l e), skilled;
                              pi ci di = h( )                                                   (2)
                           0                      1 l;        unskilled;
where, with some abuse of notation, in this context pi represents the minimum price for good i
that the consumer/worker has in his information set and h( ) is the hours worked by a type-
person.

4    Regular Goods Firms
Firms can freely enter into the production of any variety of regular goods subject to a ...xed
cost of r (in units of unskilled labor). Suppose that there are v active varieties of goods with
n ...rms producing each variety for a total of vn ...rms in the economy. The quantities v and n
will be determined in equilibrium by the fact that ...rms must earn zero pro...ts. Any variety of
regular goods can be produced by a ...rm according to the constant-returns-to-scale production

                                            o = h= ;

where o is the output of the good and h is the amount of labor employed. The unit cost of
producing a good is .
    The constant returns to scale assumption is standard in macroeconomics. Unlike the
standard model in macroeconomics, however, the number of ...rms producing a variety will be
determinate, due to the information friction. In fact, with increasing returns there could be
many ...rms producing the same variety. On this, even in the current setup average production
costs decline with sales due to the presence of the ...xed cost. High volume ...rms will supply
consumers at low prices while low volume ones will sell at higher prices. The fact that ...rms can
sell at di¤erent prices is discussed below. The simple production structure adopted permits
new theoretical results to be obtained, which is important when crossing uncharted territory.

                                                10
    To sell its product at time price p, a ...rm must reach out to customers, which involves
advertising.4 Ads are delivered through media goods, which can be distributed through either
a traditional or digital vehicle. Let at and ad represent the number of traditional and digital
ads that are sent out by the ...rm. To generate at traditional ads a ...rm must provide t media
goods that each has a click through rate of < 1; i.e.,

                                                  at = t:                                                 (3)

The cost (measured in terms of unskilled labor) for traditional advertising is

                                  A(at ) = at = ( t) , with           > 1.                                (4)

Likewise, digital ads are distributed via digital goods provision. A digital good has a click-
through rate of < 1. So, d digital goods will deliver a    ow of ads, ad , according to

                                                 ad = d:                                                  (5)

The cost of producing ad digital ads is

                                           A(qad ) = (q d) ;                                              (6)

where q is a technology factor reecting the cost advantage of digital advertising. As q declines,
digital advertising becomes more e¢ cient relative to traditional advertising. Additionally, if
digital advertising can directed to consumers who possibly will buy the product, then this
o¤ers a potential advantage over traditional advertising­  directed advertising is turned to in
Section 12. These cost functions imply that there is decreasing returns in advertising. This
is a feature of the data, according to Bagwell (2007). When the click-through rate is low
a lot of free content will have to be provided to achieve a given impact from advertising.
As will be shown in Section 10, the click-through rate of digital advertising is lower than
traditional advertising, implying that digital advertising will provide more free media goods
per advertising message noticed by consumers.
    Because consumers will di¤er in the ads that they have in their information sets, ...rms do
not have to charge the same price. This information friction allows ...rms to charge a price
higher than its marginal production cost, . Let p represent the lowest pro...table price in
equilibrium and likewise p denote the maximum pro...table one. Now, a ...rm is free to charge
   4
     This is a key distinction between a Butters-style advertising model and a directed search model. In
a directed search model there is no friction associated with providing consumers information about posted
prices. Additionally, unlike a directed search model, in an advertising model a ...rm can supply all customers
who want to buy its product. In a directed search model customers queue up to buy a product from a ...rm
with limited selling capacity. Thus, a customer can only expect to purchase the good with some probability.
So, the friction here concerns the prices that consumers have in their information sets and not whether a
consumer will be able to buy a good from the ...rm at the posted price.

                                                     11
any price p such that p p p. The higher the price, the less likely the ...rm will make a sale.
The set of viable equilibrium prices, P , is characterized later in Proposition 2. Since there is
free entry into a variety, it must transpire that a ...rm will earn the same pro...t at any price,
p 2 P.

4.1     Advertising
Let S (p) = Pr(salejp) be the probability that an ad at price p will generate a sale for the
...rm. This probability is exogenous for a ...rm and is unpacked later. The ...rm chooses its
advertising strategy to maximize its pro...ts at price p. So, its advertisements solve

                            (p; q )     maxf(p             )(at + ad )S (p)          A(at )     A(qad )g:                         (7)
                                        at ;ad

Here the term p            represents the ...rm' s unit pro...ts (excluding advertising costs) while
(at + ad )S (p) is the ...rm's total sales. Its advertising costs are A(at ) + A(qad ). The ...rst-order
conditions for at and ad are
                                                            1                                            1
                        (p            )S (p) =        at        and (p          )S (p) =        q ad         :                    (8)

The common lefthand side of these expressions is the expected pro...t (or marginal bene...t)
from sending out an extra ad. The righthand sides represent the marginal costs of an extra
traditional or digital ad. Clearly, the marginal cost of digital advertising increases with its
cost factor, q .

Proposition 1 (Advertising) All ...rms do the same amount of traditional, at , and digital ad-
vertising, ad , even when charging di¤erent prices for their products, p 2 P . Digital advertising
decreases with its cost factor, q .

Proof. See the Appendix.
     To understand the logic underlying the proposition, note that in equilibrium a ...rm is free
to pick any price it desires. So, expected unit pro...ts, (p     )S (p), must be constant across
equilibrium prices. Suppose not. Then ...rms with higher values for (p        )S (p) would make
more than ...rms with lower values because the former could always do the same amount of
advertising as the latter.
     If the marginal bene...t is constant across prices, then from (8) so must be the marginal
costs. This implies that at and ad are invariant across prices, p. Finally, from the above
...rst-order conditions for at and ad , it is immediate that
                       (p        )S (p)                                (p       )S (p)
              at = [                      ]1=(   1)
                                                      and ad = [                         ]1=(   1)
                                                                                                     =q      =(1      )
                                                                                                                          at ;    (9)
                                                                            q
or equivalently
                                 (p        )S (p)                               (p       )S (p)
                       at = [                       ]1=(    1)
                                                                 and ad = [                       ]1=(       1)
                                                                                                                  ,              (10)
                                                                                     q

                                                                  12
where the second line follows from the proposition. If there are n ...rms producing each variety,
then the total number of adverts per variety, a, is

                                                                   =(1        )
                                                                                       (p         )S (p)
                        a = n(at + ad ) = n(1 + q                                 )[                       ]1=(   1)
                                                                                                                       :       (11)

5       Pricing

5.1      Advertised Price Distribution
Consumers receive ads randomly, without any targeting by ...rms­          targeting is discussed in
Section 12. Assume that there is a much larger mass of consumers vis à vis ...rms and that no
consumer receives more than one ad from the same ...rm. Let a represent the number of ads
for a variety per consumer in the economy. The number of ads, i, that a consumer receives
will be distributed according to a Poisson distribution e a ai =i!.5 Now, let P (p) = Pr(price
    p) be the fraction of ads for a variety that have a price less than or equal to p. The function
P (p) is characterized later in Proposition 3.
     Suppose a ...rm sends an ad to a consumer o¤ering to sell the good at price p. The odds
of a consumer with i other ads having no price lower than p are [1 P (p)]i . Even when the
...rm's price p is the lowest one in the consumer'  s information set, the person may not buy the
good because it is too expensive. Let I (p; ) = 1 denote the situation when a type- consumer
buys the ...rm'  s good at price p and I (p; ) = 0 when not. It then follows that the probability
of an ad with price p to a consumer will generate a sale, given that the consumer may have
received i = 0; 1; 2;     other ads, is given by6
                                                      X
                                                      1
                                                        ai
                                                  a
                S (p) = Pr(salejp) = e                            [1      P (p)]i [tI (p; ) + (1                  t)I (p; )]
                                                       i=0
                                                             i!
                            aP (p)
                      =e             [tI (p; ) + (1          t)I (p; )]:
    5
     To see this, imagine an economy with a discrete number of consumers, c, who are       ooded with ac ads per
variety. The probability that a consumer will receive i ads is distributed according to the binomial distribution

                                                       ac 1 i             1 ac i
                                                   (     )( ) (1            )    ;
                                                        i c               c

where 1=c is the chance that a consumer gets an ad (success) and 1 1=c are the odds that they won'
                                                                                                 t (failure).
                                  ac
Out of a set of ac ads there are ( ) ways each event could happen. Finally,
                                   i

                                                 ac 1 i                1 ac   i             a i
                                         lim (     )( ) (1               )         =e        a =i!:
                                         c!1      i c                  c

    6
                                                        P1
     To go from the ...rst to the second line, set s = i=0 (ai =i!)xi = [1 + ax + (ax)2 =2! + (ax)3 =3! + ], which
implies that ds=dx = [a + a2 (ax) + a3 (ax) +        ] = as. Therefore, (1=s)ds=dx = a so that s = eax . Now, let
                    P1 i                     i     a[1 P (p)]
x = 1 P (p) to get i=0 (a =i!)[1 P (p)] = e                   , from which the desired result follows.


                                                                  13
    Three prices play a central role in the analysis; namely, the minimum price in the economy,
p, the maximum price at which the unskilled will buy, p( ), and the maximum price at which
the skilled will purchase, p. The minimum price is determined by technological considerations
while the maximum prices also depend upon the outcome of the consumer problems for the
unskilled and skilled, an important distinction from Butters (1977). The determination of p
and p is discussed now with the speci...cation of p( ) following shortly after. Consider a ...rm
that chooses to charge the minimum price, p. All the ads that this ...rm sends out will result
in purchases by consumers, implying S (p) = 1. Since there is free entry into the production
of any variety, this ...rm will earn zero pro...ts. Hence,

                                                              (p; q )          r = 0:

Solving this equation gives
                                                                  r (              1)=
                                                      p=[              ]                 + ;                                                (12)
                                                                  (q )
where
                                                   =(1    )       1=(1     )        1=(1     )            =(1   )
                               (q )     (1 + q                )                (                                    )
                                                   =(1    )     1                    1
                                      = (1 + q                )( )1=(          1)
                                                                                    ( )     =(   1)
                                                                                                      (         1) > 0:

(See the proof of Proposition 1 in the Appendix for guidance.) The minimum price, p, is
determined solely by technological factors. As a consequence so is the amount of traditional,
at , and digital advertising, ad , that each ...rm does, a fact that follows from (10) in conjunction
with S (p) = 1.
     Since a ...rm is free to pick any price it must be the case that

                                        (p0 ; q ) =      (p00 ; q ), for any p0 and p00 2 P :

Proposition 1 states that all ...rms do the same amount of advertising. Therefore,

                                             (p0         )S (p0 ) = (p00                   )S (p00 );                                       (13)

or equivalently

              aP (p0 )
  (p0    )e              [tI (p0 ; ) + (1      t)I (p0 ; )]
                                                                                                 aP (p00 )
                                                                         = (p00             )e               [tI (p00 ; ) + (1   t)I (p00 ; )]:

    Turn to the ...rm that charges the highest price, p. Only skilled consumers ( = ) who
have no other ads will buy the ...rm' s product. Therefore, S (p) = e a (1 t), because P (p) = 1
(i.e., all ads have a price lower than p). Therefore, evaluating the above expression at p0 = p
and p00 = p gives
                                    e a (1 t)(p    )=p        ;

                                                                         14
so that the maximum price at which a skilled person buys a good is
                                     p                       [r= (q )]( 1)=
                              p=                    +   =                   + :                 (14)
                                   e a (1      t)               e a (1 t)
    Next, focus on the highest price that unskilled consumers can a¤ord, p( ). At any higher
price there will be a discrete drop o¤ in potential customers from 1 down to 1 t. To recover
pro...ts there must be a discrete jump up in the lowest price above p( ), denoted by p" ( ).
Since there are no prices in between p( ) and p" ( ) it transpires that P (p( )) = P (p" ( )),
which is formalized later in Proposition 3. The prices at the left and righthand sides of the
jump must have equal pro...ts, so that (1 t)[p" ( )      ] = p( )   , which yields
                                             p( )
                                            p" ( ) =     + :                                    (15)
                                                 1 t
   Now, there must be ...rms charging every price, p, in the set P = [p; p( )] [ [p" ( ); p]. To
understand why, suppose to the contrary that there is a hole in one of the intervals. Firms at
the lower edge of the hole could increase pro...ts by raising their price slightly, because this will
not a¤ect the number of customers they have. The proposition below describes the situation.

Proposition 2 (Pricing) For any variety of regular goods there are ...rms charging every price,
p, in the set P = [p; p( )] [ [p" ( ); p]. Take the aggregate amount of advertising per variety,
a, as given. Then, both p and p are increasing in the entry cost, r, the marginal cost of
production, , and the cost of digital advertising, q . Last, the maximum price, p, is decreasing
in the fraction of individuals, 1 t, who are skilled.

Proof. See the Appendix.
It's probably obvious that an increase in the cost of doing business, as given by r, , and q , will
lead to the pricing set P =[p; p( )] [ [p" ( ); p] shifting rightward, because given the free-entry
assumption ...rms must recover their costs. When there are more skilled consumers, 1 t, it
becomes more pro...table to charge the maximum price, p, since the odds of an ad landing on
a skilled person increase. But, again, perfect competition will drive the maximum price down
so that ...rms earn zero pro...ts.
     Direct attention now to characterizing the distribution of prices in the set P = [p; p( )] [
[p" ( ); p]. Using the fact that S (p) = 1 in equation (13) gives
                              aP (p)
                   (p    )e            [tI (p; ) + (1       t)I (p; )] = p   , for p 2 P :      (16)

Since this equation must hold for all p in the pricing set, P , it traces out the function P (p).

Proposition 3 (Advertised Price Distribution) The cumulative distribution for prices, P (p),is
given by
                            8
                            >
                            < lnf(p     )=(p     )g=a;        for p 2 [p; p( )];
      P (p) = Pr(price p) = lnf[p( )       ]=(p     )g=a;     for p 2 [p( ); p" ( )];    (17)
                            >
                            :
                               lnf(1 t)(p      )=(p     )g=a; for p 2 [p" ( ); p]:

                                                        15
                                                  1.0



                                                  0.8             Transacted




                          Fraction of Prices  p
                                                  0.6



                                                  0.4                            Advertised, P(p)



                                                  0.2


                                                            p()                p()                     p
                                                  0.0
                                                        p 1.05        1.10      1.15      1.20        1.25
                                                                                                    Price, p


Figure 7: The cumulative distribution functions for both advertised prices, P (p), and trans-
acted prices that obtain in calibrated equilibrium for 2018­      Section 10 discusses the model'  s
calibration. It is not pro...table for a ...rm to price in the open interval p( ); p" ( ) . The dis-
tribution function for advertised prices stochastically dominates the one for transacted prices,
because consumers buy at the lowest price in their information set.


The associated density function reads
                               8
                               >
                               < 1=[a(p                                      )] > 0; for p 2 [p; p( )];
                      P1 (p) = 0;                                                    for p 2 [p( ); p" ( )];   (18)
                               >
                               :
                                 1=[a(p                                      )] > 0; for p 2 [p" ( ); p]:

Proof. See the Appendix.
Figure 7 illustrates the cumulative distribution for prices. For subsequent use note that P1 (p)
represents the fraction of ads o¤ering to sell a variety at price p.

5.2    Number of Varieties
How many varieties, v , will be produced? Since there is free entry into the production of
any variety of consumption goods all possible varieties will be sold. If this wasn'  t the case,
a producer could move into a variety where no one else is producing and earn supra-normal
pro...ts because of the lack of competition in advertised prices. Individuals will not consume
all varieties, though. People won' t receive ads for some varieties and even when they do get
ads some varieties may be too expensive for unskilled consumers.

Proposition 4 (Number of Varieties) All consumption goods in the feasible set [0; 1] will be
produced; i.e., v = 1.

Proof. See the Appendix.


                                                                               16
5.3    Maximum Price the Unskilled will Pay, p( )
What is the maximum price, p( ), at which an unskilled person will buy a good? To begin
with, since S (p) = 1, equation (13) also implies

                                                        (p         )
                                         S (p) =                     , for p 2 P :                     (19)
                                                        (p         )

Let B (p) = Pr(buy) represent that the probability that a consumer will buy at price p. This
is not quite the same as the probability that a ...rm will make a sale at price p, S (p), because
the latter averages over both types of consumers. The two probabilities are related as follows:
                                                        (
                                                            S (p);           for p 2 [p; p( )];
                     B (p)      Pr(buy) =
                                                            S (p)=(1     t); for p 2 [p" ( ); p]:
For given variety, the odds of a purchase at price p by a consumer are P1 (p)B (p). Since there
is a unit mass of varieties, a type- person's budget constraint can be written as
                                         Z   p( )
                                     a              pP1 (p)B (p)dp = h( );                             (20)
                                         p


where h( ) is hours worked and p( ) denotes the time price of the most expensive good the
person will buy; i.e., p( ) = p( ), for = , and p( ) = p, for = . Equation (20) pins
down p( ). To see this, set = in (20) and perform the required integration, while using
(18) and (19), to obtain

                                     p( )
                  a(p        )fln[                  ]                   +            g=a = 1   l( ):   (21)
                                      p                     p( )            p

This equation determines p( ).

6     Supply of Free Media Goods
By reference to (3) and (5), it is immediate that the quantity of media goods provided, m, is
given by
                               at ad        p              1 q =(1 )
                      m = n( + ) = n(             )1=( 1) [ +        ]:                 (22)

Again, to obtain the requisite impact from advertising, the lower the click-through rate, the
higher will be the amount of free media good required to deliver the speci...ed information.

7     The Consumer/Worker Problem
A consumer/worker'   s optimization problem is to maximize (1) subject to (2) by the choice
        v
of fci gi and l, for 2 f ; g. Focus on a generic type- worker and index the regular goods
from the lowest to the highest priced so that pi is increasing in i. Let c( ) signify the most

                                                               17
expensive generic good consumed by the individual, which has the price p( ). This also
                                                                                    R c( )
represents the person'    s overall consumption of generic goods because c( ) = 0 ci di, as
ci = 1 for i 2 [0; c( )]. Now, from the budget constraint (2) it'
                                                                s clear that c( ) can be written
as a function of a person'   s productivity, , and hours worked, h( ). So, write7

                                            c( ) = C (h( ); );

with
                    C1 (h( ); ) = =p( ) > 0 and C2 (h( ); ) = h( )=p( ) > 0;                             (23)
Using this fact, the consumer/worker'
                                    s maximization problem can be reformulated as

                                                                 (1    )
            W ( ) = maxf ln[C (1          l( )      e; ; e)] +             ln[ l( ) + (1      )m ]g:     (24)
                       l( )


The generic ...rst-order condition for the leisure of a type- person, or l( ), is:
                                                                       1
                                                                l( )
                                          = (1        )                          ; for   2 f ; g.        (25)
                      c( ) p( )                           l( ) + (1        )m
                      | {z }                |                 {z                }
               Marginal Cost of Leisure          Marginal Benefit of Leisure

The righthand side of this equation is the marginal bene...t from an extra unit of leisure. It
is increasing in the quantity of media leisure goods, m, since < 0. The lefthand side is the
marginal cost of leisure. An extra unit of leisure leads to a drop in income for a type- person.
This causes a drop in regular consumption, c( ), of =p( ), where p( ) is the price of the last
regular good consumed. This is multiplied by the marginal utility of regular goods, =c( ).
    The upshot of this ...rst-order condition is given by the proposition below.

Proposition 5 (Consumption/Leisure) An individual's consumption and leisure satisfy the
following properties:

   1. Leisure, l( ), is increasing in the number of media leisure goods, m;

   2. Regular consumption, c( ), is decreasing in the number of media leisure goods, m, and
      is increasing in the level of skill, ;

   3. Work e¤ort, h( ), rises with the cost of an education, e.

Proof. See the Appendix.
The ...rst point follows from the fact that an increase in the number of media goods, m, raises
the marginal bene...t of leisure, l( ), because the two goods are complements in the utility
   7
               Rv           R c( )
    Note that 0 pi ci di = 0 pi di = h( ). To compute C1 (h( ); ), take the total di¤erential of the above
equation while using Leibniz' s rule to get pc( ) cc( ) dc( ) = dh( ) so that dc( )=dh( ) C1 (h( ); ) = =p( ).
A similar calculation gives the formula for C2 (h( ); ).

                                                          18
function (i.e., < 0). Next, the rise in leisure, l( ), is connected with a drop in work e¤ort,
h( ), that reduces regular consumption, c( ). An increase in decreases the marginal cost of
regular consumption in terms of forgone leisure. Hence, regular consumption rises. The third
result transpires because an increase in e raises the marginal cost of leisure for any given level
of hours worked, h( ), implying that regular consumption, c( ), will be lower. This property
is important because it implies that if an education is costly enough, then the skilled will
work more than the unskilled. This allows the framework to explain the recent rise in the
unskilled's leisure relative to the skilled's.
    Last, the overall consumption of generic goods by a type- person, c( ) for 2 f ; g, is
given by
                                        Z p( )
                               c( ) = a        B (p)P1 (p)dp [cf. (20)].
                                         p

where again P1 (p)B (p) represents the odds of a purchase at price p. Evaluating the integral
at = gives consumption for an unskilled person,
                                Z p( )
                                         p
                       c( ) = a                dp [using (18) and (19)]
                                 p     a(p  )2
                              =1    S (p( )).                                                (26)

The expression has an intuitive interpretation since 1 S (p( )) represents the odds for each
variety of getting at least one advertised price less than or equal to p( ). Alternatively, when
  = the formula yields a skilled person'    s consumption,
                         Z p( )                     Z p
                                  p             1             p
               c( ) = a[              2
                                        dp +                      2
                                                                    dp]=a = 1 e a .          (27)
                          p     ( p  )        1   t  p" ( ) ( p )
              a
Here, 1   e       =1   S (p) is the probability of receiving at least one ad per variety.

8   Equilibrium
In equilibrium the labor market must clear. The labor-market-clearing condition reads

                            [tc( ) + (1 t)c( )] + n[A(at ) + A(qad ) + r]
                                                                                             (28)
                                    = t[1 l( )] + (1 t) [1 l( ) e]:

The lefthand side is the demand for labor. The ...rst term, [tc( ) + (1 t)c( )], is the demand
for labor originating from the consumption of regular goods. The second term represents the
labor used in advertising and absorbed by the ...xed costs associated with entry for the n
regular ...rms, n[A(at ) + A(qad ) + r]. The righthand side is the supply of labor from unskilled
and skilled workers. This condition can be thought of as tying down the number of entrants,
n, into a variety of regular goods.
    It'
      s now time to take stock of things.

                                                 19
    De...nition of an Equilibrium An equilibrium for the economy is de...ned by a solution
for advertising, at , ad , and a, overall consumption, c( ) and c( ), the quantity of media goods
consumed, m, labor supply, l( ) and l( ), the number of ...rms producing a variety, n, and the
prices of regular goods, p, p, p( ), and p" ( ), such that:

     1. Advertising is done in accordance with (10) and (11), which determine at , ad , and a,
        where S (p) = 1. These solutions depend on the values for n and p.

     2. The minimum and maximum time prices for regular goods, p and p, are regulated by
        (12) and (14), taking as given a.

     3. The highest time price paid by an unskilled person, p( ), is described by the pricing
        equation (21), assuming values for a, l( ), and p. The price for the skilled at the jump
        point, p" ( ), is determined by (15) as a function of p( ).

     4. The quantity of media goods consumed, m, is given by (22), where the solution for m is
        dependent on at , ad , and n.

     5. The solution to the consumer-worker's problem for c( ) and l( ) is governed by (25),
        (26), and (27) for 2 f ; g, given p( ) and m. These solutions take as given a, m, p,
        p( ), p" ( ), and p( ) = p.

     6. The labor market clears in accordance with (28), which gives the number of ...rms per
        variety, n, as a function of at , ad , c( ), c( ), l( ), and l( ).

9       E¢ ciency of the Equilibrium
The competitive equilibrium is not e¢ cient. This transpires for two reasons why the equilib-
rium is not e¢ cient. First, ads o¤ering to sell goods at high prices are being sent to unskilled
consumers that can never a¤ord to buy them. This is a social waste of resources. Second,
when engaging in advertising, ...rms do not take into account how the introduction of free
media goods bene...ts the consumer. So, there is an underprovision of media goods.
   The Pareto optima for the economy can be traced out by solving the following informationally-
constrained planning problem, where 2 [0; 1] is the relative planning weight that is being
placed on unskilled individuals:

                                                  t(1     )                             at       ad
               max                  t ln c( ) +                lnf l( ) + (1     )[n(        +        )] g
    c( );c( );at ;ad ;n;l( );l( )

                                                          (1     t)(1   )                                    at       ad
                                    + (1   t) ln c( ) +                     lnf l( ) + (1             )[n(        +        )] g ;

                                                                                                                              (29)


                                                                20
subject to
                                                      (at +ad )n
                                      1         e                    c( ) = 0;                                            (30)
and

 t[1   l( )] + (1   t) [1   l( )     e]        t c( )          (1         t) c( )             n[A(at ) + A(qad ) + r] = 0: (31)

An interpretation of this problem is that the planner is giving unskilled and skilled people
coupons in the amounts c( ) and c( ). Each coupon entitles a person to one good at the store
they go to. The total amount of coupons handed out is constrained by the resource constraint
(31). The advertisements give the locations of the stores that sell each variety. Without an
ad the consumer will not know where to buy a variety. The odds of getting at least one ad
for any particular variety are 1 e (at +ad )n . So, equation (30) states that the consumption for
the skilled is constrained by the ads they receive.
    The allocations from the informationally-constrained planning problem can be supported
in a competitive equilibrium using a tax-cum-subsidy scheme. The excessive amount of ad-
vertising can be corrected by levying a ...ne on all advertising and providing a subsidy for
consumers on all goods sold. Speci...cally, consumers require a proportional price reduction,
r, in the amount
                                        r=1          =p( );                                 (32)
and all advertising should be ...ned at the rate
                                                                         (at +ad )n
                                          f = rp(1             t)e                    :                                   (33)

The underprovision of media goods can be recti...ed by providing a subsidy per media good in
the amount s, where
                               (1    )        m          1                    (1          )        m       1
                         s=t             (        )          + (1        t)                   (        )       :          (34)
                                             l( )                                                 l( )
This is equivalent to subsidizing traditional and digital advertising at the rates s= and s= .
The above policy should be ...nanced by lump-sum taxation in line with
                    Z p( )                        Z p
                                                                           at ad
               ra[t        pP1 (p)B (p)dp + (1 t)     pP1 (p)B (p)dp] + sn( + )
                     p                                               p

             = tt( ) + (1      t)t( ) + f n(at + ad );                                                                    (35)

where t( ) and t( ) are the lump-sum taxes levied on the unskilled and skilled. The way these
taxes are raised a¤ects the economy's income distribution.

Proposition 6 (Informationally-Constrained E¢ ciency) The solution to the informationally-
constrained planning problem (29) can be supported as a competitive equilibrium with the tax-
cum-subsidy scheme speci...ed by (32), (33), and (34) that is ...nanced by lump-sum taxation in
accordance with (35).

                                                              21
Corollary 1 (Single agent economy) Suppose there is only one type of consumer/worker.
Then only a subsidy on media goods is required.

Proof. See Appendix 14.
    The intuition for the above tax-cum-subsidy scheme is this. The skilled consume more
varieties than the unskilled. A certain amount of advertising is required to e¤ect this. There
is no need to do any extra advertising to support the unskilled'    s consumption. So, the last
variety sold to an unskilled person should be priced at its marginal production cost implying
that (1 r)p( ) = , where r is the required proportional price reduction. When determining
how much advertising to do ...rms use the price p instead of the subsidized price (1 r)p, where
the latter re   ects the value of the good to a consumer. Since p > (1 r)p there is propensity
toward too much advertising. This is corrected by ...ning advertising in general at the rate f .
    Firms neglect the fact that media goods are valuable to consumers. Therefore, they un-
der provide them. This is recti...ed by subsidizing media goods. The subsidy, s, is just an
expenditure-weighted average of each group'      s marginal rate of substitution between leisure
and media goods, as can be seen from (34). The marginal rates of substitution re        ects how
much an extra media good is worth to a person in terms of leisure. For a skilled person a unit
of leisure is worth more than for an unskilled person, as re  ected by . Last, the click-through
rate speci...es how e¢ cient advertising is.
    Last, the solution to the planner'  s problem in a world with full information can obtained
undertaking the maximization in (29) while dropping the information constraint (30). This
can be supported as a competitive equilibrium where all goods are sold at the marginal cost
so that p = . A lump-sum subsidy to ...rms is needed to cover their ...xed costs, r. The cost
of this would have to be ...nanced by lump-sum taxation on consumers.

10    Calibration
In order to simulate the model, values have to be assigned to the following parameters: , ,
 , m, , , , , , q , r, , e, and t. Most of the parameter values are unique to this study.
The strategy is to pin down parameter values by using data on markups, the advertising-to-
consumption ratio, the click-through rate, the hike in the ratio of spending on digital versus
traditional advertising, the college premium, and the step up in the time spent on leisure by
non-college- and college-educated individuals.
   Some parameter values can be set straightforwardly. The unskilled in the model are taken
to be the non-college educated. They represent 65 percent of the population. In United
States the income of college graduates is 1.98 times that of the non-college educated. The
productivity of college graduates in model, , is set to match this fact. Thus, is determined
by the condition
                                                       [1 l( ) e]
                           income ratio = 1:98 =                    :
                                                         1 l( )

                                              22
Accordingly, t = 0:65 and = 2:35. The click-through rate on digital advertising is very low,
roughly 2.5 percent. This dictates setting        = 0:025. The choice of some parameters are
normalizations. On this, and control the units that output and advertising are measured
in. Hence, = = 1.
    The rest of the parameter values are selected by targeting a set of stylized facts. The long
and short of the calibration procedure is this­  a detailed explanation is provided in Appendix
15. The model'   s calibration is divided into two parts; viz, the ...rm side that determines the
advertising parameters and a consumer side that pins down the preference ones. These two
parts are linked. On the ...rm side, an important parameter is the cost elasticity for advertising,
  . To calibrate this parameter, a markup of 7 percent for the average transacted price over
marginal production cost is chosen­    this number is taken from Basu (2019).8 As mentioned in
the introduction, advertising has been roughly 2 percent of GDP for the last 100 years. This
leads to the following two restrictions on the calibration exercise.

                 markup = 1:07 = E [p]=                                                                 (36)
                           R p( )                                  Rp
                            p
                                  pB (p)P1 (p)dp + (1         t)   p( )
                                                                          pB (p)P1 (p)dp
                        = [ R p( )                                 Rp                      ]= ;
                              p
                                   B (p)P1 (p)dp + (1         t)   p(   )
                                                                          B (p)P1 (p)dp

and
                                               n[A(at ) + A(qad )]
                                  A2C = 0:02 =                      :                      (37)
                                               tc( ) + (1 t)c( )
The markup is calculated using the transacted price distribution, shown in Figure 7. The
restrictions (36) and (37) are used to pin down a value for , which governs the marginal cost of
advertising. The backed-out value for is similar to the one used by Dinlersoz and Yorukoglu
(2012) to generate a reasonable equilibrium ...rm-size distribution. In fact, alternatively, if
their value is used for , then the model here would predict a markup of 7 percent. These
restrictions also determine the ...xed entry cost, r.
    The ratio of spending on digital to traditional advertising rose from 0.02 percent 2003 to
0.28 in 2018. These numbers are used to calibrate the rise in the relative e¢ ciency of digital
advertising, or q , over this time period. Hence, the following condition is imposed on the
calibration exercise:                             8
                                                  > 0:02; for 2003;
                                       A(qad ) <
                                d2t =          = 0:07; for 2010;                           (38)
                                        A(at )    >
                                                  :
                                                     0:28; for 2018.
When calibrating the ...rm side of the model, the labor allocations from the consumer side are
taken as given. Given these labor allocations, the ...rm-side calibration hits exactly the three
data targets given by (36), (37), and (38).
   8
    The size of price markups is controversial. The number used here is conservative: the larger is the price
markup, the bigger will be welfare gain from digital advertising.

                                                     23
    For the consumer side, the preference parameters , , and , plus the parameter gov-
erning the cost of education, e, are chosen to match certain observations about leisure for
the non-college and college educated for the years 2003, 2010, and 2018. Additionally, these
observations are also used to infer a value for the click-through rate, , on traditional adver-
tising. This turns out to be much higher than the one for digital advertising. Thus, to obtain
a given number of messages read by consumers, digital advertising supplies more free media
goods than traditional advertising. (But, these media goods are less expensive to produce.)
Leisure is de...ned as all time spent on entertainment, social activities, relaxing, active recre-
ation, sleeping, eating, and personal care; this de...nition corresponds with Aguiar and Hurst
(2007, Table III, measure 2). The trend in leisure is charted in Figure 8. Leisure for the
non-college educate rose from 64.2 percent of time not working in 2003 to 65.4 in 2018. The
increase for college graduates was from 60.7 to 61.1. In each year college graduates enjoyed
less leisure than the non-college educated. Galbi (2001) has noted that, historically speaking,
increases in discretionary time use are closely related to the waxing in time spent on media.
So, the ...gure also tracks the gain in leisure since 2003 accounted for by the time consumed on
media; namely, TV, radio, reading, movies, computers, and games. The model is calibrated
to 2003 levels of leisures and subsequent gains in leisures linked with the increased time spent
on media.
    Since media goods are free their quantity is not recorded in the national income accounts.
The data on time spent not working, both over time and between the non-college and college
educated, is used to infer the quantity of media goods. Since media goods and leisure are
Edgeworth-Pareto complements, an increase in the supply of the media goods should lead
to more time spent not working, ceteris paribus; recall Proposition 5. This type of strategy
was introduced in Goolsbee and Klenow (2006) and followed by Brynjolfsson and Oh (2012).
Things are more complicated here, though. The advent of digital advertising also a¤ects the
prices of consumer goods, which will have an impact on leisure as well.
    Let leisuret ( ) represent the leisure target for a type- person in year t. Then, formally
speaking, the parameter values in question solve
                                      X      X
                            min                        [lt ( )   leisuret ( )]2 ;            (39)
                            ; ; ;e;
                                      = ; t=03;10;18


subject to (36), (37), and (38). The constraints take into account how the choice of the
preference parameters interacts with the ...rm-side calibration. The upshot from the calibration
procedure is displayed in Tables 1 and 2.




                                                       24
                                           All leisure, non-coll
                                   0.66     Media, non-coll
                                           All leisure, college
                                            Media, college
                                   0.65


                                   0.64




                         Leisure
                                   0.63


                                   0.62


                                   0.61


                                   0.60
                                            1
                                          2003                 2
                                                             2010     3
                                                                    2018



Figure 8: Leisure for the non-college and college educated. Also shown is the increase in
leisure since 2003 comprised by shifts in time spent on media ( Media). The bars for 2003
and the cross-hatched ones for 2010 and 2018 are used in the model' s calibration. Source :
American Time Use Survey.




                         Calibrated Parameter Values
Parameter Values            Description              Identi...cation
Consumers
  = 0:3499                  Consumption weight                             Data,   Eq (39)
  = 0:0076                  Weight on leisure, CES                         Data,   Eq (39)
  = 4:9896                  Elasticity of substitution                     Data,   Eq (39)
t = 0:65                    Low-type fraction                              Data
  = 2:3506                  High-type productivity                         Data
e = 0:0953                  Cost of skill                                  Data,   Eq (39)
Firms
  =1                        Marginal production cost                       Normalization
r = 0:0028                  Entry ...xed cost                              Data, Eqs (36) and (37)
Advertising
  = 3:0148                  Cost elasticity                                Data, Eqs (36) and (37)
  =1                        Constant                                       Normalization
q03 = 12:0920; q10 = 5:9132 E¢ ciency of digital adv.                      Data, Eq (38)
q18 = 2:3302
  = 0:025                   Click-through rate, digital                     Data
  = 0:4410                  Click-through rate, traditional                 Data, Eq (39)
         Table 1: The parameter values that result from the                calibration procedure.



                                                            25
                                             Data Targets
                Description                           U.S. Data Model
                Income ratio                          1.98         1.98
                Markup, 2018                          1.07         1.07
                Advertising/consumption, 1919-2019 0.022           0.022
                Digital/traditional advertising
                   2018                               0.282        0.282
                   2010                               0.070        0.070
                   2003                               0.024        0.024
                Leisure
                   Non-college, 2018                  0.6523       0.6520
                   College, 2018                      0.6110       0.6115
                   Non-college, 2010                  0.6501       0.6505
                   College, 2010                      0.6130       0.6124
                   Non-college, 2003                  0.6412       0.6411
                   College, 2003                      0.6073       0.6074
Table 2: The data targets used in the calibration exercise and the corresponding numbers for
the model. The calibration procedure hits the ...rm side numbers exactly while maximizing
the model's ...t for leisure.


11         Welfare
A person'
        s welfare, W ( ), reads

                                           (1       )
                   W ( ) = ln(c( )) +                   ln[ l( ) + (1    )m ], for        2 f ; g;

where c( ), l( ), and m represent the allocations for consumption, leisure, and media goods
under some particular scenario. From this it is clear that any change in welfare can be broken
down into changes in c( ), l( ), and m. Now consider two di¤erent scenarios, A and B . In
order to move to regime B a type- person living in regime A would have to be compensated
by boosting his regime-A consumption by the factor

                                         ev( ) = e[WB (     ) WA ( )]=
                                                                         1:

                                      s equivalent variation.9
That is, ev( ) measures a type- person'
     9
         In otherwords, ev( ) solves the equation

 WB ( )
                                                                              (1   )
                                                = ln[(1 + ev( ))cA ( )] +              ln[ lA ( ) + (1   )(mA ) ]:




                                                           26
11.1     The Change in Welfare from 2003 to 2018
Between 2003 and 2018, advertising became more e¢ cient. This had three e¤ects. First,
consumers bene...ted from the introduction of new media goods.10 Second, leisure rose. Third,
the reduction in hours was associated with a decline in consumption. By how much did welfare
improve overall?
    Table 3 shows the results. Welfare increased for the non-college and college educated by 2.5
and 2.7 percent, in terms of consumption. To attain this, the e¢ ciency of digital advertising
relative to traditional advertising rose (or q fell) at about 11 percent per year. For both
groups of individuals, there is a signi...cant increase in welfare due to the expansion of free
media goods connected with digital advertising. The non-college educated realize a signi...cant
gain in welfare from their rise in leisure. This occurs because media goods and leisure are
complements in utility; recall Proposition 5. The welfare gain from the increase in leisure is
mostly o¤set by a decline in non-college educated consumption. The college educated enjoyed
a smaller improvement in welfare from the rise in leisure. Their decline in consumption is
negligible. The reduced work e¤ort by the college-educated is counteracted by a reduction
in prices stimulated by increased competition. This estimate of the improvement in welfare
is not out of line with other work. Goolsbee and Klenow (2006) calculate that the internet
was worth somewhere between 2 to 3 percent of income to the average consumer in 2005,
but this could be as high as 27 percent depending on the preferred speci...cation. Greenwood
and Kopecky (2013) place the welfare gain from the introduction of personal computers at
somewhere between 2 to 3 percent of GDP in 2004. Brynjolfsson and Oh (2012) ...nd, using
the Greenwood and Kopecky (2013) method, that the introduction of free media goods was
worth about 5 percent of consumption in 2011.
    The large boost in welfare generated by the free provision of media goods is not re    ected
in GDP. First, GDP is not the same as economic welfare. One might think that adding the
implicit value of the free media goods to GDP would cure this problem. In particular, suppose
that GDP is measured as pc c + pm m, where c is aggregate consumption, pc is the price index for
consumption, and pm is the implicit price index for media goods. Standard reasoning suggests
measuring this implicit price by the marginal rate of substitution between leisure and media
goods. This di¤ers across the rich and the poor, so take an expenditure-weighted average. It
then turns out that pm = s, where s is given by equation (34). Doing this would increase GDP
by 7.8 percent in 2003, 1.3 percent in 2010, and 0.02 percent in 2018. This seems counter
intuitive because m increased substantially over this time period, so how could media goods
contribution to GDP decline? But, as media goods increase their implicit price falls. So, once
again, GDP is not the same as welfare. For example, electricity constitutes around 2 percent of
  10
     Marshall (1920, p. 307) notes "the dependence of newspapers and magazines on receipts from adver-
tisements. They are thereby enabled to provide a larger amount of reading matter than would otherwise be
possible ..."


                                                  27
                      The Increase in Welfare from 2003 to 2018
                                ev     Consumption Media Goods Leisure
                  Non-college 2.5% -2.43%             1.85%           3.00%
                  College       2.7% -0.03%           1.42%           1.22%
Table 3: The welfare gains from the expansion of free media goods arising from the advent of
digital advertising. These welfare gains are decomposed into the e¤ects that digital advertising
had on regular consumption, media goods provision, and leisure.


expenditure yet Greenwood and Kopecky (2013) estimate it has a compensating variation of 92
percent with there existing no equivalent variation; i.e., it isn'
                                                                 t possible to give a person today
enough income to compensate them for living without electricity. Second, some researchers
have suggested that advertising is an intangible investment and should be treated the same
way as physical investment in the national income and product accounts. This boosts GDP.
Advertising spending is deducted from ...rm'   s pro...ts in the GDP accounts unlike physical
                     11
investment spending. Corrado, Hulten, and Sichel (2009) recommend counting (a portion
of) advertising as an intangible investment in the GDP accounts­        McGrattan and Prescott
(2010) express a similar view. This would increase GDP by advertising'         s share of GDP, or
around 2 percent over the last century. This adjustment would be constant over this time
period and would not re   ect the welfare gain from digital advertising­   the ratio of advertising
spending to GDP has been stable.



    It'
      s dangerous to prognosticate about the future, but suppose, solely as a thought experi-
ment, that technological advance in digital advertising continues until 2040 at the same rate
as between 2003 and 2018. From 2018 to 2030 the non-college educated would see their wel-
fare climb by an additional 1.7 percent, while the college educated would enjoy a bene...t of
4.1 percent. By 2040 the respective numbers would be 3.0 and 7.8 percent. The cumulative
welfare gains from 2003 on are shown in Figure 9. These welfare gains can be broken down.
The free provision of media goods see strong diminishing returns kick in after 2018. The
extra supply of free media goods increases welfare for the non-college- and college-educated
population by 0.05 and 0.04 percent for the 2018-2040 period. This is trivial compared with
  11
       For those not familiar with the issue, write the national income identity as

                  consumption + investment + ... = labor income + profits + ... .

Advertising is not currently counted as a component of investment. Suppose alternatively that advertising
spending is added as a component of investment spending. On the lefthand side of the accounts, investment
would then increase by advertising. On the righthand side, advertising is no longer deducted from pro...ts
so that profits increase by advertising. That is, advertising expenditure is now capitalized instead of
expensed. This retains a balance between the left- and righthand sides of the national income accounts
balance. GDP now increases by advertising.

                                                        28
                                                                              14
                                        11

                                        10                                    12
                                                       College, c
                                         9                                    10
                                                                                                   Cons, c
                                         8
                                                                               8




                        Welfare, EV %
                                         7

                                         6                                     6
                                                                                                         Media, n c
                                         5                                     4       Leisure, n c
                                         4
                                                               Non-college,    2
                                         3                                                                      Media, c
                                                               nc
                                         2                                     0

                                         1                                     -2                            Leisure, c
                                         0                                              Con, n c
                                                                               -4
                                         2000   2010   2020   2030   2040       2000    2010   2020   2030   2040
                                                                            Year


Figure 9: Cumulative welfare changes for the non-college and college educated population.
The dashed and dot-dashed portions of the lines show the extrapolations from 2018 to 2040.
Over this future period the college-educated gain a lot in welfare from generic consumption
due to increased competition at the upper end of the price distribution. This is partially o¤set
by a decline in welfare because of a reduction in leisure motivated by the rise in the return on
working for the college educated.

the gain between 2003 and 2018. Most of the hike in welfare over this period derives from
more generic consumption resulting from more intense price competition; for the two parties,
the numbers are 3.2 and 12.8 percent. Interestingly, leisure drops for both parties, which
contributes welfare losses of 0.4 and 4.5 percent. The more precipitous loss for the college
educated occurs because they realize a signi...cant boost in their e¤ective real wage because of
a drop in prices at the upper end of the price distribution.

11.2     Who pays?
Who is implicitly paying for the provision of free media goods? Speci...cally, does consumption
by the upper end of the population help the lower end by stimulating the supply of free media
goods? To begin with, the non-college share of advertising expenditure is given by
                                                 t[1      l( )    c( )] tP (p( ))nr
                                                                                    :
                                                            n[A(at ) + A(qad )]
The numerator is non-college income less the variable cost of their consumption, t[1 l( )
  c( )], minus their prorated share of the ...xed cost of production, tP (p( ))nr, where tP (p( ))
is the share of advertised prices below p( ) that are sent to the non-college educated. This
represents the slice of non-college income that is absorbed in advertising costs. The denom-
inator is aggregate advertising expenditure. By this metric the non-college educated pay 27
percent of the cost of advertising­ see Table 4. Note that the non-college educated represent
100 t = 65 percent of the population, so the percentage share per person is only 42 per-

                                                                            29
                          Share of Total Advertising Costs
                               Undirected                     Directed
                        Share   Share/(Pop Share) Share       Share/(Pop Share)
          Non-college 27.04%            42%         39.50%            61%
          College       72.96%         208%         60.50%           173%
Table 4: The fraction of the cost of free good provision paid for by the non-college- and
college-educated populations. The last two columns refer to the directed advertising model
introduced in Section 12.


                                                                  0.07
                         Advertising Costs, Fraction of Revenue




                                                                  0.06


                                                                  0.05


                                                                  0.04                           Advertising Costs

                                                                  0.03


                                                                  0.02


                                                                  0.01


                                                                     1.00   1.05   1.10        1.15     1.20     1.25
                                                                                          Price, p


  Figure 10: Advertising costs as a fraction of a ...rm'
                                                       s revenue rise with the price charged.

cent. The college-educated pay more than their share because they buy goods at higher prices
where the markups are larger. Figure 10 plots advertising costs as fraction of a ...rm'
                                                                                      s revenue,
or [A(at ) + A(qad )]=[p(at + ad )S (p)]. When the price is higher the probability of making a
sale, S (p), is smaller. The odds of a sale drop faster than the price increases, so the cost of
advertising is spread over a smaller amount of revenue.




11.3     Public Policy
By how much would welfare improve if the second-best tax-cum-subsidy scheme proposed in
Section 9 was implemented? The upshot is presented in Table 5. Moving to the informationally-
constrained e¢ cient equilibrium has a small welfare gain, worth about 0.02 percent for the
non-college educated and about 0.03 percent for the college educated. These are smaller than
some of the magnitudes calculated in traditional welfare analyses, such as Rees's (1963) esti-
mate of the welfare cost of labor unions, which he found to be 0.13 percent of GDP. They are
bigger than Lucas' s (1987) estimate of the welfare gains from eliminating business cycles.
    Implementing the informationally-constrained e¢ cient equilibrium would require a fairly
large intervention in the economy. The purchase of consumption goods would have to be

                                                                                          30
                       Implementing the Efficient Equilibrium
                                                             t( )      t( )
          ev, Non-college ev, College       r     f       s 1 l( )  [1 l( ) e]
                                Informationally Constrained
                0.02%          0.03%      5.9% 1.0% 0.00% 4.71%      3.23%
                                     Full Information
               -6.45%         16.27%        0     0       0 9.18% -5.45%
Table 5: The tax-cum-subsidy policy needed to make the competitive equilibrium e¢ cient
and the welfare gains from doing so.


subsidized at 6 percent in order to align the marginal price paid by the non-college educated
to its marginal production cost. Advertising in general would face a small ...ne of 1.0 percent.
Media goods provision would have to be subsidized at an insigni...cant rate to compensate
for the underprovision of media goods. Last, the lump-sum taxes required to implement the
program would amount to 4.71 percent of labor income for the non-college educated and
3.23 percent for the college educated. While in the rare...ed con...nes of the model such a
policy is desirable, this is unlikely to be the case in the real world especially given the small
welfare gain. The advertising equilibrium modeled is surprisingly close to being e¢ cient in an
informationally-constrained economy.



     The second-best informationally-constrained equilibrium is still some distance away from
the ...rst-best full-information equilibrium. To see this, the planner'    s problem in a full-
information world is solved using the same utility weights as in the informationally-constrained
problem, so as to keep things comparable. As can be seen, there is a big utility gain for
college-educated consumers and a loss for non-educated ones. In the full-information world,
college-educated consumers bene...t from a large drop in prices. This e¤ect is much smaller for
non-college educated consumers and is o¤set by the lump-taxes needed to cover ...rms'...xed
costs. Both parties work more, and so lose leisure, especially the non-college educated. This
reinforces the message made in Table 4 that in the competitive equilibrium with advertising
the college-educated are paying a disproportionate share of the cost of free media costs via
the high markups on their consumption.
     Lest anyone worries, clearly resources could be redirected away from the college-educated
toward the non-college educated that result in everyone being better o¤ by a move to the
...rst-best equilibrium; i.e., the full-information planning problem could be resolved placing
more weight on the non-college educated. But, there is no way of implementing the ...rst-best
equilibrium without a mechanism for costlessly getting price information to consumers.




                                               31
                   The Increase in Welfare with Growth in TFP
                            ev       Consumption Media Goods Leisure
                Non-college 10.5% 5.62%            1.85%            3.00%
                College     10.9% 8.22%            1.42%            1.22%
                 Table 6: The welfare gains when there is growth in TFP.


11.4     Growth in TFP
Suppose TFP changes. Would this change the results in a material way? The answer is no.
To address this question, let productivity in the production, advertising, and the cost of entry
grow in a balanced fashion at the gross rate g so that g = (1= 0 )=(1= ) = (1= 0 )=(1= ) =
r=r0 > 1. Additionally, suppose that the number of varieties, v , also expands at this rate
implying v 0 =v = g . Last, assume that there is technological progress in the household sector
that augments the bene...t of leisure at rate g . Then, it can be shown that, when there is
no digital-speci...c technological progress, the economy will evolve along a balanced growth
path­ the details are in Appendix 16. Fernald (2014) calculates that TFP in the U.S. economy
grew at roughly 0.5 percent per year. So, set g = 1:005; as will be seen, the exact number
isn't material. Also, as before, assume that there is technological improvement in digital
advertising so that q03 > q10 > q18 , with the q '
                                                 s calibrated in the manner described in Section
10. The upshot is presented now. The full set of results for the setting with growth in TFP
are provided in Appendix 16.
    Not surprisingly when growth in TFP is allowed, the improvement in welfare for both
the poor and rich is much larger. Table 6 shows the results after technological progress in
the household sector is factored out. The welfare gain for both types of consumers is large,
10.5 and 10.9 percent. Most of the dividend in welfare comes from consumption growth.
Interestingly, the welfare gains accruing from the increase in leisure and media goods are
virtually identical to the results obtained for the baseline model.




11.5     Annoying Ads
Ads provide important facts for consumers; viz, prices, product speci...cations, and information
about new goods. They can also be annoying. How much is an open question. In a randomized
experiment of its 35 million customers the music streaming service Pandora found that as they
increased the number of ads per hour less people tuned in and more people signed up for the
$4.99 per month ad-free version. An extra ad per hour led to a 2 percent drop in listeners and
a 0.14 percent increase in paid subscribers. The increased revenue from the paid subscription
service, however, did not make up for the loss in ad revenue. Only 30 percent of viewers for the
video-on-demand service Hulu purchase the $11.99-per-month no-commercials version versus

                                              32
the $5.99 ad-supported plan­  undirected TV and movie ads are probably the most disruptive
form of advertising. In 2018 Hulu earned $1.5 billion in ad revenue. Last, the opt-out rate on
marketing emails is low, somewhere between 0.2 and 0.5 percent. Industry is endeavouring to
...nd the sweet spot between the amount of advertising and fee for service. Consumers love free
goods and services. The large networks built by Facebook, Google, and other tech giants allow
for the rapid di¤usion of the information contained in advertising. It'  s a pro...table business
model for these tech companies to use free goods as a vehicle to distribute advertising.
     How ads enter consumers'preferences is an open question. Suppose that they just detract
from the enjoyment of media goods. Speci...cally, assume that they reduce the enjoyment of
a media good by the gross factor . This is e¤ectively a renormalization of the constant term
    on media goods.12 Therefore, nothing changes in the above analysis and the welfare gain
from media goods can be thought of as purging the nuisance of ads. Alternatively, perhaps
consumers hate ads in their own right. In particular, subtract the disutility term H (na) from
preferences. All of the positive analysis done here still goes through unaltered. The welfare
analysis will change though. It would be di¢ cult to parameterize the function H without a lot
of additional information. Additionally, the evidence suggests that consumers aren'      t willing
to pay much for ad-free content. Could companies pay people (a negative price) to view ads?
It might be hard to get the more a- uent to view the ads for a small negative price. Becker
and Murphy (1993) suggest that consumers could sell their "attention" to advertisers, but
then just ignore the ads; therefore, there is a moral hazard problem with negative pricing.

12     Directed Advertising
The information age allows advertisers to collect vast amounts of information on consumers.
Digital advertising both collects and uses information to target potential buyers. Suppose
instead that advertising can be directed only toward those consumers who will potentially
buy the product, but that anyone can use the free media goods used to disseminate the ads.
In such a setting there is no point sending an ad with a very high price to a consumer who
can't a¤ord to purchase the good at this price. So, directed advertising is more e¢ cient
than undirected advertising. It also is probably less annoying. To operationalize this idea
the economy is split into two mutually exclusive spheres of economic activity, one for each
consumer type. A ...rm can decide which group of consumers to sell to and at what price.
These two spheres are only linked via the free-entry condition and the provision of free media
goods. A capsule summary of the revised setup is now presented.
    First, the number of ...rms per variety in each sphere is di¤erent, denoted by n , for
  2 f ; g. Within each realm ...rms solve an advertising problem of the form (7). Since ...rms'
  12
                               Rv
     Write preferences as ln( 0 ci di) + (1 ) ln[ l + (1     )( m) = ]= . If is a free parameter, then setting
  =     shows that this is really a renormalization of the current setup. Without further information the two
scenarios are observationally equivalent.


                                                     33
pro...ts must be the same across groups and prices, all ...rms in the economy will do the same
amount of traditional and digital advertising, at and ad . Denote the total amount of adverts
within any variety for a group by a = n (at + ad ), for 2 f ; g.
    Second, each group of consumers faces their own advertised price distribution, P (p) for
  2 f ; g. This occurs because they are targeted separately. As before, let the maximum
prices for each group be represented by p( ) and p. For the non-college and college educated
these prices respectively solve

                                  a =t                               a =(1 t)
                   [p( )     ]e          =p       and (p        )e              =p     .

The minimum price, p, is the same as in the equilibrium with undirected advertising because,
as was mentioned, this price depends only on technological considerations. The two advertised
price distributions are
                                           (
                                               lnf(p     )=(p         )gt=a ;    for         = ;
            P (p) = Pr(price        p) =
                                               lnfp     ]=(p         )g(1 t)=a ; for         = :
Neither price distribution exhibits a at portion associated with a jump in prices.
   Third, there are separate resource constraints for each of the two spheres:

                           c( ) + n [A(at ) + A(qad ) + r]=t = 1            l( );

and
                    c( ) + n [A(at ) + A(qad ) + r]=(1          t) = [1         l( )   e]:
Last, the consumption of media goods, m, for both groups of individuals is given by

                                  m = (n + n )(at = + ad = ):

    How would a move from a world where advertising is undirected to a world where it is
directed a¤ect welfare? To conduct this experiment, the parameter values from the benchmark
economy are retained to keep things comparable. The results are somewhat surprising­        see
Table 7. Welfare drops ever so slightly by 0.03 percent for the non-college educated but moves
up for the college educated by 5.05 percent. Media goods consumption falls insigni...cantly for
both groups because now there is marginally less advertising overall. This leads to a loss in
welfare, ceterus paribus. The non-college educated reduce their leisure, because leisure and
media goods are Edgeworth-Pareto complements in utility. The college educated realize a
large gain in welfare from increased consumption because price competition is stimulated at
the upper end of the price distribution. For the college educated the average price that they
pay for goods drops by 4.6 percent. The maximum price paid by the college educated falls




                                                   34
                          Move Toward Directed Advertising
                               ev       Consumption Media Goods                                                         Leisure
                 Non-college -0.03% 0.05%              -0.03%                                                           -0.05%
                 College       5.05% 9.90%             -0.02%                                                           -4.40%
              Table 7: The welfare gains from a move toward directed                                                   advertising.

                                                             Non-Col, Both
                                                      1.00



                                                                       Col Edu, Directed
                                                      0.75
                              Fraction of Prices  p



                                                      0.50
                                                                               Col Edu, Undirected



                                                      0.25




                                                      0.00
                                                               1.05          1.10        1.15        1.20
                                                                                                            Price, p


Figure 11: The cumulative distribution functions for transacted prices under both directed and
undirected advertising. The college-educated purchase from a much better price distribution
when advertising is directed. For the non-college educated the two prices distributions are
virtually identical.


by 11.8 percent.13 As can be seen from the ...rst-order condition (25) for the college educated,
this amounts to an increase in the college-educated real wage, =p, that stimulates work e¤ort
and discourages leisure. Figure 11 shows the shift in the transacted price distribution for
the college educated. There is virtually no impact on the transacted price distribution the
non-college educated. Last, note that the share of directed advertising paid for by the college
educated drops­ see Table 4.




12.1      Public Policy
The directed advertising economy is virtually e¢ cient. A move to the informationally-
constrained e¢ cient equilibrium leads to in...nitesimal welfare gains of 0.003 and 0.001 percent
for the non-college and college educated­  see Table 8.


  13
     On this, Argente and Lee (2020) and Kaplan and Schulhofer-Wohl (2017) examine price distributions.
They ...nd that recent ination hurt the poor more that the rich, hinting that this feature of the model might
be in data. More generally, Kaplan et al (2019) compare the predictions of a price-posting model with the
data.

                                                                                    35
                Second-Best Efficiency with Directed Advertising
                                                                  t( )      t( )
             ev, Non-college ev, College r         f       s     1 l( )   1 l( ) e
                  0.003%         0.001%      0% 0% 0.008% 0.10% 0.13%
Table 8: The tax-cum-subsidy policy needed to make the competitive equilibrium with directed
advertising (informationally-constrained) e¢ cient and the welfare gain from doing so.


12.2     A Hybrid Model
It's hard to know how much advertising is directed versus undirected. Here theory is out-
pacing measurement. Given this void, suppose that all digital advertising is directed while
all traditional advertising is undirected. To model the extent of direction in ads, imagine an
economy with both types of consumers living in two separate spheres: directed and undirected.
The relative size of the population living in the directed sphere is targeted so that it grows
over time in accordance with the observed di¤usion of digital advertising in United States.
Since the e¢ ciency gain accruing from digital advertising derives from the fact that it can be
directed, the cost advantage of digital advertising is eliminated; i.e., qt = 1 for all t. The 2.5
percent click-through rate for digital advertising is retained.
    The hybrid model is calibrated so that the average across spheres in 2018 for the price
markup, the advertising-to-consumption ratio, and the relative earnings of the college-educated
match the data. Additionally, the average leisure time across spheres for workers in 2003, 2010,
and 2018 is also targeted. In the analogue to data matching problem (39) the average price
markup, the advertising-to-consumption ratio, and the relative earnings of the college edu-
cated are added as targets. The estimated parameters are now ; r; ; ; ; , e; , and st (for
t = 2003; 2010; 2018) where st is the relative size of the digital sector. The results for the
hybrid model are remarkably similar to the baseline model­      see Appendix 17. Non-college-
educated workers enjoy a welfare gain between 2003 and 2018 of 2.0 percent while for the
college educated the number is 2.8. Notice that the skilled fare better relative to the unskilled
with the move toward digital advertising in the hybrid model.

13     Closing
An information-based model is developed where ...rms must advertise to sell goods. There
are two modes of advertising; namely, traditional and digital. Advertising is executed via the
provision of free media goods. In the baseline version of the model, digital advertising costs
less than traditional advertising. It also delivers more free media goods per message received
by consumers. These media goods complement leisure in utility. Since there is randomness in
the ads that consumers receive, ...rms set di¤erent prices for the exact same product. Hence,
an equilibrium distribution of prices emerges. The advertising equilibrium is not e¢ cient.
First, free media goods are underprovided. Second, some advertising is wasteful in the sense
that ads are sent to consumers who can'    t a¤ord to purchase the good at the posted price. A


                                               36
second-best tax-cum-subsidy policy that overcomes these ine¢ ciencies is developed. Part of
this policy involves subsidizing media goods provision and taxing advertising.
    The developed model is matched up with some stylized facts from the U.S. data; in partic-
ular, the average price markup, the ratio of advertising expenses to consumption expenditure,
the click-through rate for digital advertising, the growth in the ratio of spending on digital
advertising relative to traditional advertising, the college premium, and the rise in the time
spent on leisure that was connected with media for both non-college- and college-educated
people. Interestingly, the framework is consistent with the recent decrease in hours worked for
the non-college educated relative to the college educated. The provision of free media goods
via advertising is connected with a large increase in welfare. GDP is not a good measure of
welfare when new goods are introduced into an economy. Adding an imputed value for the
new media goods to GDP may not accurately re        ect the gain in welfare. Additionally, count-
ing advertising as component of investment in the GDP accounts may not capture the bene...t
of the digital advertising revolution. College-educated consumers pay a disproportionately
large share of the cost of these media goods because they purchase products at higher prices.
They may bene...t from the introduction of digital advertising, however, due to the expansion
of price competition at the upper end of the goods market relative to the lower end. The
tax-cum-subsidy policy that overcomes these ine¢ ciencies associated with advertising has a
small impact on welfare, which is swamped by the welfare gain from the free provision of
media goods.
    The competitive equilibrium with undirected advertising is compared with one where ad-
vertising is directed toward consumers that might actually buy the product. There is a slightly
smaller supply of free media goods in the world with directed advertising because there is less
advertising. This (negligibly) hurts those consumers who wouldn'       t have bought high-priced
products in the economy with undirected advertising. It bene...ts those consumers who bought
high-priced goods in the economy with undirected advertising because now there is more price
competition, which results in increased consumption. A hybrid model is entertained where all
digital advertising is directed and traditional advertising is undirected. After recalibrating, the
hybrid model delivers similar results to the baseline one. Compared with the baseline model
the skilled fare relatively better than the unskilled with the shift toward directed advertising.
    An interesting extension of the model would be see if it can mimic observed price distri-
butions. If it can, then an advertising model is a viable alternative to search models. Of
particular interest is how the advent of digital advertising a¤ected the observed price distri-
bution, especially the prices paid by the rich and poor.14 Doing this would probably involve
introducing further heterogeneity in consumers, both in tastes and incomes. Some element
of persuasive advertising might be needed. All this involves breaking new theoretical ground,
gathering further facts on advertising and prices, and pushing the quantitative analysis for-
  14
       Footnote 13 mentions some suggestive work on this.


                                                     37
ward. These are challenges, but the return could be high.

References
 [1] Aguiar, Mark and Erik Hurst. 2007. "Measuring Trends in Leisure: The Allocation of
     Time Over Five Decades." Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 (3): 969-1006.
 [2] Aguiar, Mark, Mark Bils, Kerwin Ko... Charles, and Erik Hurst. 2017. "Leisure Luxuries
     and the Labor Supply of Young Men." Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.
 [3] Argente, David and Munseob Lee. 2020. "Cost of Living Inequality During the Great
     Recession." Journal of the European Economic Association, forthcoming
 [4] Bagwell, Kyle. 2007. "The Economic Analysis of Advertising." In M. Armstrong and R.
     Porter (Eds), Handbook of Industrial Organization, Vol 3, Amsterdam: Elsevier B.V.:
     1702-1844.
 [5] Basu, Susanto. 2019. "Are Price-Cost Markups Rising in the United States? A Discussion
     of the Evidence." Journal of Economic Perspectives 33 (3): 3­  22.
 [6] Becker, Gary S. and Kevin M. Murphy. 1993. "A Simple Theory of Advertising as a Good
     or Bad." Quarterly Journal of Economics 108 (4): 941-964.
 [7] Brynjolfsson, Erik and Joo Hee Oh. 2012. "The Attention Economy: Measuring the
     Value of Free Digital Services on the Internet."International Conference on Information
     Systems.
 [8] Butters, Gerard R. 1977. "Equilibrium Distributions of Sales and Advertising Prices."
     Review of Economic Studies 44 (3): 465-491.
 [9] Cavenaile, Laurent and Pau Roldan. 2019. "Advertising, Innovation, and Economic
     Growth."Unpublished paper, Unversity of Toronto.
[10] Cooley,Thomas F. and Edward C. Prescott. 1995. "Economic Growth and Business Cy-
     cles" Frontiers of Business Cycle Research, edited by Thomas F. Cooley, (Princeton, NJ:
     Princeton University Press): 1­ 38.
[11] Corrado, Carol, Charles Hulten, and Daniel Sichel. 2009. "Intangible Capital and U.S.
     Economic Growth." Review of Income and Wealth 55 (3): 661­      685.
[12] Dinlersoz, Emin M. and Mehmet Yorukoglu. 2008. "Informative Advertising by Hetero-
     geneous Firms." Information Economics and Policy 20 (2): 168-191.
[13] Dinlersoz, Emin M. and Mehmet Yorukoglu. 2012. "Information and Industry Dynamics."
     American Economic Review 102 (2): 884-913.
[14] Dinlersoz, Emin M., Nathan Goldschlag, Mehmet Yorukoglu, and Nikolas Zolas. 2021.
     "The Macroeconomics of Trademarks: Product Quality, Reallocation, and Welfare."Un-
     published paper, Koc University.
[15] Fernald. John. 2014. "A Quarterly, Utilization-Adjusted Series on Total Factor Produc-
     tivity."Working Paper 2012-19, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.
[16] Galbi, Douglas A. 2001. "Communications Policy, Media Development, and Conver-


                                            38
       gence."Unpublished Paper, Federal Communications Commission.
[17]   Goolsbee, Austin and Peter J. Klenow. 2006. "Valuing Consumer Products by the Time
       Spent Using Them: An Application to the Internet."   American Economic Review 96 (2):
       108­ 113.
[18]   Gourio, Francois and Leena Rudanko. 2014. "Customer Capital." Review of Economic
       Studies 81 (3): 1102­ 1136.
[19]   Greenwood, Jeremy and Karen A. Kopecky. 2013. "Measuring the Welfare Gain from
       Personal Computers." Economic Inquiry 51 (1): 336-347.
[20]   Greenwood, Jeremy, Ananth Seshadri, and Mehmet Yorukoglu. 2005. "Engines of Liber-
       ation." Review of Economic Studies 72 (1): 109-133.
[21]   Greenwood, Jeremy and Guillaume Vandenbroucke. 2008. "Hours Worked (Long-Run
       Trends)." The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, v. 4, 2nd edition, edited by
       Lawrence E. Blume and Steven N. Durlauf, (New York, N.Y.: Palgrave Macmillan):
       75-81.
[22]   Hall, Robert E. 2014. "What the Cyclical Response of Advertising reveals about Markups
       and other Macroeconomic Wedges." Unpublished paper, Hoover Institution, Stanford
       University.
[23]   Kaplan, Greg, Guido Menzio, Leena Rudanko, and Nicholas Trachter. 2019. "Relative
       Price Dispersion: Evidence and Theory." American Economic Journal: Microeconomics.
       11 (3): 68-124.
[24]   Kaplan, Greg and Sam Schulhofer-Wohl. 2017. "In     ation at the Household Level." Jour-
       nal of Monetary Economics 91 (C): 19­    38.
[25]   Kopecky, Karen A. 2011. "The Trend in Retirement." International Economic Review 52
       (2): 287-316.
[26]   Kopytov, Alexandr, Nikolai Roussanov, and Mathieu Taschereau-Dumouchel. 2021.
       "Cheap Thrills: the Price of Leisure and the Global Decline in Work Hours."Unpublished
       paper, University of Hong Kong.
[27]   Lucas, Robert E., Jr. 1987. Models of Business Cycles. Oxford: Basil Blackwell Ltd.
[28]   Marshall, Alfred. 1920. Industry and Trade: A Study of Industrial Technique and Business
       Organization; and of Their Inuences on the Conditions of Various Classes and Nations.
       Third Edition. London: MacMillan and Co. Limited.
[29]   McGrattan, Ellen R. and Edward C. Prescott. 2010. "Unmeasured Investment and the
       Puzzling U.S. Boom in the 1990s." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2 (4):
       88-123.
[30]   Negishi, Takashi. 1960. "Welfare Economics and Existence of an Equilibrium for a Com-
       petitive Economy." Metroeconomica 12 (2-3): 92-97.
[31]   Ozga, S. A. 1960. "Imperfect Markets Through Lack of Knowledge." Quarterly Journal
       of Economics 74 (1): 29-52.


                                               39
[32] Perla, Jesse. 2019. "A Model of Product Awareness and Industry Life Cycles." Unpub-
     lished Paper, University of British Columbia.
[33] Rachel, × ukasz. 2020. "Leisure-Enhancing Technological Change." Unpublished Paper,
     London School of Economics.
[34] Rees, Albert. 1963. "The E¤ects of Unions on Resource Allocation." The Journal of Law
     and Economics 6 (1): 69-78.
[35] Stegeman, Mark. 1991. "Advertising in Competitive Markets." American Economic Re-
     view 81 (1): 210-223.
[36] Stigler, George J. 1961. "The Economics of Information." Journal of Political Economy
     69 (3): 213-225.
[37] Telser, Lester G. 1964. "Advertising and Competition." Journal of Political Economy 72
     (6): 537-562.

14      Appendix: Proofs
14.1     Competitive Equilibrium with Undirected Advertising
Proof of Proposition 1 (Advertising). Plugging these solutions for at and ad , given by
the ...rst line of (9), into the objective function (7) gives
                                                                              =(        1)
                                    (p; q ) = [(p              )S (p)]                        (q );

where
                                          =(1   )       1=(1    )        1=(1       )                 =(1   )
                        (q )     (1 + q             )               (                                           )
                                          =(1   )       1                 1
                               = (1 + q             )( )1=(         1)
                                                                         ( )       =(        1)
                                                                                                  (         1) > 0:

Now, consider two ...rms charging two di¤erent prices, p0 and p00 , in the set P . It must transpire
that (p0 ; q ) = (p00 ; q ), which can only be true if [(p0   )S (p0 )] =( 1) = [(p00 )S (p00 )] =( 1) .
But then from (9), the solutions for at and ad must be the same.
Proof of Proposition 2 (Pricing). It'            s trivial to see from (12) and (14) that p and p
are increasing in r; , and q ­   note that (q ) is decreasing in q . Last, p falls with (1 t), as is
immediate from (14).
Proof of Proposition 3 (Price Distribution).                   An exponentiation of equation (16)
implies that
                                    1    (p    )[tI (p; ) + (1 t)I (p; )]
                           P (p) = lnf                                      g:
                                    a                   p
The result follows by noting that tI (p; ) + (1 t)I (p; ) = 1, when p 2 [p; p( )], and tI (p; ) +
(1 t)I (p; ) = 1 t, when p 2 [p" ( ); p]. Last, since there are no ...rms that price in the range
[p( ); p" ( )] the distribution function is at over this interval.
Proof of Proposition 4 (Number of Varieties). Suppose that some consumption good
i is not produced. A producer could enter the variety, charging the maximum price, p, while

                                                               40
Figure 12: Leisure, l, is determined at the point where the marginal bene...t and marginal cost
curves intersect. The diagram shows what happens when the number of leisure goods increase
from d to d0 .


advertising in the amounts at and ad . All high-type consumers receiving an ad would buy
this good. The resulting level of supra-normal pro...ts is

  (p      )(at + ad )(1    t)    A(at )    A(qad )       r>
                                               (p        )(at + ad )e a (1       t)   A(at )   A(qad )   r = 0.

On the righthand side of the above equation e a = S (p) is the odds that a ...rm selling another
variety at price p will make a sale. These positive pro...ts violate the zero-pro...t condition.
Proof of Proposition 5 (Consumption/Leisure). To conserve on notation let c = c( ),
l = l( ), and pc = p( ). Focus on the ...rst-order condition (25), which can be rewritten as15

                                           = (1      )                           :                           (40)
                                    c pc                 l + (1     )m l1
                                    |{z}     |               {z              }
                                     MC                       MB

The above ...rst-order condition can be represented diagrammatically, as shown in Figure 12.
The lefthand side of (40) represents the marginal cost of leisure (MC). This is increasing in l,
so the marginal cost curve is upward sloping. On this, note that both c and pc are decreasing
in l by (23)­ recall that prices are ordered from the lowest to the highest. The righthand side
is the marginal bene...t of leisure (MB). The righthand side is decreasing in l so the marginal
bene...t curve is downward sloping.

   1. To demonstrate the proposition'
                                    s ...rst point that leisure, l, will increase with the number
   15
     The righthand side is the marginal utility of leisure, l. Note that the marginal utility of media goods, m,
has the symmetric form
                                                   (1     )m 1
                                        (1      )                  > 0:
                                                  l + (1       )m
Taking the derivative of this with respect to l also gives the cross partial given in (41). That is, if leisure is
an Edgeworth-Pareto complement with media goods, then media goods are an Edgeworth-Pareto complement
with leisure.


                                                         41
        of media goods, m, note that

                                   dMB                                        (1             )l1                    1
                                       =              (1            )                                 m                  > 0, as   < 0:                (41)
                                    dm                                  [ l + (1             )m l1 ]2

        The marginal cost curve will stay in position, because it is not a function of m.

  2. If leisure, l, increases with the free provision of media goods, then work e¤ort, h( ),
     and income, h( ), must fall. This leads to a drop in regular consumption, c. To show
     that regular consumption, c, is increasing in the level of skill, , convert the ...rst-order
     condition (40) for l into one for c by using the budget constraint (2). For a skilled person
     this will read

                            = (1    )                                    Rc                                                        Rc              :   (42)
                c pc                    [1        e        (1= )            0
                                                                                pi di] + (1          )m [1           e     (1= )   0
                                                                                                                                        pi di]1

        (For the unskilled person just set = 1 and e = 0.) The lefthand side is the marginal
        bene...t of regular consumption, c, while the righthand side is its marginal cost. The
        marginal cost curve rises in c while the marginal bene...t curve declines in c. Here an
        increase in decreases the marginal cost of consumption, while it raises the marginal
        bene...t. Hence, c will increase.

  3. Last, to establish that work e¤ort for the skilled, h( ) = 1 l e, is increasing in the
     cost of education, e, return to equation (40). Note that the marginal cost of leisure rises
     with e because c = C (h( ); ) will be smaller at any given level of l by (23) because
     h( ) = 1 l( ) e. The righthand side is una¤ected by e.



14.2         E¢ ciency of the Undirected Advertising Equilibrium
To conserve on notation, let the subscript 1 denote an allocation for the unskilled person and
2 the skilled one. The informationally-constrained planning problem (29) then rewrites as


                                             t(1           )                                        at        ad
         max                  t ln c1 +                        ln[ l1 + (1                   )[n(        +         )] ]
 c1 ;c2 ;at ;ad ;n;l1 ;l2

                                                                                    (1       t)(1         )                            at ad
                                             + (1              t) ln c2 +                                     ln[ l2 + (1          )[n( + )] ] ;
                                                                                                                                     | {z }
                                                                                                                                              =m

subject to
                                                                            (at +ad )n
                                             (1         t)(1            e                )    (1         t)c2 = 0;
and

          t(1        l1 ) + (1      t) (1          l2          e)        t c1        (1       t) c2           n[A(at ) + A(qad ) + r] = 0:


                                                                                   42
Attach the Lagrange multiplier ! to the ...rst constraint and the one                                           to the second.
   The ...rst-order conditions are:
                                             1
                                                = ;                                                                                   (43)
                                            c1
                                    1
                                       =!+      = (!= + );                                                                            (44)
                                    c2

                            1                                                       1
               (1    )m         n=                            (1    )m                  n=
   t(1     )                       + (1        t)(1       )
                l1 + (1         )m                             l2 + (1                  )m
                                                                                                                (at +ad )n
                                                                                          + (1         t)!ne                 = nA1 (at );

                                                                                                                                      (45)

                            1                                                        1
               (1     )m        n=                             (1     )m                 n=
   t(1     )                       + (1        t)(1        )
                 l1 + (1        )m                               l2 + (1                 )m
                                                                                                             (at +ad )n
                                                                                     + (1            t)!ne                = nqA1 (qad );

                                                                                                                                      (46)

               (1      )m 1 (at = + ad = )                                         (1            )m 1 (at = + ad = )
   t(1     )                               + (1                t)(1            )
                       l1 + (1    )m                                                             l2 + (1    )m
                                                                                              (at +ad )n
                                                  + (1          t)! (at + ad )e                            = [A(at ) + A(qad ) + r];


                                                                                                                                      (47)
                                                                          1
                                                                l1
                                           (1         )                                  = ;                                          (48)
                                                          l1 + (1              )m
and
                                                                      1
                                                          l2
                                          (1      )                                     =        :                                    (49)
                                                    l2 + (1                   )m
   Following Negishi (1960), the question asked is whether or not there is a competitive
equilibrium with the set of taxes and subsidies speci...ed by (32), (33), (34), and (35) that shares
the planning problem'  s allocations for c1 ; c2 ; at ; ad ; n; l1 ; and l2 . If so, then the competitive
equilibrium with the proposed tax-cum-subsidy scheme is (informationally-constrained) Pareto
optimal.
   Before proceeding to proving that the competitive equilibrium with the proposed tax-
cum-subsidy scheme is Pareto optimal, motivated by (46), conjecture that the subsidy on
each media goods, s, is

                                       (1     )m 1                                                 (1     )m 1
                    s = [ t(1     )                 + (1                      t)(1           )                  ]= :                  (50)
                                      l1 + (1    )m                                               l2 + (1    )m


                                                                43
Using (48) and (49) it can be seen that the righthand side of this expression collapses so that
                                               1
                             (1     )m                   1                            1
                        s=                         [t        1    + (1         t)          1]
                                                        l1                           l2
                               (1    )        m              1                      (1          )        m       1
                          =t             (        )              + (1         t)                    (        )       .
                                             l( )                                                       l( )
This subsidy per media good is equivalent to subsidizing traditional and digital advertising
at the rates s= and s= . The proportional price reduction on generic goods, r, implies that

                                         (1         r)p( ) =                  [cf (32)].                                 (51)

Proof of Proposition 6 (Informationally-Constrained E¢ ciency). To start with focus
on the consumption/leisure allocations, while assuming that the solutions for advertising and
the number of ...rms agree in both situations. To show that the planning problem with the
speci...ed planning weight can be supported as a competitive equilibrium with the proposed
subsidy-cum-tax policy, let
                                      !
                                        + = (1 r)p:
Using this together with equations (44) and (49) gives the skilled consumer'          s ...rst-order con-
                                                                                 (at +ad )n
dition in the competitive equilibrium. Under both regimes c2 = 1 e                          . This, along
with the consumption/leisure ...rst-order condition, implies that the solution for the skilled
person' s leisure, l2 , will be the same in both scenarios. Analogously, using (51) in conjunction
with equations (43) and (48) gives the unskilled consumer'       s ...rst-order condition. Then, the
labor-market-clearing condition (28) implies the unskilled person'         s consumption, c1 , is the
same. So, the allocations for c1 ; c2 ; l1 ; and l2 from the planning problem can be supported as
a competitive equilibrium with the proposed subsidy-cum-tax policy.
    Now turn to advertising. In the competitive equilibrium, p               = A1 (at ) + f s= and
p     = A1 (qad ) + f s= . Rewriting equation (45) while using the formula for s and adding
f to both sides yields
                                                                 (at +ad )n
                         s= + (1         t)(!= )e                              + f = A1 (at ) + f:

Using formula (33) for the ...ne on advertising, f , then gives
                                                                         (at +ad )n
                         s= + (1         t)(!= + rp)e                                     = A1 (at ) + f:

Noting that != = (1        r)p      leads to
                                                                      (at +ad )n
                           s= + (1           t)(p                )e                 = A1 (at ) + f

or
                                     p                  = A1 (at ) + f               s= ;                                (52)
because (1 t)(p     )e (at +ad )n = p . This is the ...rst-order condition for at in a competitive
equilibrium. Similarly, from equation (46) it can be seen that
                                                                 (at +ad )n
                        s= + (1      t)(!= )e                                 + f = qA1 (qad ) + f;

                                                                    44
implying
                                   p      = qA1 (qad ) + f       s= :                                    (53)
This is the e¢ ciency condition for digital advertising, ad , that arises in the competitive equilib-
rium. Therefore, the competitive solutions for at and ad , under the proposed subsidy-cum-tax
policy, satisfy the planning problem.
    Last, move on to the number of ...rms. Multiply (45) by at = and (46) by ad = and then
sum the resulting equations to get
                                                         (at +ad )n
       s(at = + ad = )n + (1     t)(!= )n(at + ad )e                  = nat A1 (at ) + nqad A1 (qad );

where formula (50) for s has been used. Similarly, multiply (47) by n= and subtract the
result from the above equation to obtain

                          at A1 (at ) + qad A1 (qad ) = A(at ) + A(qad ) + r:                            (54)

Finally, multiplying the e¢ ciency conditions (52) and (53) for traditional and digital adver-
tising by at and ad , respectively, and then summing the two equations while making use of
(54) gives

            (p    )(at + ad ) = at A1 (at ) + qad A1 (qad ) + (at + ad )f       s(at = + ad = )
                             = A(at ) + A(qad ) + r + (at + ad )f           s(at = + ad = ):

This is the zero-pro...t condition for a ...rm when there is both a subsidy for media goods
provision and a ...ne on advertising. This implies that the solution for n from the planning
problem will be shared by the competitive economy with the proposed subsidy-cum-tax policy.

    Suppose now that there is only one type of consumer/worker. Without loss in generality,
let this be the high type. For this specialized case just a subsidy on media goods is required
in the amount
                                         (1    )m 1 1
                                    s=                      :
                                                       l2 1
Proof of Corollary 1 (Single agent economy). The proof is a straightforward modi...ca-
tion of the previous proof. When there is only the high-type person, the ...rst-order conditions
(43) and (48) no longer appear, so disregard them. Now, set != + = p. Using this together
with equations (44) and (49) gives the consumer'  s ...rst-order condition in a competitive equi-
librium. To complete things, set f = r = t = 0. Then parrot the remaining steps in the above
proof (ignoring the ones for the unskilled person) while using the revised formula for s.

14.3       Recovering r, f , s, t( ), and t( ) from the Planning Problem
The tax-cum-subsidy scheme that renders the competitive equilibrium e¢ cient can be recov-
ered from the solution to the planning problem. First, the subsidy on digital advertising, s,
can be calculated from (34) using the planning problem allocations for at , ad , l( ), l( ), and
n.

                                                   45
   Second, the proportional price reduction, r, and the ...ne on advertising, f , are immediate
from (32) and (33), if the prices p( ) and p are known. To recover these two prices, from the
competitive equilibrium it transpires that
                                              p
                 1     S (p( )) = 1                            = c1 [equations (19) and (26)];
                                             p( )

which implies
                                       p                       e a (1          t)(p          )
                            p( ) =                 +       =                                     + ;
                                       1      c1                             1 c1
where the term on the far right follows from substituting out for p     using (14). Next,
from the two consumer'  s problems, in the competitive equilibrium with the proposed tax-
cum-subsidy scheme, it transpires that

                                                         p( ) = p;

where
                                           c2   l( ) + (1                    )m l( )1
                                       (      )                                          :
                                           c1 [ l( ) + (1                     )m l( )1 ]
Substituting the second formula for p( ) into the ...rst one for p( ) then gives

                                        (1           )                              (1           )
                               p=                        and p( ) =                                  ;

where
                                                           e a (1 t)
                                                                     :
                                                             1 c1
Since a, c1 , c2 , m, l( ), and l( ), are known from the planning problem so are and .
    Finally, by modifying (26) and (27), the lump-sum taxes levied on the unskilled and skilled,
t( ) and t( ), read as

                                                                    p( )
            t( ) = 1    l( )     (1         r)a(p          )fln[                    ]                     +               g=a
                                                                     p                   p( )                  p

and

             t( ) = [1      l( )       e]
                                                      p( )
                       (1      r)a(p         )fln[                   ]                       +                g=a
                                                       p                      p( )                   p
                       (1      r)a(p          )            p
                                                  fln[                   ]                   +                          g=a;
                               1 t                       p" ( )                (p        )           p" ( )         )

where
                                                                    p( )
                                             p" ( )            =          :
                                                                      1 t



                                                               46
15    Appendix: Calibration
To solve the model values for the following parameter values are needed: , , , , r, , , ,
  , q , e, t, and . The idea is to pin down values for r, , q , , , , , , and e by using data on
markups, the advertising-to-consumption ratio, the click-through rate on digital advertising,
the increase in the ratio of spending on digital versus traditional advertising, and the rise in
time spent on leisure using media goods by non-college-educated and college-educated persons.
Out of the remaining parameters, t and can be assigned values directly from the data. The
last two parameters, and , are normalized to 1. As will be seen, at the calibration point the
calibration procedure will determine a value for n. The steps in the procedure are as follows:
  1. Calibrating . Two facts are used to do this, namely the average markup, markup, and
     advertising'
                s share of consumption, A2C. These facts are taken to apply for the whole
     period in question, and therefore for the year 2018.

      (a) A formula for . In the model all ...rms have the same advertising expenses, zero
          pro...ts, and hence revenue net of production costs. Focus on the ...rms charging the
          lowest price, p. To start with, equation (8) implies
                                (p       )at =   at and (p         )ad =     q ad :
           This gives
                                    (p    )n(at + ad ) = n[A(at ) + A(qad )]:
           Dividing through by total sales, t[1       l( )] + (1     t) [1   l( )     e], then results in
                           (p     )n(at + ad )                    n[A(at ) + A(qad )]
                                                       =
                t[1     l( )] + (1 t) [1 l( )         e]   t[1 l( )] + (1 t) [1 l( )             e]
                                                         =    A2Cs,
           where it should be noted that sales equal consumption expenditure in the model.
           Therefore,
                                    1                 (p   )a
                               =                                          :
                                   A2C t[1 l( )] + (1 t) [1 l( ) e]
           To use this formula, values are needed for a, p  , 1 l( ), and 1 l( ) e. The
           latter two quantities come from the consumer side of the calibration; that is, the
           model' s predictions for 1 l( ) and 1 l( ) e at the 2018 calibration point, as
           shown in Table 2. Information on the average price markup, markup, is used to
           solve for a and p     .
      (b) Using the markup to determine a and p                   . This will involve solving three
          equations in three unknowns, as discussed now. In the model the average price
          markup, is given by
                                     R p( )                                Rp
                            E [p]   1 p     pB ( p ) P 1 ( p ) dp + (1 t )  p( )
                                                                                 pB (p)P1 (p)dp
                 markup =         =   R p( )                               Rp
                                        p
                                             B (p)P1 (p)dp + (1 t) p( ) B (p)P1 (p)dp
                                1    t[1 l( )] + (1 t) [1          l( ) e]
                            =                                               :                         (55)
                                    1 t[(p    )=(p( )   )]         (1 t)e a

                                                 47
          The numerator follows from (28) since this is proportional to aggregate spending.
          The denominator is proportional to aggregate consumption and follows from (26)
          and (27). Next, the labor-market-clearing condition (28) implies that

                   [tc( ) + (1            t)c( )] + a(p                 ) = t[1             l( )] + (1               t) [1        l( )    e];

          since n[A(at ) + A(qad ) + r] = a(p ) by the zero-pro...t condition. Solving out for
          c( ) and c( ) using (26) and (27), while noting that B (p( )) = (p     )=[p( )     ],
          then yields
                        p
             [1   t(             )        (1     t)e a ] + a(p                ) = t[1             l( )] + (1           t) [1       l( )    e]: (56)
                       p( )

          Last, p( ) must solve

                                                p( )
                          a(p         )fln[                ]                                +                  g=a = 1          l( ):           (57)
                                                 p                  p( )                         p

          Equations (55), (56), and (57) represent a system of three equations in three un-
          knowns, which can be used to ...nd a solution a, p , and p( ) predicated upon the
          observed markup, markup, and the labor allocations for 2018 at the calibration
          point reported in Table 2.

  2. Calibrating the ...xed entry cost, r. Since all ...rms earn zero pro...ts, zero in on ...rms
     selling at the lowest price, p. Their zero-pro...t condition gives
                                     =(    1)            =(1    )        1=(1       )           1=(1       )         =(1    )
                  r = (p         )              (1 + q              )                   (                                       ) > 0;

     where p, , q , and         have all been previously determined.

  3. Calibrating the cost of advantage of digital advertising, q , for the years 2003, 2010, and
     2018. These can be recovered from the observed ratio of digital ad spending to traditional
     ad spending, d2t, for the years 2003 and 2018. For the year 2010 an interpolated value
     is used for d2t. To see this, from (4), (6), and (10) it is apparent that

                              A(qad )    qad                            =(1     )                    =(1       )
                                      =(     ) = (qq                                ) =q                           = d2t:
                              A(at )      at

     Therefore,
                                                       q = (d2t)(1                  )=
                                                                                            ;
     where    is known from the ...rst step.

    Calibrating the preference parameters, , , , the cost of an education, e, and the click-
through rate on traditional advertising, . This is done by solving problem (39) which tries to
match up the model'   s predictions for leisure versus 6 observations on leisure from U.S. data


                                                               48
for non-college- and college-educated people for the years 2003, 2010, and 2018. Central to
this data matching problem is the ...rst-order condition

                               = (1   )                           ; for   2 f ; g.
                  c( ) p( )               l( ) + (1    )m l( )1

The quantity of digital media goods consumed, nad = , and the price of the last good consumed,
p( ), are quantities that can be recovered from the information produced in Steps 1 to 3,
conditional upon values for 1 l( ) and 1 l( ) e. The quantity of traditional media goods
consumed, nat = , depends upon the click-through rate, , for which there is no information
available. So, must be calibrated. The model'       s leisure quantities, lt ( ) and lt ( ), come from
calibrating , , , e, and so as to match up, as close as possible, the model'         s predictions for
leisure, lt ( ), with the stylized facts from the data, leisuret ( ) for t = 2003; 2010; and 2018,
and = f = non-college, = collegeg.

16     Appendix: Growth in TFP
First, it will be shown that given the assumptions in the main text the economy will follow
a balanced growth path. Second, the results for the model when TFP is allowed to change
are presented in Tables 9 and 10. To begin with, to incorporate technology advance in the
household sector rewrite tastes as
                          Z v                                Z m
                                       (1 )
                      ln(     ci di) +      ln[ (zl) + (1  )(    mj dj ) ];
                           0                                         0

where z represents a technological progress in the home sector. This is easy to justify using
household production theory. Next, as assumed in the text, let

                   (1= 0 )=(1= ) = (1= 0 )=(1= ) = r=r0 = v 0 =v = z 0 =z = g > 1:

     Then, there will exist an balanced growth path with the following properties:

   1. The price markup at the lowest price, p      , grows at the rate 1=g < 1­  this is actually
      a decline. This fact follows from equation (12) and the assumption that (1= 0 )=(1= ) =
      r=r0 = g . From (14) the markup at the maximum price will grow at this rate too,
      provided that advertising per variety is constant. By eyeballing (21) it is then apparent
      that p( ) follows a similar time path­on this note that the lefthand side of (21) will now
      be multiplied by v , which grows at rate g so that va(p     ) is constant.

   2. The above implies that the price distribution shifts to the left by the factor 1=g .

   3. The ...rst-order condition (8) for advertising shows that at and ad will remain constant
      when both p        and shift by the factor 1=g .

   4. The number of media goods, m, will grow at rate g . This follows from the righthand side
      of equation (22), which should now be multiplied by v . On this, note that (p    )=( )
      will be constant.

                                                  49
               Calibrated Parameter Values for the Model with TFP Growth
Parameter Values                                       Description                     Identi...cation
Consumers
   = 0:3499                                            Consumption weight              Data, Eq (39)
   = 0:0076                                            Weight on leisure, CES          Data, Eq (39)
   = 4:9896                                            Elasticity of substitution      Data, Eq (39)
t = 0:65                                               Low-type fraction               Data
   = 2:3506                                            High-type productivity          Data
e = 0:0953                                             Cost of skill                   Data, Eq (39)
Firms
  = 0 = 1:0053                                         Annual Growth in TFP            Data
                     0 7               0 15
  03 = 1; 10 = ( = ) ; 18 = ( = )                      Marginal production cost        Assumed
r03 = 0:0028; r10 = r03 ( = 0 )7 ; r18 = r03 ( = 0 )15 Entry ...xed cost               Data, Eqs (36) and (37)
v03 = 1; v10 = ( 0 = )7 ; v18 = ( 0 = )15              Varieties                       Assumed
Advertising
   = 3:0148                                            Cost elasticity                 Data, Eqs (36) and (37)
                     0 7               0 15
  03 = 1; 10 = ( = ) ; 18 = ( = )                      Constant                        Assumed
q03 = 12:0920; q10 = 5:9132                            E¢ ciency of digital adv.       Data, Eq (38)
q18 = 2:3302
   = 0:025                                             Click-through rate, digital     Data
   = 0:4410                                            Click-through rate, traditional Data, Eq (39)
     Table 9: The parameter values that result from the calibration procedure for the model with
     TFP growth.

       5. The lefthand side of the labor-market clearing condition still holds, since aggregate
          consumption c( ) + (1 t)c( ) will grow at the rate g due to the expansion of varieties,
          while expands at 1=g . Likewise, A(at ) + A(qad ) + r grows at rate 1=g , which will be
          o¤set by an increase in the number of ...rms from n to gn. Therefore, the number of
          ...rms per variety, n, remains constant.

       6. Last, with above utility function the ...rst-order condition for leisure is
                                                                1
                                                       z l( )
                                      = (1    )                          ; for   2 f ; g.
                          c( ) p( )               z l( ) + (1       )m
          Therefore, if c( ) grows at rate g and p( ) by the factor 1=g , then the lefthand side will
          be constant. The righthand side will also be constant because m and z both grow at
          rate g . Thus, l( ) will be constant.



    17     Appendix: Hybrid Model
    The results for the hybrid model are presented in Tables 11 and 12. In the hybrid model all
    digital advertising is directed while all traditional advertising is undirected. See the main text
    for more detail.

                                                     50
                                     Data Targets
      Description                           U.S. Data Model with TFP Growth
      Income ratio                          1.98        1.98
      Markup, 2018                          1.07        1.07
      Advertising/consumption, 1919-2019 0.022          0.022
      Digital/traditional advertising
        2018                                0.282       0.282
        2010                                0.070       0.070
        2003                                0.024       0.024
      Leisure
        Non-college, 2018                   0.6523      0.6520
        College, 2018                       0.6110      0.6115
        Non-college, 2010                   0.6501      0.6505
        College, 2010                       0.6130      0.6124
        Non-college, 2003                   0.6412      0.6411
        College, 2003                       0.6073      0.6074
Table 10: The data targets used in the calibration exercise and the corresponding numbers
for the model with TFP growth.




                Calibrated Parameter Values for the Hybrid Model
 Parameter Values                   Description                     Identi...cation
 Consumers
   = 0:3497                         Consumption weight              Data, Eq (39)­  analogue
   = 0:0073                         Weight on leisure, CES          Data, Eq (39)­  analogue
   = 4:9731                         Elasticity of substitution      Data, Eq (39)­  analogue
 t = 0:65                           Low-type fraction               Imposed
   = 2:3185                         High-type productivity          Data, Eq (39)­  analogue
 e = 0:0924                         Cost of skill                   Data, Eq (39)­  analogue
 Firms
   =1                               Marginal production cost        Normalization
 r = 0:0026                         Entry ...xed cost               Data, Eq (39)­  analogue
 Advertising
   = 3:0074                         Cost elasticity                 Data, Eq (39)­  analogue
   =1                               Constant                        Normalization
 q03 = q10 = q18 = 1:0              E¢ ciency of digital sector     Imposed
 s03 = 0:03; s10 = 0:09; s18 = 0:29 Size digital sector             Data, Eq (39)­  analogue
   = 0:025                          Click-through rate, digital     Data
   = 0:4285                         Click-through rate, traditional Data, Eq (39)­  analogue
Table 11: The parameter values that result from the calibration procedure for the hybrid
model.



                                            51
                                    Data Targets
           Description                           U.S. Data Hybrid Model
           Income Ratio                          1.98        1.98
           Markup, 2018                          1.07        1.07
           Advertising/consumption, 1919-2019 0.022          0.022
           Digital/traditional advertising
              2018                               0.282       0.282
              2010                               0.070       0.070
              2003                               0.024       0.024
           Leisure
              Non-college, 2018                  0.6523      0.6525
              College, 2018                      0.6110      0.6108
              Non-college, 2010                  0.6501      0.6503
              College, 2010                      0.6130      0.6126
              Non-college, 2003                  0.6412      0.6408
              College, 2003                      0.6073      0.6080
           EV
           Non-college                                       2.0%
           College                                           2.8%
Table 12: The data targets used in the calibration exercise and the corresponding numbers
for the hybrid model.




                                           52
