                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    FIRST-MOVER ADVANTAGE AND THE PRIVATE VALUE OF PUBLIC SCIENCE

                                         Ashish Arora
                                        Sharon Belenzon
                                        Bernardo Dionisi

                                      Working Paper 28533
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28533


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2021




We thank Wesley Cohen and Jonathon Cummings, and seminar participants at Duke, Bocconi,
and the University of Michigan for helpful comments. All remaining errors are ours. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Ashish Arora, Sharon Belenzon, and Bernardo Dionisi. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
First-mover Advantage and the Private Value of Public Science
Ashish Arora, Sharon Belenzon, and Bernardo Dionisi
NBER Working Paper No. 28533
March 2021
JEL No. O3,O31,O34,O36

                                           ABSTRACT

Technical progress increasingly relies on the use of scientific knowledge. But if much of this
knowledge is in the public domain, can it be a source of private value? We find that average
private returns to using public science are small, especially in crowded technical fields, consistent
with the view that the expected profit from an input that others can easily access is low. However,
private value is higher when a firm is the first to use science, partly because it can secure broader
patents relative to later users. Finally, corporate participation in scientific research is a strong
predictor of first use, especially of relevant science. This is consistent with the view that
participation in science raises familiarity with relevant scientific advances.


Ashish Arora                                      Bernardo Dionisi
Fuqua School of Business                          Fuqua School of Business
Duke University                                   Duke University
Box 90120                                         100 Fuqua Drive
Durham, NC 27708-0120                             Durham, NC 27708
and NBER                                          bernardo.dionisi@duke.edu
ashish.arora@duke.edu

Sharon Belenzon
Fuqua School of Business
Duke University
100 Fuqua Drive
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
sharon.belenzon@duke.edu
     "... knowledge is regarded by economists as being "on the shelf" and costlessly available
to all comers once it has been produced. But . . . it frequently requires a substantial research
capability to understand, interpret and to appraise knowledge that has been placed upon the
shelf . . . . The cost of maintaining this capability is high, because it is likely to require
a cadre of in-house scientists who can do these things. And, in order to maintain such a
cadre, the firm must be willing to let them perform basic research. The most effective way
to remain effectively plugged in to the scientific network is to be a participant in the research
process. ...basic research may be thought of as a ticket of admission to an information network"
(Rosenberg, 1990: 170).



1    Introduction

Technical progress and scientific advance are closely interlinked (Mansfield, 1995; Cohen et al.,
2002). In many, if not most, sectors of the economy, new technologies are increasingly scientific
in nature (Narin et al., 1997; Fleming et al., 2019). The percentage of utility patents that cite
science has increased from approximately 6% in 1980 to 30 % in 2015, and the average number
of citations to science per patent has increased from 0.1 to 4.4 over the same period. Much of
this scientific knowledge is published and available for all to use. Moreover, not all scientific
discoveries are relevant for invention. A challenge for firms, therefore, is how to create value
from an input that is of uncertain value and freely available to all.
    We argue that first-movers may enjoy a significant advantage (Lieberman and Mont-
gomery, 1998), but for that the firm has to participate in science to have the capacity to
evaluate which scientific advances are relevant. The growing quantity of published research
(Jinha, 2010) suggests that knowing where to look and what to use may be crucial. Recent ev-
idence suggests that firms focus their attention on academic publications from locations with
a high concentration of relevant patenting activity (Bikard and Marx, 2020). This may reflect
longer term links with universities or even individual researchers. Bikard and Marx (2020)
provide an insightful example on how Amgen secured crucial intellectual property building on
the breakthrough purification of erythropoietin (EPO) by Professor Goldwasser at the Univer-
sity of Chicago. In a paper published in 1977, Goldwasser showed that EPO was responsible
to stimulating production of red blood cells. Using the purified samples of EPO provided by


                                               1
Professor Goldwasser, Amgen scientists could learn about the structure of EPO and identify
the relevant genes. This knowledge enabled Amgen to produce EPO using recombinant DNA
techniques, ahead of its rivals, and obtain the vital patent rights that underpinned Amgen's
subsequent commercial success.
    This example shows both the means by which a firm can be the first to use public science
as well as the benefits of being a first mover in the use of public science. Simply put, firms'
engagement in basic research is a source of a "first mover advantages," because participation
in basic research increases a firm's ability to recognize and apply relevant extramural findings
before others (Cohen and Levinthal, 1989; Rosenberg, 1990).
    In this paper, we investigate the returns to the use of science, and how those returns
differ between early and late users, as well as how the relative returns are conditioned by
the number of potential users. The greater the number of potential users, the greater the
relative rewards to being an early user, consistent with competition eroding the returns from
the use a common resource. Second, we explore a specific mechanism for potential first mover
advantage, namely the scope of patent protection obtained by the first movers. Finally, we
explore whether and how being a first-mover is related to participation in scientific research
by the firm.
    We present three main findings. First, private returns to using science in invention are
low. The difference in the private value of patents that cite science relative to patents that
do not cite science is about 3%, despite the substantially higher technical quality of patents
citing science, as measured by forward citations. In other words, the use of science appears to
create social value, but only modest private economic returns. Consistent with the idea that
private returns to using science are low because rival firms also have access to it, we find that
the value of using science is lower in more competitive technology niches, defined as number
of firms patenting in the same technology class as the focal firm. However, we also find that
the negative relationship between value and competition can be substantially mitigated if the
focal patent is the first to use the cited publication. Being a first mover in using science is



                                               2
associated with a reduction in the estimated negative effect of competition by half.
    Second, exploring the source of first-mover advantage in the use of science, we find that
first-movers obtain broader patents compared to subsequent users of the same scientific discov-
ery, and more so when considering scientific findings that turn out to be useful for invention.
    Third, active engagement in research, as measured by the number of publications au-
thored by firms' employees, is positively associated with the first use of scientific publication,
especially the first use of relevant publications. Exploring the mechanisms behind this re-
lationship, we find that a firm is more likely to be the first to cite a scientific paper in its
patent if the firm is familiar with the journal or conferences where the scientific discovery was
disclosed. This is consistent with the view that corporate science is a ticket of admission into
scientific communities.
    We make two contributions. We theorize that firms can turn a publicly available input
into a privately valuable resource by moving first, thereby pre-empting rivals. We document
that firms can derive private value from the use of public science, particularly if they are the
first to do so, and this first-mover advantage is more salient in more crowded niches. Further,
we provide evidence for the widely theorised, but under-documented idea that firms which
produce public research are also more likely to be among its early users. Thus, firms that
invest in internal research are not just more likely to use science, but are also better able to
extract private benefits from using public science.
    On the methodological front, we leverage newly developed data (Kogan et al., 2017) on
the value of patents to measure the private economic return to the specific invention, and
distinct from the technical quality of the patent. In so doing, we respond to the call by
Lieberman and Montgomery (2013) for forward-looking, rather than retrospective, measures
of the benefits of being a first-mover, and for measures of economic return, rather than market-
share or survival (Lieberman and Montgomery, 1988). However, our study does not extend
to entry into the product market but is limited to the pre-entry stage of invention.
    We next discuss our findings and contribution in the context of the different literatures



                                                3
that we draw upon and to which we contribute.



2        Prior literature and theoretical considerations

2.1       Reliance on science and patent value

A recent literature has studied the relationship between the use of science and patent value.
Fleming and Sorenson (2004) find that patents citing scientific prior art receive more follow-on
citations. Our paper confirms that finding but also shows that the mean private value of using
science is low. That is, while inventions relying on science may be of higher technical quality
and may generate greater social value, extracting private value from these higher quality
patents is difficult. Poege et al. (2019) show a positive relationship between the quality of the
articles cited by a patent and the technical quality of the patent. Our results are consistent.
Patents citing articles published in high impact factor journals have higher private economic
value relative to all other patents.
        Watzinger and Schnitzer (2019) provide evidence that patents closer to scientific publica-
tions tend to have higher economic value than patents farther from science.1 As in Watzinger
and Schnitzer (2019) we use the monetary value of a patent developed by Kogan et al. (2017) to
estimate the relationship between the use of science and the patent economic value. However,
we compare patents that are the first to cite a paper with patents that only cite papers that
have been previously cited by other patents, as well as with patents that do not cite scientific
papers, whereas Watzinger and Schnitzer (2019) compare the average value of patents that
directly cite science to patents that do so indirectly. Importantly, we take a within firm per-
spective, controlling for unobserved firm-specific factors that may be related to patent value,
as well as to the distance between patents and science. This enables us to characterize the
relationship between the use of science and value, and link this relationship to competition,
    1
     They define closeness to science following Ahmadpoor and Jones (2017), so that, for instance, a patent
has a distance of 1 from a publication if it cites the publication. It has a distance of 2 from a scientific
publication if the patent cites a patent that in turn cites a scientific paper.



                                                     4
first mover advantage, and absorptive capacity.


2.2        First mover advantage

An influential literature has studied the conditions under which first movers have an advantage,
the possible means by which first movers gain an advantage, and why some firms are more likely
to move first (e.g., Lieberman and Montgomery (1988, 1998); Fosfuri et al. (2013)). Whereas
the first-mover literature has focused on product markets, we focus on first movers in using a
scientific discovery. This has some natural implications for how first movers gain an advantage.
(Lieberman and Montgomery, 1988) identify three mechanisms whereby first-movers gain
advantage: technology leadership, locking-in buyers, and preemption of key inputs, or winning
a patent race (Fosfuri et al., 2013). In our context, the first mover, by being the first to patent,
may gain a degree of market exclusivity, and in particular, may obtain broader patents.
Needless to say, these different sources of advantage are not mutually exclusive. A patent
may itself provide the patenting firm with the time to develop the complementary asset, while
rivals are trying to invent around.
        Lieberman and Montgomery (1998) argue that economic returns are the appropriate
measure of first mover advantage rather than market share or survival, the focus of much
of the literature. They argue that "First-mover advantages exist when the pioneering firm
earns positive present value of profits as the consequence of its early entry (i.e. positive
profits net of those attributable to more general types of firm proficiency). A serious problem
confronting those engaged in empirical work is the fact that disaggregate profit data are seldom
obtainable." An advantage of our study is the ability to observe a proxy for the monetary value
a firm expects by pioneering the use of scientific findings. We have a measure of stock market
returns associated with the patent (Kogan et al., 2017). In addition to being a measure of
anticipated future economic return, albeit with some caveats, it is also specific to the invention
rather than simply a firm level measure.2 In other words, though limited to inventions that
    2
        Indeed, Lieberman and Montgomery (2013) suggest stock-market capitalization as the appropriate mea-
sure.


                                                      5
are patented, this is a much finer grained measure of first mover advantage in the use of
science, which allows us to control for unobserved firm specific effects. Thus, one can ask how
economic returns from early versus late use of science differs within the same firm.3
     Extensive as the literature is, pinpointing the specific ways in which early entry proves
advantageous has remained a challenge in large sample settings. Our measure also allows us
to explore how the economic returns are realized. We find that science-based patents are of
higher technical quality, as reflected by citations received.4 Importantly, patents that are the
first to use a scientific discovery tend also to be broader in scope, compared to patents that
are later users. That is, first movers are able to gain broader patent protection.
     The literature has stressed the returns are contingent on a variety of factors (Lieberman
and Montgomery, 2013). One such factor is the response of competitors. For instance, Agar-
wal and Gort (1996) document that competitor entry intro product markets has accelerated
over time, reducing the lead time enjoyed by early entrants. However, the heightened com-
petition would also imply lower profits for the later entrants. Thus the open question is how
competition conditions the relative returns to early entry. We argue, with the help of simple
analytical model, that find that the presence of potential users reduces the average returns
from using science but enhances the relative returns of early users. Our empirical results are
consistent with this reasoning.5
     Although we draw upon the literature on first-mover advantage, there are important
differences in context and measures. We use a forward looking measure of economic return,
rather than market share or survival, and the measure is tied to the invention itself, rather
than aggregate profitability of the firm as a whole. On the other hand, we do not observe entry
into a market, only the timing of the use of science in invention. Further, we are confined to
    3
      We are aware of only one similar prior study. Poletti et al. (2008) also use stock-market event study
approach with product market announcements.
    4
      Watzinger and Schnitzer (2019) show that these patents also tend to use more novel keywords.
    5
      Another strand of the literature has examined the capabilities and resources that allow firms to move first.
Starting with Mitchell (1989), the literature has examined a variety of such capabilities including marketing
capabilities (Mitchell, 1991) and specialized assets (Tripsas, 1997), technical capabilities (Klepper, 2002) and
manufacturing (Arora and Ceccagnoli, 2006). We complement this literature by pointing to absorptive capacity
as a source of first-mover advantage.



                                                        6
publicly traded firms.


2.3     Investment in research and absorptive capacity

The vast literature on absorptive capacity (Cohen and Levinthal, 1989; Rosenberg, 1990) em-
phasizes the importance of corporate participation in research for accessing outside knowledge
(Sauermann, 2010; Fabrizio, 2009). While this literature does not typically discuss first-mover
advantage directly, it suggests that the firms that invest in basic research are better able to
benefits from scientific discoveries that are ostensibly available to all. In our context, Baruf-
faldi and Poege (2020) show that firms that participate in a conference are more likely to
cite a paper presented in that conference compared to papers at comparable conferences. We
complement their findings by showing that firms are more likely to be early users when they
participate in conferences and use scientific findings presented at the conference the firm at-
tended. Our findings also resonate with the literature that has stressed the importance of
pre-entry capabilities for entry (Helfat and Lieberman, 2002), and specifically for direction of
innovation (Helfat, 1994).
      In subsection 2.4 we explicitly model competition. Once a firm has used a scientific
discovery in its inventions, and disclosed it by citing it in its patents, both the discovery and
its relevance becomes clearer to others, including firms that may lack absorptive capacity. By
so doing we stress that even firms without absorptive capacity may use scientific discoveries,
but are unlikely to be first-movers because absorptive capacity is required to judge whether
the scientific discovery is commercially valuable or not. The first-mover has more time to build
or acquire the required inputs for commercialization. However, it can also use the patent itself
to carve out a broader exclusive zone, thereby appropriating a larger share of the rents from
its invention.
      Empirically, we advance the literature on absorptive capacity by documenting not only
that absorptive capacity is related to use, but also the economic return from the use, and
how technical competition conditions the economic returns. In so doing, we connect the


                                               7
absorptive capacity literature to the strategic competition literature. This is timely in view of
the growing division of innovative labor (Arora et al., 2018), whereby universities specialize in
upstream research, and corporations specialize in downstream development and an increasing
reliance on science of technology (Fleming et al., 2019; Marx and Fuegi, 2019). This division
means that the using public science is becoming more important over time, but also that the
challenge in profiting from it rises as firms' scientific capabilities deteriorate.


2.4     Analytical framework

To guide our empirical specifications, we develop a model in which scientific discoveries are
publicly disseminated but their significance is initially only understood by firms that have
absorptive capacity. In this model, absorptive capacity enables the firm to understand whether
the discovery will or will not be useful for invention. If useful, the firm can move first to apply
the discovery, thereby garnering a bigger piece of the intellectual space opened up by the
discovery. Other firms can learn from the first-mover's experience and follow on. However,
they have to work-around the invention claimed by the first-mover. Followers avoid having to
invest in absorptive capacity but face a higher cost of working around the first-mover's patent.
      The case of development of statins from Gambardella (1992) illustrates this idea. After
scientific advance had demonstrated that high cholesterol levels were related to heart disease,
firms such as Bristol-Myers, developed compounds such as Colestyramine, which removed bile
acids from the body, thereby reducing some cholesterol. However, this was far less effective
than reducing the production of cholesterol itself. In the 1970s Brown and Goldstein at the
University of Texas elucidated how the body synthesizes cholesterol. Thereafter the search
began for molecules that would block one of the 30 steps in the synthesis of cholesterol (Endo,
2010). However, it was Merck that successfully isolated lovastatin, the first compound that
was effective in humans. Merck was first, in part because Merck scientists were familiar with
Mevalonic acid, a key intermediate in the cholesterol pathway (Gambardella, 1992). Following
the successful commercial debut of lovastatin (Mevacor) in 1987, other companies were able to


                                                 8
enter. Parke-Davis (eventually acquired by Pfizer) was able to chemically synthesize a more
potent statin, atorvastatin (Lipitor), by relying on molecular modeling of lovastatin. This
example illustrates that internal scientific capability is useful for early users of science. How-
ever, once the applicability of a scientific discovery is demonstrated, followers need much lower
levels of internal capability to apply the science, perhaps bringing to bear other capabilities
(Gambardella, 1995).6
     To fix ideas, consider the case where there are N firms that are active in an existing
technological trajectory. The expected payoff from an invention in the existing trajectory is
o (N ), where the subscript o is a menomonic for "old". We assume that this payoff decreases
with the number of active inventors N . Consider a scientific advance that potentially opens up
a new trajectory. However, success is uncertain; there is a probability p that the leveraging the
science will be successful, and with probability 1 - p it will be unsuccessful. The uncertainty
will be resolved after someone actually tries to use the science in an invention. However for a
firm with absorptive capacity, the uncertainty is smaller, because it gets a "signal" which is
correlated with the true state. That is, absorptive capacity enables the firm to make a more
informed decision. In the simplest, albeit less realistic, case, the signal is perfect - the firm
knows with certainty whether the discovery is useful or not.7
     Suppose that there is a single firm with absorptive capacity, which will pursue the dis-
covery if the signal is positive and not pursue it if the signal is negative. To avoid unnecessary
detail, we assume that p is always low enough such that firms without absorptive capacity
will not pursue discoveries till the discovery has been shown to be useful i.e., till someone has
successfully used it.8
    6
      For instance, the synthesis of atorvastatin required expertise in chiral chemical synthesis at large scale,
whereas lovastatin was a naturally product extracted from a fungus Roth (2002).
    7
      The appendix shows that the assumption of a perfect signal can be relaxed with no essential changes in
the results.
    8
      In the appendix we discuss the decision to invest in absorptive capacity. The discussion here makes it clear
that firms will under-invest in absorptive capacity because some of the benefits of such investment spillover
to others. Investment in absorptive capacity enables a firm to assess the relevance of a scientific discovery.
However, when it acts on it and successfully uses a scientific discovery, this also signals to other firms that the
discovery is useful. The latter can gain some value but do not have to incur the cost of investing in absorptive
capacity. The problem is exacerbated If the returns of the first-user fall as more firms use the discovery.



                                                        9
       The final part of the story has to do with the inventive step or breadth of the invention,
which is reflected in the intellectual space the inventor claims. We assume that the cost of
               q2
invention is c , and the expected gross return is pqv , where q represents the size of the
               2
inventive step (which implies a corresponding scope for the patent), and v is the unit value
from an inventive step of size q in the new trajectory. Thus the payoff to pioneering the new
trajectory, 1 , where the subscript 1 denotes the first firm to enter the new trajectory, is
                 cq 2    (v )2
1 = max{q1 v - 21 } =
       q1                 2c
     We focus on the case where 1 > o (N ). If the leader is successful, others will follow. The
followers benefit from a resolution of the uncertainty. However, followers have a disadvantage
in that the pioneer may lay claim to an intellectual space, forcing the follower to invent-around
the pioneer's patent. Later followers would find progressively more intellectual space blocked
off by those who had preceded them. We model this as an increasing cost of invention. That
is, the second firm to use the discovery with an inventive step q2 has an invention cost of
  q2
c 2  (q1 ), where q1 is the inventive step of the pioneer, and  (0) = 1,  > 0. More generally,
  2
                                                                               q2
for the rth firm entering the new trajectory, the invention cost function is c r  (Qr ) where
                                                                               2
        r-1
Qr =          qi . However, because followers only enter if the scientific discovery is useful, they do
        i=1
not face any possibility of failure. Thus their gross return is qr v . The payoff of the rth firm is
                   2                v2
r = max{qr v - cq 2
                   r
                       ( Qr ) } =          . The optimal inventive step for the rth firm entering a
       qr                         2c (Qr )
                v
trajectory is         . In other words, earlier users have better inventions and broader patents
              c (Qr )
than later users.
       We assume that firms have to choose i.e., they may either explore the new trajectory or
stay in the old one.9 Firms will enter till their payoffs equal those in the existing trajectory.
That is, if n firms explore the trajectory, then ignoring integer constraints, a free entry equi-
librium implies n = 0 (N - n). Formally, the number of firms that use the discovery, n is
                    v2
characterized by          = 0 (N - n).
                 2c (Qn )
     Note that a higher N implies a higher n. This is because an increase in N implies that
   9
     Relaxing this assumption would imply that the returns from the new trajectory are zero for the marginal
entrant, but the main result would be unaffected.


                                                    10
0 (N - n) falls. To maintain the equality, Qn must increase, and hence, n must be higher.
A direct implication of the foregoing is that a higher N implies lower marginal returns in the
new trajectory, and hence also lower average returns. It also implies that the returns of the
first-mover relative to average returns would increase with N . This leads to the main result.10

Result: The average return to the use of science is lower when there are more active inventors.
However, the return to the first user relative to the average return to the use of science is higher
when there are a more active inventors.
         In the empirical analysis, we also investigate the key assumptions of our framework.
Specifically we test whether (i) firms with absorptive capacity are more likely to be first-
movers, (ii) particularly for using relevant science. We further test that (iii) first-movers are
more likely to get broader patents, (iv) especially for using relevant science.




3        Data

         To explore the relationship between science and invention value we combine data from
several sources: (i) USD denominated patent value from Kogan et al. (2017). We restrict the
sample obtained from Kogan et al. (2017) to patents assigned between 1980 to 2010: 1,297,995
patents, assigned to 6,514 unique PERMCOs. To use the data from Arora et al. (2017), we
consider only U.S.headquartered firms, which allows us to link companies' scientific publication
activity and the use of science. Our estimation sample comprises 860,107 unique patents issued
by the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) from 1980 to 2010 to 4,426 publicly traded,
U.S. headquartered companies., (ii) patent citations to scientific publications from Marx and
Fuegi (2019) ­ PCS Data, (iii) corporate publications from Arora et al. (2017), (iv) financial
    10
      If competition directly affects payoffs from the use of science, the returns being a first mover should be
higher. However, this complicates the formal analysis because first-mover has an incentive to deter entry by
trying for a broader patent. Intuitively, allowing for preemption would strengthen the returns to being a
first-mover. Further, greater competition in the existing trajectory would provide a greater incentive to the
first-mover to preempt followers.



                                                      11
information from CRSP/Compustat, (v) front-page patent information from PatStat, and (vi)
scientific articles from Microsoft Academic (Sinha et al., 2015). Below we describe how these
data are used to construct the main measures used in this paper, summarized in Table 1.

3.1     Measures

Patent value. Patent values (i ) are sourced from (Kogan et al., 2017). These are estimated
using abnormal stock market returns of the company at the time the patent is granted. The
patent value in millions of USD is deflated to 1982 prices using the Consumer Price Index.
Kogan et al. (2017) estimate the economic value of a patent as a function of the idiosyncratic
firm return, the ex ante probability of a patent being granted and a firm market capitalization
before the issuing of the patent. This measure of the private economic value of patent allows
researchers to distinguish it from its technical value, typically measured with forward citations.
      The measure developed by Kogan et al. (2017), however, suffers from some drawbacks.
As with all event study based measures, it assumes that the only reason for the abnormal
return accruing to the firm's stockholders is related to the event under consideration, in this
instance, the grant of a patent. There is also an important question about the time window
used to measure the abnormal return. The shorter the window, the more tightly the focal
event is linked to the stock price movement on the day but the less likely that the market
price incorporates the relevant information. In the present context, a related drawback is
that patents assigned to the same firm the same day (the USPTO issues patents once a week,
on Tuesdays) are assigned the same average value. Notice however that what matters for
our results is not the absolute values but whether the relative patent values are meaningfully
measured. This is because we study the private economic value of patents that are the first
to cite a scientific publication relative to those that only cite publications previously cited by
other patents, and to patents that do not cite science.
      The average patent value in our sample, is $17.55 million in (1982 prices), while the
median patent is valued at $7.98 million. Values vary across industries, ranging from higher
values in categories such as "Drugs & Med" where the average patent value is $29 million,


                                               12
"ICT" with an average of $18.9 million, to "Mechanical" with an average value of $13 million.11
Use of science To measure the use of science in invention, we follow the growing literature
employing non-patent literature (NPL) citations linked to scientific publications. We rely
on Marx and Fuegi (2019), which provides an open source data-set, PCS Data, linking NPL
citations of US patents, granted between 1926 and 2018, to scientific papers in Microsoft
Academics. The PCS Data is a patent - NPL citation level dataset which assigns to each
patent an NPL citation string matched, with various degrees of confidence, to a scientific
publication in Microsoft Academics.12 This match allows researchers to classify whether an
NPL citation contains a link to a scientific paper.
       While patent citations, specifically patent-citations-to-patents, have been criticized as a
measure of knowledge flows (Jaffe and Trajtenberg, 2002; Roach and Cohen, 2013), recent
evidence suggests that patent citations to scientific papers suffer less from the drawbacks
afflicting patent citations to patent. Specifically, patent citations to papers are plausible
measures of inventor awareness and use of scientific findings.
       Arora et al. (2017) validate patent citations to science as a measure of knowledge flows
using responses of industrial R&D lab managers to the Carnegie Mellon Survey (Cohen et al.,
2000). Their validation exercise indicates a positive relationship between citations to science
made by a firm's patents and the firm's reported use of science in its R&D process. Bikard
and Marx (2020), in an attempt at understanding the process underlying patent citations to
scientific literature, interview 21 inventors. In the interviews the inventors confirmed their
direct involvement in the addition of citation to science to their patents, implying that the
citation reflected their awareness of the cited publication. Finally, in a large scale analysis,
Arora et al. (2020) propose a novel approach to understand the relationship between patent
citations to science and the academic literature. They show a positive relationship between
technological classes citing science and the average textual distance between the text of patents
  11
      We winsorize patent values at the 1 and 99 percentiles. Categories are sourced from NBER patent
classifications.
   12
      For our analysis we use the matched sample with a confidence score above 7. See Marx and Fuegi (2019)
for details



                                                    13
in the citing technological class and academic literature abstracts. Technological classes that
are textually close to the academic literature have a higher propensity to cite scientific papers.
    We create a binary indicator ­ Science ­ equal to one if the focal patent contains a
front-page NPL citation linked to a scientific publication. Front page citations delimit legally
the validity of the patent (Bryan et al., 2020). Further, the relative importance of front-page
citations, over in-text citations, has increased over time. Front page citations as a share of
overall citations to science went from 20% in 1970 to over 60% in 2019 (Marx and Fuegi, 2020).
Approximately 26 % of patents cite science, and about 62% of the firms in our sample have
been granted a patent that cites science. Of all the granted patent between 1980 and 2010,
approximately 14% cite more than 1 publication, and on average a patent cites approximately
2 publications.
    We classify different types of citations to science using a commonly used measure of jour-
nal quality, the Journal Impact Factor (JIF), as well as a new measure of the commercial
relevance of the journal, developed by Bikard and Marx (2020): the Journal of Commercial
Impact Factor (JCIF). The JIF and JCIF are calculated for each journal J and year t as
the number of times the articles in J in years t-1 and t-2 were cited in year t, divided by
the number of articles in J during years t-1 and t-2. Whereas JIF employs citations from
other papers, JCIF employs citations from patents. Approximately 34 % of patents citing at
least one scientific publication, cite an article on a journal with a JIF in the top 2%, and 56
% of patents that cite a scientific publication cite on from a journal with a JCIF in the top 2%.


First to use science. The PCS Data includes about 3 million scientific publication that are
cited in US granted patents. On average, a cited publication is cited by approximately 5.49
patent, while the median cited publication is cited by 2 patents, with a range from 1 to about
5,200 patents. In order to identify whether a patent was the first to cite a specific publication,
amongst all USPTO patents, we compare each patent-cited publication with all the patents
that cited the specific publication between 1901 and 2010. We classify the focal patent as first



                                               14
to use a given publication if no other patent that cited the publication was filed before the
focal patent. Specifically, we classify patent T as first to use paper S if no other patent citing
paper S was filed before T. Accordingly, First Use of Science is a binary variable equal to one
if the focal patent is the first to cite a paper and zero otherwise. If a patent cites more than
one publication, the first to use dummy variable receives the value of one if at least one of
these articles are cited for the first time.
       We build similar indices for citing scientific publications in different types of journals
according the above described JIF and JCIF. We construct measures of first to use articles
in top JIF and top JCIF by identifying whether a patent is first to cite a paper that was
published in a journal with a JIF/JCIF above the 99th percentile.


Relevant science: Not all used discoveries are relevant for invention. Our theory assumes
that internal absorptive capacity enables a firm to discern which discoveries will be relevant.
Accordingly, we measure relevant science as publications that are highly cited by patents:
papers that fall into the top 95th percentile of patent-to-science citations. We also construct
a measure of first to use relevant science as a binary variable indicating whether a patent is
the first to cite a relevant publication. As a robustness check We also present results with
papers that have been cited more than once, Mult Tech Use, as relevant science.


Corporate participation in science. We obtain corporate publication activity from Arora
et al. (2017).13 The corporate publication data allows us to identify scientific papers for which
at least one of the authors is affiliated with US headquartered Compustat firm. We thus create
                                                                                  14
our main measure of a firm engagement in science: Publication Stock                    .
       A key contribution of this paper is exploring the mechanisms by which corporate par-
ticipation in science might contribute to developing a first mover advantage in using public
  13
      Arora et al. (2017) match approximately 800 thousand scientific in the "Science Citation Index" and
"Conference Proceedings Citation Index - Science" of Web of Science, published between 1980 and 2015, to
their sample of Compustat firms; the details and data can be found in the appendix of Arora et al. (2017)
   14
      Publications Stock and Patent Stock are calculated using a perpetual inventory method with a 15 percent
depreciation rate  , where Publications Stock t = Publications t + (1 -  ) Publications Stock t-1


                                                     15
science. We develop two measures using information in the corporate publication data. Build-
ing on Rosenberg (1990), who argues that active engagement in scientific research `buys' firms
a ticket for admission into an information network, we propose that attending conferences in
which relevant science is presented and awareness of applicable journals raises a firm familiar-
ity, and possibly reduces search costs, allowing for a timely implementation of the scientific
advances.
     Using corporate publications between 1980 and 2010, we identify conferences and journals
with which a firm is "familiar " at each point in time. We construct two measures of familiarity
with a conference or journal, one based on whether the firm has published in a conference's
proceeding and one based on whether the firm has published in a journal. Specifically, we
encode conference attendance by as firm F has attended conference C if at least one employee
of F is among the affiliations in a paper in the proceeding of conference C. Similarly, at the
                                                                                                         15
journal level, we consider firm F to be familiar with a journal J if F has published in J.
     We use conference information disambiguated in Microsoft Academics. There are about
3500 conferences linked to scientific articles, 46% of which are linked to articles cited in the
front page of patents. In our sample, 15% of the articles cited in patents are linked to a
conference, 32 % of the patents citing science cite an article presented at a conference, while
at the firm level the average firm cites articles in its patents that are linked to approximately
8 different conferences.
     To conduct our analysis at the patent level we adapt the measure for each patent using
the PCS Data. We classify the focal patent P, filed by firm F and citing a scientific journal
J, as familiar with J if an employee of F has authored a paper published in J, prior to the
filing of P. Similarly, at the conference attendance level, we indicate the focal patent P, filed
by firm F and citing a paper published in the proceeding of conference C, as familiar with C if
   15
      We use Microsoft Academics (MAG) Sinha et al. (2015) to identify the characteristics of each paper,
such as the journal in which it was published, when it was published, what other papers it cites, and if it was
presented at a conference. The Corporate Pubs Data from Arora et al. (2017) links Compustat firms to the
Web of Science database (WoS). Since WoS and MAG use different identification codes for the same paper, we
create a crosswalk between the WoS IDs in the Corporate Pubs Data and MAG IDs using TFIDF and fuzzy
matching on papers' titles and authors, limiting comparisons within rolling windows of 3 years.



                                                      16
an employee of F has authored a paper presented at C.
Crowdedness. We use the number of patenting firms as a proxy of technological competi-
tion in a market. Specifically we count the number of firms (PERMCOs) that are assigned
patents in the same primary CPC, up to the group level "CPC-6", in the same year.16 As an
alternative measure, we use the number of firms that cite at least one of the publications that
are cited by the focal patent.


Patent Scope. We use two measures to proxy for patent scope: the length of the shortest in-
dependent claim, and the count of independent claims of the focal patent Marco et al. (2019).17
More independent claims, or fewer words in the shortest independent claim, correspond to a
broader patent scope.



3.2      Non-parametric results

       We have theorized that competition lowers the average private value of using science in
invention, and widens the gap between first-movers in the use of science and followers. In the
empirical analysis, we test this. In addition, we empirically investigate whether firms that
invest in research are more likely to be first-movers in using science, especially science that is
likely to prove useful for invention. Finally, we explore the empirical basis for our conjecture
that an important advantage from being a first-mover is the ability to obtain broader patents.
       Our main sample and variables are at the patent level. The key variables for each patent
are its dollar value to the firm, whether it cites science, and whether a citation to a specific
scientific article first appeared in the focal patent. Table 2 presents descriptive statistics for
our main variables. The median patent in our sample is valued at $7.98 millions (1982 prices).
The median values of patents that cite science and that do not cite science are respectively
  16
      We obtain primary CPC codes for each utility patent from Google Patents.
  17
      Similar measures can also be used, for example Kuhn and Thompson (2019) propose the length of the
first independent claim. The length of the shortest and the first independent claim, as well the average length,
are highly correlated.




                                                      17
$9.14 million and $7.6 million.
       The value of patents citing science vs not citing science, however, differs along an im-
portant dimension: how many firms are patenting in the same technological space. Figure 1
shows that as the number of firms patenting in a technological class increases the difference in
value between patents citing science and patents that do not cite science steadily decreases.18
This suggests that firms tend to create more value using scientific advances in less crowded
technological fields, consistent with the idea that private returns to using science are low if
rivals also have access to the same science.
       To explore first-mover-advantage in the use of science, we split the sample of patents
citing science into patents that are first to use a scientific article and patents that only cite
scientific articles previously cited by other patents.19 First to use patents (blue, long-dashed
line in Figure 1) are of higher value when there is more than one firm in a technological space.
Additionally, the difference between being first to use (long-dashed blue line) and not first to
use (short-dashed red line) tends to be larger in more crowded spaces. These trends suggest
that the negative effect of competition are mitigated by being the first to use a particular
research article.
       Note also that our measure of first-use is absolute. It is possible that a follow-on use may,
in fact, be the first use in the relevant market. If so, we are under-estimating the private value
of first-use by mixing economically relevant first-use and follow-on use in a single category.
  18
       The median patent is issued in a patent class ("CPC6") populated by 19 firms.
  19
       If two patents are filed on the same day and they cite the same science, they are both first to use.




                                                        18
                            Figure 1: Use of Science in Crowded Spaces




            This figure shows the average patent value for different bins of competition (Num-
            ber of Firms Patenting in the 6-digit CPC); we group patents into 10 quantiles
            based on the number of patenting firms in the same CPC Group ("CPC6"), cut-
            offs are determined yearly. The values are presented for 3 different groups: (i)
            patents that do not cite science (medium-dashed, grey line) (ii) patents that cite
            science for the first time (long-dashed, blue line) and (iii) patents that cite science,
            but they don't do so for the first time (short-dashed, red line).




4     Econometric analysis

4.1    Patent value and the use of science

We estimate the following specification for the ith patent of the k th firm:


                               ln(ik ) = 0 + 1 Scienceik + Z ik  +             i                       (1)




                                                      19
The value of the patent is represented by ik and Scienceik is a dummy variable which takes
the value 1 if the patent cites science, and 0 otherwise. We control for factors Zik that may
influence the use of science and patent value. These include grant-year fixed effects, because
the use of scientific papers in the front page of patents varies over time; the logarithm of the
firm's market capitalization on the day prior to the issuing of the patent; firm size; patent
class fixed effects to account for variation of the use of science across different technologies;
and firm fixed effects to control for the presence of unobservable firm characteristics that do
not vary over time. We cluster the standard errors by firm to account for potential serial
correlation in the use of science within firms.
    Table 3 presents the estimation results for the relationship between patent value and
the use of science. The results show that patents that cite science are more valuable than
patents that do not, but the difference is economically small. Column 1 presents estimates
without controlling for firm fixed effects. The coefficient estimate of Science Dummy indicates
that patents that cite scientific papers are about 3.8% more valuable than non-science citing
patents. When controlling for firm-fixed effects, this estimate is cut by about two thirds and it
is not statistically different from zero. The estimates in Column 2 imply that citing science, for
the average patent, is associated with an increase in patent value of approximately $ 212,000
and for the median we observe an an increase in patent value of approximately $ 96,000 (in
1982 prices), relatively small differences when compared with the average value of a patent.
    Columns 3-5, Table 3, explore heterogeneity by the quality of the cited publication.
Column 3 includes a dummy that equals one for cited publications that are published in
journals with an impact factor (JIF) in the upper 1% of all journals in Microsoft Academics.
This dummy variable receives the value of zero for all other observations, so patents not citing
science and patent citing science that is not in a top JIF are lumped in one category. The
estimate indicates patents citing a top JIF publication are more valuable than patents citing
lower ranked publications. Patents citing science published in higher commercial impact factor
journals (JCIF) are not more valuable than those citing journals with lower JCIF. Finally,



                                                  20
Column 5 includes the two different quality dummies in a single specification. The value of
using science is never bigger than 4% (summing all use of science use dummies) with respect
to the value of non-citing patents, even when the cited publication is published in a high
impact journal.
    If the observed (small) difference in the economic value of citing scientific publications, vs
not, is driven by differences in intrinsic quality of the two groups then we would expect that
small differences in the technical value as well (Hall et al., 2005; Nicholas, 2008). Columns
6-8 examine the relationship between science and technical importance, measured by forward
citations. The estimate of the Science Dummy in Column 6 indicates that patents using
science receive on average 20% more citations by follow-on inventions compare to patents
not citing science. For the average patent in the sample it translate into approximately 2
more citations. When we consider the use of high quality science (science cited in journals
with an impact factor on the upper 1%) the difference increases by about one more citation:
citing science increases the number of forward citations by 31%. Column 8 reports a linear
probability model in which being in the top 1% of forward citations, in a patent class-year, a
"Home Run", is related the use of science. A patent that cites science, when evaluated at the
average, has a 55% (0.00824 / .015) higher probability of being a home run. Overall the results
from Table 3 indicate that while patents that cite science are technically more important, the
private economic value of using science is relatively low.
    Table 4 present estimates by technology fields. The results indicate that using science
in patented inventions appears to be valuable only in the "drugs" and "chemicals" categories
where the use of science is valued respectively at $ 800,000 and $ 350,000 (in 1982 prices).
The estimates at the technology field level confirm that the basic pattern is robust: The use
of a resource that is available to many is not a source of significant private economic value.




                                               21
4.2     Competition and first to use

      If the private value of commercializing scientific research is economically small because
science is non-excludable and thus can be used by all, we would expect that the value of
using science be lower in more crowded technical spaces. However, we would expect that in
crowded niches, first mover would be more valuable. As theorized in section 2.4, and as figure
1, suggested, the average value of patents is smaller in crowded niches. However, the value of
first-movers is higher than that of followers. Moreover, though both decline with competition,
the difference between the two is higher in more crowded niches. That is, the value of being a
first mover is greater in more crowded spaces. Here we verify that those findings are robust to
controlling for time and firm characteristics, including time invariant firm effects. Accordingly,
we estimate the following specification:


   ln(ik ) = 0 + 1 Scienceik + 2 Scienceik × ln(Competitorsi ) + 3 ln(Competitorsi )
                                                                                              (2)
           + 4 First to Useik × ln(Competitorsik ) + Z ik  +    ik



      We measure how crowded or competitive the niche is with the number of firms that patent
in the same 6-digit CPCs as the focal patent within the same year the focal patent is granted.
For ease of exposition, we label firms operating in the same technology niche (measured either
as those patenting in the same 6-digit CPC) as competitors. The linear competition terms
are included in Z i . Our interest is at 2 , where we expect ^2 < 0, that is, the private value
of commercializing science falls in the number of firms that have access to the publications
cited by the focal patent.
      Table 5 Column 1 introduces our measures of competition: the natural log of one plus
the number of different Compustat firms in the same 6-digit CPC as the focal patent. The
estimate of the coefficient on competition is negative, and the estimate on the dummy for
science is small and statistically indistinguishable from zero, consistent with the estimates
earlier, such as Table 3, column 2.



                                               22
      Column 2 adds an interaction between science and competition. As expected, we see that
^2 is negative. The coefficient estimate on science dummy jumps to close to 7%, indicating a
large increase in the private value of commercializing science in low-competition environments
compared to the baseline results in Table 3. The private value of using science falls sharply
with competition, dissipating when number of competitors reaches the top quartile of the
distribution of the competitors variable. Thus, we confirm a substantial heterogeneity of the
private value of using science by number of potential users, and link the low average private
returns to public science to the relatively high average number of competitors.
      Column 3 in Table 5 introduces our main variable of interest, which captures if a patent
is the first to use a scientific paper. We test whether the negative effect of competition on
private value can be mitigated by being a first-mover. In Column 3 we add an interaction
term between first to use and competition. As expected, first to use substantially mitigates
the negative effect of competition on the private returns to using science. The coefficient
estimate on the interaction term between science and competition is reduced by half when
science is first cited by the focal firm (from -0.02 to -0.0103). That is, as in the non-parametric
analysis, we observe that being first allows for a reduction in the negative effect of competition
by 50%. Columns 4-7 provide estimates by technology field. These are broadly consistent,
showing that first to use mitigates the effect of competition in all fields, albeit that the effects
are not always precisely measured. Drugs, however, appear to deviate from this pattern. The
estimated interaction term is about half the size of that in Column 3, and of the opposite
sign. This may reflect the high reliance on science in bio-pharmaceuticals, but may also reflect
the somewhat special role of patents in protecting pharmaceutical inventions. For instance,
though Merck was the first-mover in statins, Parke-Davis (and subsequently, Pfizer) was able
to introduce a more effective product.

4.3     Patent Scope

As a direct test of the mechanism discussed in the theory, we investigate whether pioneering
the use of scientific advances allows first movers to secure broader patents. We estimate, for


                                                23
the ith patent of the k th firm


                      Patent Scopeik = 0 + 1 First to Useik + Z ik  +   it                  (3)


      Table 6 shows that patents that cite science have about 3% more independent claims
(Column 1), but have about the same number of words in the shortest independent claims as
patents that do not cite science (Column 3). However, being first to use is associated with 6%
more independent claims on average (Column 1) and 4% fewer words in the shortest claim
(Column 3). That is, compared to patents that do not cite science, patents of first movers
have about 9% more independent claims. The gap between the patent scope of first movers
and followers is even greater when considering the use of relevant science. Column 2 shows
that the first mover patent have about 11% more independent claims on average compared
to follower patents. Similarly, Column 4 shows that the length of the shortest independent
claim is about 7% shorter for first mover patents relative to follower patents. In other words,
one way in which being a first-mover in using science translates into private value is being
able to get a broader patent, which can then discourage entry and provide a greater zone of
exclusivity for the first mover.


4.4     Scientific capabilities and first to use

The foregoing results naturally raise the question of which firms are more likely to be first-
movers in using science. The theory of absorptive capacity (Cohen and Levinthal, 1989)
predicts that corporations that produce science increase their ability to recognise and ap-
ply scientific knowledge originated outside the firm's boundaries. We estimate the following
specification for the ith patent of the k th firm:


                  First to Useik = 0 + 1 ln(Publication Stockk ) + Z ik  +   it             (4)




                                                 24
where First to use is a binary variable equal to 1 when the focal patent is the first to cite
a scientific paper; Publication Stock is the cumulative number of publications of the firm,
which is calculated using a perpetual inventory method with a 15 percent depreciation rate  ,
where Publications Stock t = Publications t + (1 -  ) Publications Stock t-1 ; Z includes our set
of controls, such as the grant-year fixed effects, the firm's Patent Stock and R&D Intensity
and firm fixed effects. We cluster the standard errors by firm to account for potential serial
correlation in the use of science within firms.
      Table 7 shows that a doubling of publication stock will increase the probability of being
first to use by 1.8 percentage points, which, evaluated at the mean of the distribution of first
to Use, translates into a 13% increase in the probability to be first to use. The estimated
relative increase in the likelihood of being first to use ranges from 3% in Column 2 to approx-
imately 24% when we consider first use of high quality science. This suggests that corporate
engagement in upstream research increases a firm's ability to recognize extramural knowledge,
where previous evidence was constrained to the use of R&D aggregate data.




4.5     Familiarity with science and first to use

      The estimated relationship between publication activity and first to use raises questions
about the underlying mechanisms through which engagement in scientific research allows firm
to move more quickly into unexplored scientific areas. Active engagement in scientific research
may raise a firms familiarity with relevant journals and conference proceedings. We explore
whether this not only leads to citation to science, as Baruffaldi and Poege (2020) show, but
more specifically, whether it is related to a firm being the first to use the science. We thus
estimate the following specification for the ith patent of the k th firm.


                First to Useik = 0 + 1 Familiarity with Scienceik + Z ik  +    it            (5)

      We estimate the above specification at the patent level, for the sample of patent citing

                                                  25
science, since both our dependent and main independent variable are constructed conditional
on a patent citing a scientific article. First use of Science is a binary variable equal to 1 when
the focal patent is the first to cite a scientific paper and Familiarity with Science is a measure,
at the patent level, indicating whether the focal patent cites a scientific paper published in for
a conference or in a journal where the firm has also published.20 We control for firm, year and
patent class fixed effects. If corporate participation in conferences and publications in certain
journals increases a firm absorptive capacity, we would expect 1 > 0.
        The results are reported in Table 8. Column 1 presents a validation test. Using an linear
probability model, we find that a patent that cites internal science is also more likely to cite a
paper that is being cited for the first time. The estimates from column 1 imply that patents
that make internal citations, i.e., a citation to papers published by an employee of the focal
firm prior to the filing of the patent, have a 6.3% point higher probability to be first to use.
Evaluated at the average of the distribution of first to Use this translate into an increase of
the of approximately 12% ( 0.063 / 0.54).
        Columns 2 to 5 explore how first use is related to familiarity with the science cited. As
previously defined, familiarity relates to whether the assignee of the patent has published in
the journal cited by the focal patent or if the assignee has attended the conferences cited in
in the focal patent. Estimates in Column 2 show that if a firm is citing a paper presented
at a conference it attended, then its patent is 12% more likely to be a first-user of science.
Similarly, if a patent is citing a paper published in an outlet the firm has published in before
the filing of the patent, then the patent is 5.5% more likely to be the first at citing a paper
(Column 3). In sum, a patent that cites science from a familiar domain is also more likely to
cite a paper that is being cited for the first time. Column 4 shows that familiarity through
journals and familiarity through conference participation are largely independent in terms of
their effects of first use. Column 5 and 6 in Table 8 consider the first use of papers published
   20
     In unreported analysis we measure whether the focal patent cites a scientific paper published in a con-
ference proceeding or in a journal which the firm cited in its scientific research. The resulting estimates are
similar to the estimates in Table 8: familiarity with science increases the likelihood of a patent being first to
use.



                                                       26
in journals with high journal impact factor (Column 5) and with a high commercial impact
factor (Column 6); the estimates in Column 5 and 6 are in line with the baseline results.
     We had assumed that absorptive capability implies that a firm is not only aware of
scientific discoveries but is also able to assess, better than others, the relevance of the discovery
for use in its inventive activities; we thus restrict our first to use measure to relevant science.
In columns 7 and 8 of Table 8, we assess whether engagement in the publication process
increases the likelihood of pioneering the use of papers (Column 7) that will be cited more
than once ­ First to Use Mult Tech Use ­ or the use of papers (Column 8) that will receive
enough citations to place them in the upper 5% percent of papers with respect to patent
citations count ­ First to Use Relevant Paper. Evaluating our estimates at the average of the
distribution of First to Use - Mult Tech Use, being familiar with the science used translates
into an increase in the likelihood of being First to Use - Mult Tech Use, by 21% ( 0.0867
/ 0.4). Similarly, at the average of the distribution of First to Use - Relevant Paper, being
familiar with the science used translates into an increase in the likelihood of being First to
Use - Relevant Paper, by 36% ( 0.0267 / 0.075).




5     Conclusion

     Research suggests that corporations are reducing their engagement in performing scien-
tific research (Arora et al., 2017). Sourcing outside knowledge is thus becoming ever more
necessary, and scientific advances from public institutions have become a crucial input into the
corporate innovation. However, creating private value from an input that is freely available
to all, including competitors, is not straightforward. The resource based view suggests that
creating private value requires idiosyncratic resources that are not reproducible by others and
cannot be easily transferred (Barney, 1986). How then can firms create private value from
public science?
     In this paper we explore how by being the first to use scientific advances, firms can



                                                 27
mitigate the negative effect that competition in the technical field has on value creation
from public science. Our findings suggest that firms need to have the absorptive capacity to
understand and use external knowledge, particularly when they cannot simply follow another
firm's lead. Maintaining such a capability is likely to require a cadre of in-house scientists,
who can plug into the relevant flows of scientific knowledge. The most effective way to remain
plugged in to the scientific network is to be a participant in the research process.
    Our findings raise a potential concern about the health of the American innovation ecosys-
tem. While the growing specialization of universities in upstream research and of firms in
downstream development should make each sector more productive in its respective activ-
ity, it also means that the need to link these two activities together is also becoming more
important. If, by withdrawing from science corporations lose their "ticket" to the scientific
community, linking public science to downstream invention would be hard to maintain. How
society can manage sufficient incentives to use public science in downstream invention in an
ecosystem where firms gradually lose their ability to understand, and hence profit from, public
science is a central challenge for policy makers and business managers alike.


References
Agarwal, R. and Gort, M. (1996). The evolution of markets and entry, exit and survival of
  firms. The review of Economics and Statistics, pages 489­498.

Ahmadpoor, M. and Jones, B. F. (2017). The dual frontier: Patented inventions and prior
 scientific advance. Science, 357(6351):583­587.

Arora, A., Belenzon, S., and Patacconi, A. (2018). The decline of science in corporate R&D.
  Strategic Management Journal, 39(1):3­32.

Arora, A., Belenzon, S., and Sheer, L. (2017). Back to basics: why do firms invest in research?
  Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Arora, A., Belenzon, S., and Suh, J. (2020). Science and the market for technology.

Arora, A. and Ceccagnoli, M. (2006). Patent protection, complementary assets, and firms'
  incentives for technology licensing. Management Science, 52(2):293­308.

Barney, J. B. (1986). Strategic factor markets: Expectations, luck, and business strategy.
  Management science, 32(10):1231­1241.


                                              28
Baruffaldi, S. and Poege, F. (2020). A firm scientific community: Industry participation and
  knowledge diffusion. Max Planck Institute for Innovation & Competition Research Paper,
  (20-10).

Bikard, M. and Marx, M. (2020). Bridging academia and industry: How geographic hubs
  connect university science and corporate technology. Management Science, 66(8):3425­
  3443.

Bryan, K. A., Ozcan, Y., and Sampat, B. (2020). In-text patent citations: A user's guide.
  Research Policy, 49(4):103946.

Cohen, W. M. and Levinthal, D. A. (1989). Innovation and learning: the two faces of R & D.
  Economic Journal, 99(397):569­596.

Cohen, W. M., Nelson, R. R., and Walsh, J. P. (2000). Protecting their intellectual assets:
  Appropriability conditions and why us manufacturing firms patent (or not). Technical
  report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Cohen, W. M., Nelson, R. R., and Walsh, J. P. (2002). Links and impacts: the influence of
  public research on industrial r&d. Management science, 48(1):1­23.

Endo, A. (2010). A historical perspective on the discovery of statins. Proceedings of the Japan
  Academy, Series B, 86(5):484­493.

Fabrizio, K. R. (2009). Absorptive capacity and the search for innovation. Research policy,
  38(2):255­267.

Fleming, L., Greene, H., Li, G., Marx, M., and Yao, D. (2019). Government-funded research
  increasingly fuels innovation. Science, 364(6446):1139­1141.

Fleming, L. and Sorenson, O. (2004). Science as a map in technological search. Strategic
  management journal, 25(8-9):909­928.

Fosfuri, A., Lanzolla, G., and Suarez, F. F. (2013). Entry-timing strategies: The road ahead.
  Long Range Planning, 46(4-5):300­311.

Gambardella, A. (1992). Competitive advantages from in-house scientific research: The us
 pharmaceutical industry in the 1980s. Research policy, 21(5):391­407.

Gambardella, A. (1995). Science and innovation: The US pharmaceutical industry during the
 1980s. Cambridge University Press.

Hall, B. H., Jaffe, A., and Trajtenberg, M. (2005). Market value and patent citations. RAND
  Journal of economics, pages 16­38.

Helfat, C. E. (1994). Evolutionary trajectories in petroleum firm r&d. Management science,
  40(12):1720­1747.

Helfat, C. E. and Lieberman, M. B. (2002). The birth of capabilities: market entry and the
  importance of pre-history. Industrial and corporate change, 11(4):725­760.

                                              29
Jaffe, A. B. and Trajtenberg, M. (2002). Patents, citations, and innovations: A window on
  the knowledge economy. MIT press.

Jinha, A. E. (2010). Article 50 million: an estimate of the number of scholarly articles in
  existence. Learned Publishing, 23(3):258­263.

Klepper, S. (2002). The capabilities of new firms and the evolution of the us automobile
  industry. Industrial and corporate change, 11(4):645­666.

Kogan, L., Papanikolaou, D., Seru, A., and Stoffman, N. (2017). Technological innovation,
 resource allocation, and growth. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132(2):665­712.

Kuhn, J. M. and Thompson, N. C. (2019). How to measure and draw causal inferences with
 patent scope. International Journal of the Economics of Business, 26(1):5­38.

Lieberman, M. B. and Montgomery, D. B. (1988).           First-mover advantages.    Strategic
  management journal, 9(S1):41­58.

Lieberman, M. B. and Montgomery, D. B. (1998). First-mover (dis) advantages: retrospective
  and link with the resource-based view. Strategic management journal, 19(12):1111­1125.

Lieberman, M. B. and Montgomery, D. B. (2013). Conundra and progress: Research on entry
  order and performance. Long Range Planning, 46(4-5):312­324.

Mansfield, E. (1995). Academic research underlying industrial innovations: sources, charac-
 teristics, and financing. Review of Economics and Statistics, 77(1):55­65.

Marco, A. C., Sarnoff, J. D., and Charles, A. (2019). Patent claims and patent scope. Research
 Policy, 48(9):103790.

Marx, M. and Fuegi, A. (2019). Reliance on science in patenting. Available at SSRN.

Marx, M. and Fuegi, A. (2020). Reliance on science by inventors: Hybrid extraction of in-text
 patent-to-article citations. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Mitchell, W. (1989). Whether and when? probability and timing of incumbents' entry into
 emerging industrial subfields. Administrative science quarterly, pages 208­230.

Mitchell, W. (1991). Dual clocks: Entry order influences on incumbent and newcomer market
 share and survival when specialized assets retain their value. Strategic Management Journal,
 12(2):85­100.

Narin, F., Hamilton, K. S., and Olivastro, D. (1997). The increasing linkage between us
  technology and public science. Research policy, 26(3):317­330.

Nicholas, T. (2008). Does innovation cause stock market runups? evidence from the great
  crash. American Economic Review, 98(4):1370­96.

Poege, F., Harhoff, D., Gaessler, F., and Baruffaldi, S. (2019). Science quality and the value
  of inventions. Science advances, 5(12):eaay7323.


                                             30
Poletti, M., LING, H., and ENGELLAND, B. (2008). An empirical study of launch order
  valuation based upon stock market reaction. Marketing Management Journal, 18(1).

Roach, M. and Cohen, W. M. (2013). Lens or prism? patent citations as a measure of
  knowledge flows from public research. Management Science, 59(2):504­525.

Rosenberg, N. (1990). Why do firms do basic research (with their own money)? Research
  policy, 19(2):165­174.

Roth, B. D. (2002). 1 the discovery and development of atorvastatin, a potent novel hypolipi-
  demic agent. In Progress in medicinal chemistry, volume 40, pages 1­22. Elsevier.

Sauermann, Henry Cohen, W. (2010). What makes them tick? employee motives and firm
  innovation. Management Science, 56:2134­53.

Sinha, A., Shen, Z., Song, Y., Ma, H., Eide, D., Hsu, B.-j. P., and Wang, K. (2015). An
  overview of microsoft academic service (mas) and applications. In Proceedings of the 24th
  international conference on world wide web, pages 243­246. ACM.

Tripsas, M. (1997). Unraveling the process of creative destruction: Complementary assets and
  incumbent survival in the typesetter industry. Strategic Management Journal, 18(S1):119­
  142.

Watzinger, M. and Schnitzer, M. (2019). Standing on the shoulders of science.




                                             31
                             Table 1: Variables Descriptions

 Variable                        Description

ln(Patent Value)                 Value of the focal patent ­ in millions of USD, deflated to
                                 1982 dollars using the Consumer Price Index ­ derived from
                                 abnormal stock returns of the filing company around the
                                 date of the patent grant. Measure for the economic value of
                                 the patent.
ln(1 + Fw Cites)                 Number of citations the focal patent received up to 5 years
                                 from patent grant. Measure for the technical value of the
                                 patent.
Patent Home Run                  Binary: the focal patent is in the upper 1% of citations
                                 received in that patent class/year.
ln(Mkt Cap)                      Market capitalization of the focal patent's assignee (firm)
                                 the day before the issuing of the focal patent.
Science Dummy                    Binary: the focal patent cites a scientific publication.
Sci Top JIF Dummy                Binary: the focal patent cites a scientific publication pub-
                                 lished in a journal in the upper 1% of Journal Impact Factor
                                 in that year.
Sci Top JCIF Dummy               Binary: the focal patent cites a scientific publication pub-
                                 lished in a journal in the upper 1% of Journal of Commercial
                                 Impact Factor in that year.
ln(N Patenting Firms)            Number of firms that file a patent in the same year as the
                                 filing of the focal patent.
First Use of Science             Binary: the focal patent is the first to cite a scientific pub-
                                 lication.
Science Dummy (Relevant Paper)   Binary: the focal patent cites a scientific publication that in
                                 the upper 5% of patent citations to science
Self Citation                    Binary: the focal patent cites a publication that was au-
                                 thored by an employee of the patent's assignee (firm) prior
                                 to the filing of the patent
Published in Journal             Binary: the focal patent is "familiar" with its own NPL
                                 science citations linked to a specific journal. the focal patent
                                 T, filed by firm F and citing a scientific journal J, is familiar
                                 with J if an employee of F has authored a paper published
                                 in J prior to the filing of T.
Attended Conference              Binary variable equal to one if the focal patent cites a sci-
                                 entific publication published in a conference proceeding at-
                                 tended by at least one employee of the patent assignee. At-
                                 tendance to conferences is measure by publication in confer-
                                 ence proceeding.


                                               32
                                 Table 2: Summary Statistics


                                  Mean    Median   75th     90th      SD     Min     Max        N
Sample: Full
ln(Patent Value)                  2.274   2.195     2.949    3.712   1.067   0.005    6.367   859206
ln(1 + Fw Cites)                  1.296   1.386    1.946    2.565    0.948   0.000    6.724   870134
Home Run                          0.015   0.000     0.000    0.000   0.122   0.000    1.000   869856
Science Dummy                     0.258   0.000     1.000    1.000   0.438   0.000    1.000   870134
Science Dummy (High JIF)          0.052   0.000    0.000    0.000    0.222   0.000    1.000   870134
Science Dummy (High JCIF)         0.108   0.000    0.000    1.000    0.310   0.000   1.000    870134
ln(N Patenting Firms)             2.889   3.045     3.912   4.489    1.244   0.000    5.037   869856
First to Use                      0.137   0.000    0.000    1.000    0.344   0.000    1.000   870134
First to Use (High JIF)           0.016   0.000    0.000    0.000    0.127   0.000   1.000    870134
First to Use (High JCIF)          0.038   0.000    0.000    0.000    0.191   0.000    1.000   870134
Science Dummy (Relevant Paper)    0.132   0.000    0.000    1.000    0.339   0.000   1.000    870134
First to Use (Relevant Paper)     0.019   0.000    0.000    0.000    0.138   0.000    1.000   870134
ln(N Indep Claims)                0.886   1.099     1.386   1.792    0.646   0.000    4.787   860116
ln(Words x Ind Claim)             4.729   4.779     5.147    5.481   0.666   0.000    9.444   860116
Self Citation                     0.032   0.000    0.000    0.000    0.177   0.000    1.000   870134
Attended Conference               0.022   0.000     0.000    0.000   0.147   0.000    1.000   870134
Published in Journal              0.134   0.000     0.000    1.000   0.340   0.000    1.000   870134
ln(R&D Intensity)                 0.104   0.056     0.117    0.176   0.256   0.000   10.154   839618
ln(Patent Stock)                  7.850   8.315     9.528   10.349   2.213   0.693   11.185   870134
ln(1+Publication Stock)           6.230   6.645    8.509    9.366    2.801   0.000   10.922   870134
Mkt Cap                           9.129   9.343    10.760   11.855   2.162   0.000   13.329   870134




                                              33
                          Table 3: The Use of Science and the Patent Economic and Technical Value

     Dependent Variable:                                    log(Patent Value)                           ln(1 + Fw Cites) Home Run
                                                                  J. Impact J. Comm
                                                                    Factor   Factor
                                            (1)          (2)          (3)      (4)             (5)         (6)         (7)           (8)
     Science Dummy                        0.0380    0.0121 0.00782 0.00587 0.00514          0.207     0.168     0.00824
                                        (0.00194) (0.00683) (0.00609) (0.00444) (0.00442) (0.00702) (0.00790) (0.000669)
     Science Dummy (High JIF)                                      0.0373                   0.0327                   0.0558
                                                                  (0.0128)                 (0.0102)                 (0.0164)
     Science Dummy (High JCIF)                                                  0.0177 0.00920                       0.0938
                                                                               (0.0113) (0.0102)                    (0.0122)
     Mkt Cap                               0.335     0.597    0.597    0.597    0.597
                                        (0.000394) (0.0296) (0.0296) (0.0296) (0.0296)




34
     Firm FE                                No           Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
     Year FE                                Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
     Class FE                               Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
     Observations                         858924       858368      858368       858368      858368      869288       869288       869288
     Adjusted R2                           0.556        0.764       0.764        0.764       0.764       0.190        0.190        0.059
     Avg Dep Var                           2.27         2.27        2.27         2.27        2.27        1.29         1.29         .015
       Notes : log(Patent Value) is the natural logarithm of the patent value (in USDm) derived from abnormal stock returns of the filing
       company around the date of the patent grant, sourced from Kogan et al. (2017). Science Dummy High JIF is a binary variable
       equal to one if the focal patent cites a scientific publication in the front page. Science Dummy High JIF is a binary variable equal
       to one if the focal patent cites a scientific publication published in a journal with a Journal Impact Factor above the 99th percentile
       within year. Science Dummy High JCIF is a binary variable equal to one if the focal patent cites a scientific publication published
       in a journal with a Journal of Commercial Impact Factor (sourced from Marx and Fuegi (2019)) above the 98th percentile within
       year. ln(1+ Fw Cites) is the natural logarithm of the number of forward citations within 5yr from the grant of the focal patent
       Home Run is a binary variable equal to one if the focal patent received a number of forward citations in the top 99th percentile
       among the patents granted in the same year and the same patent class CPC4. log(Mkt Cap) is the natural logarithm of the market
       capitalization of the focal firm the day before the patent was issued. Standard errors clustered at the firm level.
           Table 4: Patent Value and Use of Science (Industry Level)

                                   (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)
Dep Var: ln(Patent Value)                      ICT      Electronics     Drugs      Chemical
Science Dummy                    0.0121 -0.00780 0.00719       0.0278    0.0191
                               (0.00683) (0.00746) (0.00819) (0.00926) (0.00788)
Mkt Cap                           0.597   0.589             0.584        0.638    0.634
                                (0.0296) (0.0475)         (0.0443)     (0.0210) (0.0252)
Firm FE                            Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes
Year FE                            Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes
Class FE                           Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes
Observations                     858368      258878        193945        70362      148110
Adjusted R2                       0.764       0.745         0.751        0.875       0.778
Avg Dep Var                       2.27         2.35         2.10          2.55       2.35
  Notes : log(Patent Value) is the natural logarithm of the patent value (in USDm) derived
  from abnormal stock returns of the filing company around the date of the patent grant,
  sourced from Kogan et al. (2017). Science Dummy High JIF is a binary variable equal to
  one if the focal patent cites a scientific publication in the front page. log(Mkt Cap) is the
  natural logarithm of the market capitalization of the focal firm the day before the patent
  was issued. Standard errors clustered at the firm level.




                                            35
                                    Table 5: Patent Value, Use of Science & Number of Patenting Firms

                                                                      (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)         (7)
     Dep Var: ln(Patent Value)                                                                             ICT      Electronics     Drugs      Chemical
     Science Dummy                                                  0.0125   0.0615   0.0767   0.0588                  0.0389       -0.0134 0.0447
                                                                  (0.00691) (0.0209) (0.0221) (0.0335)                (0.0217)     (0.0253) (0.0191)
     ln(N Patenting Firms)                                          -0.0386 -0.0346 -0.0347 -0.0173     -0.0219 -0.00892 -0.00835
                                                                   (0.0137) (0.0126) (0.0126) (0.0159) (0.00714) (0.00591) (0.00413)
     ln(N Patenting Firms) x Science Dummy                                      -0.0152 -0.0207 -0.0174       -0.0122    0.0116 -0.0132
                                                                               (0.00545) (0.00564) (0.00888) (0.00557) (0.00847) (0.00662)
     First Use Science Dummy                                                                 -0.0278 -0.0583           -0.0133      0.0308 -0.0359
                                                                                            (0.0115) (0.0382)         (0.0182)     (0.0209) (0.0158)
     ln(N Patenting Firms) x First Use Science Dummy                                        0.0104    0.0152     0.0102   -0.00566 0.0198
                                                                                           (0.00298) (0.00842) (0.00495) (0.00672) (0.00563)




36
     Mkt Cap                                                         0.598    0.598    0.598    0.589                   0.585        0.638   0.634
                                                                   (0.0296) (0.0296) (0.0296) (0.0475)                (0.0442)     (0.0210) (0.0251)
     Firm FE                                                          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes
     Year FE                                                          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes
     Class FE                                                         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes
     Observations                                                   858368      858368       858368      258878       193945        70362       148110
     Adjusted R2                                                     0.765       0.765        0.765       0.745        0.751        0.875        0.778
     Avg Dep Var                                                     2.275       2.275        2.275       2.35          2.1          2.55        2.35
       Notes : log(Patent Value) is the natural logarithm of the patent value (in USDm) derived from abnormal stock returns of the filing company
       around the date of the patent grant, sourced from Kogan et al. (2017). ln(N Patenting Firms) is the natural logarithm of the number of firms
       patenting within a year and 6-digit CPC class Science Dummy is a binary variable equal to one if the focal patent cites a scientific publication
       in the front page First Use Science Dummy is a binary variable equal to one if the focal patent is the first to cite a scientific publication in the
       front page log(Mkt Cap) is the natural logarithm of the market capitalization of the focal firm the day before the patent was issued. Standard
       errors clustered at the firm level.
                          Table 6: First to Use and Patent Scope

                                                 (1)           (2)            (3)              (4)
Dep Var: Patent Scope                        ln(N Indep Claims)           ln(Words in Ind Claim)
Science Dummy                                  0.0285        0.0103       0.000985          -0.0150
                                             (0.00437)     (0.00429)      (0.00552)        (0.00520)
First to Use                                  0.0607        0.0600         -0.0462          -0.0379
                                             (0.00532)     (0.00492)      (0.00567)        (0.00539)
Science Dummy (Relevant Paper)                               0.0344                          0.0286
                                                           (0.00458)                       (0.00721)
First to Use (Relevant Paper)                                0.0525                         -0.0195
                                                           (0.00939)                       (0.00936)
Firm FE                                         Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes
Year FE                                         Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes
Class FE                                        Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes
Observations                                  859275         859275         859275          859275
Adjusted R2                                    0.169          0.170          0.182           0.182
Avg Dep Var                                     .89            .89            4.73           4.73
  Notes : ln(N Indep Claims) is the natural logarithm of the number of independent claims made
  by the focal patent ln(Words in Ind Claim) is the natural logarithm of the number of words of the
  shortest independent claim made by the focal patent Science Dummy is a binary variable equal
  to one if the focal patent cites a scientific publication in the front page First Use Science Dummy
  is a binary variable equal to one if the focal patent is the first to cite a scientific publication in
  the front page Science Dummy (Relevant Paper) is a binary variable equal to one if the focal
  patent cites a scientific publication that in the upper 5% of patent citations to science First Use
  (Relevant Paper) is a binary variable equal to one if the focal patent is the first to cite a scientific
  publication that in the upper 5% of patent citations to science




                                                  37
            Table 7: Firms' participation in science and first to use

                                 Sample: Full              Sample: Citing Science
                                       (1)              (2)           (3)           (4)
Dep Var: First to Use                                              High JIF      High JCIF
ln(1+Publication Stock)              0.0182          0.0176         0.0124         0.0349
                                   (0.00581)        (0.00919)      (0.00506)      (0.00948)
ln(Patent Stock)                    -0.0252          -0.0429        -0.0173        -0.0363
                                   (0.00466)        (0.00817)      (0.00468)      (0.00662)
ln(R&D Intensity)                   0.00947          -0.00121       0.00602        0.00415
                                   (0.00613)        (0.00671)      (0.00591)      (0.00653)
Firm FE                                Yes              Yes           Yes             Yes
Year FE                                Yes              Yes           Yes             Yes
Class FE                               Yes              Yes           Yes             Yes
Observations                        838792           215994         215994          215994
Adjusted R2                          0.128            0.084          0.187           0.094
Avg Dep Var                          .1368             .53           .0629           .1437
  Notes : First Use Science Dummy is a binary variable equal to one if the focal patent is
  the first to cite, in its front page, a scientific publication First Use High JIF is a binary
  variable equal to one if the focal patent is the first to cite, in its front page, a scientific
  publication which was published in a journal with an impact factor in the top 1% in
  its field First Use High JCIF is a binary variable equal to one if the focal patent is the
  first to cite, in its front page, a scientific publication which was published in a journal
  with a commerical impact factor in the top 1% in its field ln(1 + Publications Stock) is
  the natural logarithm of the stock of scientific publications in which at least one of the
  authors is affiliated with the focal firm ln(Patent Stock) is the natural logarithm of the
  stock of patents of the focal firm R&D Intensity is the natural logarithm of R&D over
  Sales Publications Stock and Patent Stock are calculated using a perpetual inventory
  method with a 15 percent depreciation rate, where Publications Stock t = Publications t
  + 75%Publications Stock t-1 Standard errors are clustered at the firm level.




                                             38
                                              Table 8: Firms' familiarity with science and first to use

                                                (1)           (2)          (3)            (4)          (5)           (6)             (7)            (8)
     Dep Var: First to Use Dummy                                                                    High JIF      High JCIF       Mult Tech       Relevant
                                                                                                                                    Use            Paper
     Self Citation                           0.0634                                     0.0545       0.0401         0.0942           0.102         0.0535
                                            (0.00725)                                 (0.00759)     (0.00448)      (0.00962)       (0.00698)      (0.00473)
     Attended Conference                                     0.122                     0.114
                                                           (0.0111)                   (0.0127)
     Published in Journal                                                0.0554         0.0515        0.0335         0.120           0.0867         0.0267
                                                                       (0.00921)      (0.00991)     (0.00423)      (0.00724)       (0.00760)      (0.00291)
     Firm FE                                    Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes
     Year FE                                    Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes




39
     Class FE                                   Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes
     Observations                             224192       224192        224192        224192        224192         224192          224192         224192
     Adjusted R2                               0.086        0.088         0.086         0.091         0.192          0.124           0.062          0.047
     Avg Dep Var                                .53          .53           .53           .53           .06            .15              .4           .075
       Notes : First Use Science Dummy is a binary variable equal to one if the focal patent is the first to cite, in its front page, a scientific publication
       First Use High JIF is a binary variable equal to one if the focal patent is the first to cite, in its front page, a scientific publication which was
       published in a journal with an impact factor in the top 1% in its field First Use High JCIF is a binary variable equal to one if the focal patent is
       the first to cite, in its front page, a scientific publication which was published in a journal with a commercial impact factor in the top 1% in its
       field First Use Mult Tech Use is a binary variable equal to one if the focal patent is the first to cite a scientific publication that is cited at least
       by two different patents First Use High Tech Impact is a binary variable equal to one if the focal patent is the first to cite a scientific publication
       that in the upper 5% of patent citations to science Self Citation is a binary variable equal to one if the focal patent cites a scientific publication
       authored by at least one employee of the patent assignee Attended Conference is a binary variable equal to one if the focal patent cites a scientific
       publication published in a conference proceeding attended by at least one employee of the patent assignee. Attendance to conferences is measure
       by publication in conference proceeding. Published in Journal is a binary variable equal to one if the focal patent cites a scientific publication
       published in a journal in which at least one employee of the patent assignee had published previous to the filing of the focal patent. Standard
       errors are clustered at the firm level.
Appendix
In the Appendix we show that the main results extend when absorptive capacity yields a noisy
signal, and when competition directly affects payoffs. We also derive the conditions for a firm
to invest in absorptive capacity.

Absorptive capacity provides a noisy signal
The firm with absorptive capacity receives a signal such that if the discovery is useful, the signal
                                  1
is positive with probability  > 2   . Similarly, if the discovery is not useful, the signal is negative
with probability . The probability of a positive signal,  is given by  = p + (1 - p)(1 - ).
The probability of the discovery being useful given a positive signal,  is given by  =
          p
                     . Notice that  > p.
p + (1 - p)(1 - )
      A fully informative signal (the case analysed in the text) implies  = 1, which implies
 = 1. A signal with no information implies  = 1        2
                                                         , so that  = p. Suppose p is small enough
             2 2
            pv
such that        - o (N ) < 0. In this case, uninformed firms will prefer not to invest in the
              c
new discovery. However, if the potential first-mover, the firm with absorptive capacity, gets a
                                                              v2
sufficiently informative signal, it will invest. Formally,       - o (N ) > 0 implies that there is a
                                                               c
                            2 v 2
 large enough such that           - o (N ) > 0. Given a positive signal, the leader invests, with
                              c
                  2 v 2                                          2 v 2
expected payoff         . The ex ante payoff is therefore              + (1 -  )o (N ), which can be
                   2c                                            2c
                  2 v 2
rewritten as             - o (N ) + o (N ). Potential followers will observe the outcome and
                   2c
invest in using the discovery if it is successful, which happens with probability .

Investing in absorptive capacity
Suppose the cost of investing in absorptive capacity is F . For simplicity, let the signal be
perfect, so  = 1. If the firm, having invested in absorptive capacity (correctly) judges the
                                       v2
discovery to be useful, its payoff is     , an outcome which has probability p.21 Thus the
                                       2c
                                                                  v2
expected net benefit from investing in absorptive capacity is p       - o (N - n) - F .
                                                                  2c
     The direct implication is that the payoff to investing in absorptive capacity is greater
when there are more potential followers. Recall that the number of followers n increases with
N . Thus, the payoff to investing in absorptive capacity is greater in more crowded niches.




   21
      For simplicity, we assume that there will be exactly one discovery per period. If there are K discoveries,
                                                                        F
this is equivalent to assuming the fixed cost of absorptive capacity is K .


                                                      40
