                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     THE VALUE OF PRIVACY IN CARTELS:
            AN ANALYSIS OF THE INNER WORKINGS OF A BIDDING RING

                                           Kei Kawai
                                        Jun Nakabayashi
                                         Juan M. Ortner

                                      Working Paper 28539
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28539


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2021




We are especially thankful to Sylvain Chassang, for many stimulating conversations on the topic
of collusion, and to Mr. Masayoshi Oura for providing us the data and answering questions about
the cartel. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Kei Kawai, Jun Nakabayashi, and Juan M. Ortner. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Value of Privacy in Cartels: An Analysis of the Inner Workings of a Bidding Ring
Kei Kawai, Jun Nakabayashi, and Juan M. Ortner
NBER Working Paper No. 28539
March 2021
JEL No. L41

                                           ABSTRACT

We study the inner workings of a bidding cartel focusing on the way in which bidders
communicate with one another regarding how each bidder should bid. We show that the
designated winner of the cartel can attain higher payoffs by randomizing its bid and keeping it
secret from other bidders when defection is a concern. Intuitively, randomization makes
defection less attractive as potential defectors face the risk of not winning the auction even if they
deviate. We illustrate how our theoretical predictions are borne out in practice by studying a
bidding cartel that operated in the town of Kumatori, Japan.

Kei Kawai                                         Juan M. Ortner
Department of Economics                           Boston University
University of California, Berkeley                270 Bay State Rd.
530 Evans Hall #3880                              Boston, MA 02215
Berkeley, CA 94720                                jortner@bu.edu
and NBER
kei@berkeley.edu

Jun Nakabayashi
Kindai University
3-4-1 Kowakae
Higashiosaka City
Osaka 577-8502
Japan
nakabayashi.1@eco.kindai.ac.jp
1     Introduction
Consider the problem of a cartel member who has been pre-selected as the winner of an
upcoming first-price sealed-bid procurement auction. The objective of the pre-selected win-
ner is to be the lowest bidder and, at the same time, submit an inflated bid to secure high
margins. The extent to which the bid can be inflated is limited by both the reserve price
and the incentive compatibility (IC) constraints of the losing cartel bidders who may defect.
This paper studies both theoretically and empirically the problem of how the cartel should
bid in this scenario. We show that, when the IC constraints are binding, the pre-selected
winner should randomize its bid and keep it secret from the designated losers. We then show
that our theoretical predictions are borne out in practice through a case study of a detected
bidding cartel in Japan. Our case study offers a concrete example in which privacy helps
cartels achieve larger profits. Our findings also help understand when the "price-variance
screen" (Abrantes-Metz et al., 2006) for collusion is likely to have power, and help rationalize
collusive bidding patterns observed in other settings.
    The analysis of the paper is based on the simple intuition that, by keeping its bid secret,
the pre-determined winner can make it harder for other bidders to defect. If the pre-selected
winner's bid is publicly known, a defector can undercut the announced bid to obtain maximal
deviation profits. If instead the pre-selected winner's bid is unknown, a potential defector
runs the risk of deviating (and be punished) without even winning the auction.
    We formalize these ideas with a model in which a group of firms repeatedly plays a first-
price procurement auction. The size of the project auctioned off is drawn i.i.d. each period,
and firms share the same costs. Consistent with our empirical application, we assume that
the cartel has access to a mediator and allocates contracts through a bid rotation scheme. We
say that an equilibrium has common-knowledge bids if firms' bids depend deterministically
on the public history.
    Under the cartel's optimal bid rotation equilibrium with common-knowledge bids, win-
ning bids are determined by either the losers' IC constraints or the reserve price. As in
Rotemberg and Saloner (1986), winning bids are below the reserve price whenever the project


                                               2
is sufficiently large.
   Our main result shows that a cartel may strictly gain from bidding schemes without
common-knowledge bids. Under the optimal bid rotation equilibrium, the mediator randomly
draws the winner's bid from a distribution F , and privately communicates this bid to the
predetermined winner. Non-winners are instructed to place a losing bid. Distribution F
has the property that, under this equilibrium, non-winners are indifferent between placing
a losing bid or deviating and placing any bid in the support of F . By keeping losing firms
uninformed, such a bidding scheme relaxes incentive constraints and yields larger profits.
   Our theory delivers two key predictions. First, since the incentive constraints of losing
firms are more likely to bind for large projects, collusive schemes with randomized bids are
most profitable (and hence most likely used) when the project auctioned off is large. Second,
optimal randomized bidding schemes tend to have a sizable gap between the winning bid
and the second lowest bid; i.e., there is significant money left on the table.
   In order to illustrate how these theoretical forces are borne out in practice, we study
the inner workings of a bidding ring consisting of mid and small contractors participating
in procurement auctions let by the town of Kumatori, Japan. The cartel was active until
October 2007, when members of the cartel were investigated and prosecuted for bid-rigging.
The cartel case in Kumatori makes it ideal for studying the inner workings of a bidding
ring because the criminal case and the subsequent liability claims case both went to trial.
The court proceedings produced a wealth of information. The rulings of the case alone
offer detailed and rich descriptions about the actions of the cartel members as well as the
motivations behind their actions.
   Another useful aspect of the collusion case is that there was significant variation in the
size of projects let by the town. In particular, there was one occasion in which cartel mem-
bers bid on a project (building a housing complex) that was about 20 times the size of the
average project let by the town. The variation in project size induces variation in the IC con-
straints of losing cartel bidders as temptation to defect is typically bigger for larger projects.
The variation in the IC constraint is useful for validating the theory. Consistent with the



                                                3
predictions of our model, we find that the pre-determined winner took extra precautions
to keep its bid secret when bidding on the housing complex. Court documents show that
the designated losers were instructed how to bid but were kept in the dark as to how the
designated winner would bid. Moreover, the winning bidder bid much lower than what the
losing bidders were instructed to bid. The winner's bid was about 11.5% lower than the
next lowest bid, while the average difference between the winning bid and the losing bids for
other auctions was less than 1%. The court ruling describes the motive of the pre-determined
winner for leaving money on the table in that auction as trying to make it difficult for other
cartel members to guess its bid.
    Our analysis has implications for screens of collusion, in particular, the price-variance
screen proposed by Abrantes-Metz et al. (2006). The variance screen flags unusually low
variance of the price sequence (or equivalently, high degrees of price stability) as a marker
for collusion.1 The price-variance screen was originally motivated by the observation that
variance in prices increased substantially after the collapse of a bidding cartel consisting of
seafood processors. Researchers have since found similar patterns in other settings such as
Swiss procurement auctions (Imhof et al., 2016) and LIBOR (Abrantes-Metz et al., 2012),
as well as in non-auction markets.2 Our study provides a better understanding of when low
price variance is likely to be associated with collusive bidding (when IC constraints don't
bind, and all bids are clustered around the reserve price) and when it might not (when IC
constraints bind).
    Lastly, our analysis has implications for the role that transparency plays in sustaining a
successful collusive scheme. It is well known from the theory of repeated games that trans-
parency allows colluders to better coordinate and monitor each others' actions. However,
motivated by the way communication was structured in several recently detected cartels,
Sugaya and Wolitzky (2018) identify a potential drawback of transparency: they show that
transparency may hinder collusion by enabling potential defectors to devise more profitable


   1
     Prior work that makes the connection between competition and stability of prices include Carlton (1986)
and Levenstein (1997).
   2
     Examples include retail gasoline and pasta products (Jim´
                                                             enez and Perdiguero, 2012, Crede, 2019)

                                                     4
deviations. Our analysis offers a concrete example of how privacy helps cartels.


Related literature. Our paper studies how cartels bid in a repeated-game setting. There
is a large theoretical literature on this topic exploring issues such as monitoring (e.g., Green
and Porter, 1984, Skrzypacz and Hopenhayn, 2004, Sugaya and Wolitzky, 2018), efficiency
and private costs (e.g., Athey and Bagwell, 2001, Athey et al., 2004, Athey and Bagwell,
2008) and demand shocks (e.g., Rotemberg and Saloner, 1986, Haltiwanger and Harrington,
1991). Our work also relates to prior papers studying how communication may help sustain
collusion (e.g., Compte, 1998, Kandori and Matsushima, 1998, Harrington and Skrzypacz,
2011, Rahman, 2014, Awaya and Krishna, 2016).
    The empirical portion of our work is closely related to studies that test whether or not
the price patterns implied by models of collusion are borne out in the data. Porter (1983)
and Ellison (1994) study pricing by the Joint Executive Committee to test for the models
of Green and Porter (1984) and Rotemberg and Saloner (1986). Levenstein (1997) studies
the bromine cartel and finds evidence consistent with the model of Green and Porter (1984).
Borenstein and Shepard (1996) study the retail gasoline market to test for the model of
Haltiwanger and Harrington (1991). Wang (2009) also studies the retail gasoline market and
finds evidence consistent with the equilibrium of Maskin and Tirole (1988).
    Our paper is also related to the literature on detecting instances of collusion. Early sem-
inal work includes Hendricks and Porter (1988), Baldwin et al. (1997) and Porter and Zona
(1993, 1999). More recent work includes Bajari and Ye (2003), Abrantes-Metz et al. (2006),
Athey et al. (2011), Conley and Decarolis (2016), Schurter (2017), Kawai and Nakabayashi
(2018), and Chassang et al. (2020).3
    Lastly, our results indirectly relate to the literature on information design (Kamenica
and Gentzkow, 2011). In particular, the indifference condition characterizing the optimal
bid distribution in our model has analogs in Condorelli and Szentes (2020), who study
   3
     Other related work includes Pesendorfer (2000), who studies bidding rings with and without side-
payments, and Asker (2010), who studies knockout auctions among cartel members. Ohashi (2009) and
Chassang and Ortner (2019) document how changes in auction design can affect the ability of bidders to
sustain collusion. Clark et al. (2018) analyze the breakdown of a cartel and its implications on prices. For
a survey of the literature, see Porter (2005) and Harrington (2008).

                                                     5
information acquisition by a buyer, Perez-Richet and Skreta (2018), who study test design,
and Ortner and Chassang (2018), who study the design of anti-corruption schemes.



2     Bid-rigging in the Town of Kumatori
This section provides a brief description of the bidding ring that operated in the town of
Kumatori until October 2007.


2.1    Background

Auctions for construction projects in Kumatori. The town of Kumatori uses auctions
to allocate construction projects that are estimated to cost more than 1.3 million yen, or
about 13 thousand dollars. The auction format is first-price sealed bid with a secret reserve
price, although as we discuss below, some of the town officials were leaking the reserve price
to the contractors. In fact, in all of the auctions that we study, the lowest bid was below the
reserve price.
    An important feature of the auctions is that participation is by invitation only. The town
maintains a list of qualified contractors and invites a subset of firms from the list to bid.
The town maintains separate lists for projects with different sizes. For example, for building
construction, the city maintains four separate lists of contractors (Tier A through Tier D).
The city typically invites Tier A firms to bid on the largest projects, Tier B firms to bid
on the next largest projects, and so on, essentially segmenting the market by project size.
All of Tier A firms are headquartered outside of Kumatori and are invited to bid only on
exceptionally large projects. Tier B firms and below are local firms typically headquartered
within the town. Most of the Tier B and C firms were members of the Kumatori Contractors
Cooperative, a trade association that consisted of a little more than 20 mid and small size
contractors in Kumatori. The members of this cooperative were found to be colluding.


Bidding ring in the town of Kumatori. Reports of police investigation of the mem-
bers of the Kumatori Contractors Cooperative for bid-rigging first appeared in the news on

                                              6
October 12, 2007. In addition to the contractors in Kumatori, more than 20 town officials,
including the town mayor, were questioned by the police. The media reported that some of
the town officials had helped the contractors collude by leaking the secret reserve price.4 In
November 2007, four individuals were indicted for bid-rigging. The criminal charges focused
on the defendant's involvement in bid-rigging in a single auction that took place on August
22, 2006 that Imakatsu Construction won, an auction for rebuilding a public housing com-
plex (Ohara Residences). The defendants included Mr. Kitagawa, the owner of Imakatsu
Construction and director of the Kumatori Contractors Cooperative; his son, who was an
employee of Imakatsu Construction; Mr. Nishio, the vice-director of the Cooperative; and
Mr. Takano, an employee of the Cooperative. While Mr. Nishio and Mr. Takano were
not participants of the auction, they mediated much of the communication between Mr.
Kitagawa and the other participants of the auction. For example, Mr. Nishio gave out the
instructions to other bidders on how they should bid. All four defendants were found guilty
in trial in March 2008.
   Although the criminal case focused on the defendants' involvement in bid-rigging in the
Ohara Residences auction, the court ruling indicated that the Ohara Residences auction was
not an isolated case and that the participants of the bid-rigging scheme were not confined
to those that were criminally charged.5 In the ruling, the court stated that the members of
the Kumatori Contractors Cooperative allocated the projects according to a preset order to
even out the work of each contractor. While none of the town officials were formally charged,
the court ruling stated that the designated winner of the cartel would approach the town
officials to seek out the engineering estimate.
   In response to the ruling of the criminal case, the town of Kumatori withheld part of
its payment to Imakatsu Construction for work that had been completed in order to off-set
liability claims. However, the mayor and town officials showed little interest in pursuing
claims for damages incurred on other auctions. This inaction led some of the residents of


   4
    See, e.g., Chunichi Shimbun, October 20, 2007
   5
    Our description of the cartel in this paragraph is taken from page 2 and 3 of Ruling H19 (WA) No.
6418, Osaka District Court.

                                                  7
Kumatori to file suit against the mayor asking the court to order the mayor to pursue claims
against 23 firms, all members of the Kumatori Contractors Cooperative, for damages incurred
on other auctions. The District Court of Osaka ruled in favor of the plaintiffs, ordering the
town to pursue claims against the bidders in the amount of about 375 million yen, or about
3.75 million dollars. The mayor appealed the ruling, but the verdict was upheld by the Osaka
High Court with relatively minor modifications.


2.2     Ohara Residences Auction

Among the auctions that the cartel bid on, the Ohara residences auction was somewhat
unique because of the large value of the project. This section discusses briefly how, despite
the town's policy of segmenting the market by project size, the members of the Kumatori
Contractors Cooperative were invited to bid in the auction. We also present preliminary
evidence suggesting that the IC constraints of the losing bidders were binding in the auction.
   The town of Kumatori started planning for the rebuilding of the Ohara Residence Com-
plex, an ageing public housing project, around 2000 according to the minutes of the meeting
of the town council.6 The new residence complex would consist of three separate buildings.
Construction of the first and smallest of the three buildings was put to an auction in April
2004 to Tier A firms. The winning bid was 363 million yen, or about 3.6 million dollars. The
winner of the auction was Asanuma Corporation, a contractor headquartered in the city of
Osaka with annual sales of about 2 billion dollars in FY 2005.
   In the Fall of 2004, Mr. Kitagawa, the director of the Kumatori Contractors Cooperative
and owner of Imakatsu Construction began lobbying the town's mayor and the head of the
town's general affairs department to let Tier B firms bid on the second and third components
of the Ohara Residences Complex.7 Mr. Kitagawa was an important supporter of the mayor.
Despite the lobbying by Mr. Kitagawa, the head of the department was reluctant to let Tier
B firms bid on the Ohara residences project initially, according to court documents. However,

   6
    Minutes of the meeting of the town countil to discuss the budget, March 2001, page 49.
   7
    Our description of the cartel in this paragraph are taken from page 17 of Ruling H21 (Gyo-U) No. 99,
Osaka District Court.

                                                   8
the head of the department started to warm to the idea around April 2006. On August 3,
2006, the town office invited five contractors to bid on the housing complex project, including
Imakatsu Construction. All of the five invited bidders were Tier B firms and also members
of the Cooperative.
    The left Panel of Figure 1 plots the reserve price for auctions let by the town of Kumatori
in which cartel firms in Tier B were invited to bid. The horizontal axis corresponds to the
calendar date and the vertical axis corresponds to the reserve price of the auction. The
figure shows that, except for the Ohara Residence Auction that took place on August of
2006 (corresponding to the dark circle), Tier B firms were invited to bid on auctions with
reserve prices below 200 million yen. The average reserve price during this period excluding
the Ohara Residences auction is about 37.5 million yen. The Ohara Residences auction was
about 17.5 times the average size of projects on which the bidders were invited to bid.
    The right panel of Figure 1 plots the difference between the lowest and the second lowest
bids as a fraction of the reserve price for these auctions. The figure shows that the difference
is always less than 4%, except for the Ohara Residences auction (corresponding to the dark
circle). The average difference for lettings excluding Ohara Residences is about 0.94%. The
bid difference for Ohara Residences, on the other hand, is 11.4%. The bidding patterns
suggest that the cartel members kept the winning margin small for small projects but not
for the Ohara Residences project. The next two sections explore, first theoretically and then
qualitatively ­ through close examination of court documents ­ how these bidding patterns
can be explained as an optimal cartel response when IC constraints of designated losers bind.



3     Model
We consider a repeated game in which, in each period t  N, a buyer procures a project
from firms i = 1, 2. To simplify the exposition, we assume that the buyer uses a first-price
auction with a public reserve price. Our results generalize to the case of n > 2 bidders, and
to auctions with secret reserve prices.


                                               9
Figure 1: Reserve Price of Auctions (Left Panel) and Difference between Winning Bid and
Second Lowest Bid (Right Panel). Left panel of the Figure plots the reserve price of auctions
in which collusive firms in Tier B were invited to bid. The right panel plots the difference
between the winning bid and the lowest losing bid, as a fraction of reserve prices.


   In each period t, firms i = 1, 2 share the same procurement cost c  0, which we normalize
to c = 0. Public reserve price rt is drawn i.i.d. over time from distribution Fr with support
[r, r], with r > r  0. After observing rt , firms submit public bids bt = (bi,t )i=1,2 . This
yields allocation xt = (xi,t )i=1,2  [0, 1]2 such that: if bj,t > bi,t then xi,t = 1; if bj,t < bi,t then
xi,t = 0. In the case of ties, we follow Athey and Bagwell (2001) and Chassang and Ortner
(2019) and let bidders jointly determine the allocation. Formally, we allow bidders i = 1, 2
to simultaneously and publicly pick numbers i,t  [0, 1]. When bids are tied, the allocation
                             i,t
to bidder i is xi,t =      i,t +j,t
                                    .8   Firm i's profits in period t are xi,t (bi,t - c) = xi,t bi,t . Firms
   8
       If i,t = j,t = 0, then xi,t = xj,t = 1/2.

                                                        10
share a common discount factor  < 1.


Mediation. Firms have access to a mediator. In each period t, the mediator observes the
history of past reserve prices and bids, as well as current reserve price rt . Prior to bidding,
the mediator privately sends recommended bids (bi,t , i,t ) to firms i = 1, 2. Recommendations
(bi,t , i,t )i=1,2 may depend on the history of past reserve prices and bids, current reserve price
rt , and the history of past recommendations.9


Solution concepts. A period-t history for bidder i,


                              hi,t = (rs , bi,s , i,s , bs , s )s<t   (rt , bi,t , i,t ),


records past reserve prices (rs )s<t , mediator's recommendations (bi,s , i,s )s<t , and realized
bids (bs , s )s<t , as well as current reserve price rt and mediator's recommendation (bi,t , i,t ).
A pure strategy i : hi,t  (bi,t , i,t ) for bidder i maps bidder i histories to bids. Our solution
concept is weak Perfect Bayesian Equilibrium, which we simply refer to as equilibrium. The
period-t public history is h0
                            t = (rs , bs , s )s<t .


Definition 1. We say that equilibrium  = (i )i=1,2 is a bid rotation equilibrium if there
exists i, j = 1, 2, i = j , such that for all on-path public histories h0             0
                                                                        t , E [xi,t |ht ] = 1 if t is

even and E [xj,t |h0
                   t ] = 1 if t is odd.


   We focus on bid rotation equilibria, which corresponds to the bidding scheme the Kuma-
tori cartel used.

Definition 2. We say that equilibrium  = (i )i=1,2 has common-knowledge bids if, for
i = 1, 2 and for all histories hi,t , i (hi,t ) is a pure action and depends only on h0
                                                                                      t and rt .


   We note that equilibria with common-knowledge bids correspond to pure strategy equi-
libria of the game without the mediator. Let  denote the set of bid rotation equilibria, and
let CK   denote the set of bid rotation equilibria with common-knowledge bids. For each
   9
       See Sugaya and Wolitzky (2017) for a detailed exposition of repeated games with a mediator.

                                                        11
equilibrium  and i = 1, 2, let Vi ( ) denote firm i's expected discounted payoff at the start
of the game under  . Define

                                               CK
                                           V         sup              Vi ( ), and
                                                          CK i=1,2


                                               V  sup                Vi ( ),
                                                          
                                                             i=1,2


to be, respectively, the cartel's largest payoffs under an equilibrium in CK and . Since
                                  CK
CK  , we have V  V                     .
     Our first result characterizes optimal equilibria in CK . All proofs are in the Appendix.

Proposition 1. On the equilibrium path, the bidding strategy in any   CK that attains
    CK
V        is such that, in all periods t, the winning bid is given by the minimum between rt
           CK                CK
and W           , where W         is the expected continuation payoff of a designated loser under any
                                  CK
equilibrium that attains V             .

                                                    CK
     In an equilibrium that attains V                    , along the equilibrium path the designated winner's
                   CK
bid is rt or W          , whichever is lowest, and the designated loser places a losing bid. Deviations
                                                                                                                         CK
are punished with Bertrand-Nash reversion. Intuitively, the winning bid must be below W
                                                                          CK
to deter the loser from deviating. Bid min{r, W                                } is the highest bid below r that satisfies
                                                                                               CK
the loser's incentive constraint. The appendix shows how value W                                    is computed.
                                                                                                                    CK
     Our main result characterizes optimal equilibria in , and establishes when V > V                                    .

Proposition 2. On the equilibrium path, the bidding strategy in any    that attains V
is such that, in all periods t, the winning bid is drawn from c.d.f. F  (·; rt ). Distribution
F  (·; rt ) is degenerate at rt if rt  W and is non-degenerate otherwise, where W is the
expected continuation payoff of a designated loser under any equilibrium that attains V .
                            CK                                  CK
     Moreover, V > V             if and only if r > W                 .

     Proposition 2 shows that a cartel strictly benefits from strategies without common-
                                                                                                                      CK
knowledge bids when the largest point in the support of Fr is high enough; i.e., r > W                                       .


                                                               12
Moreover, when the reserve price is high enough, the winning bid is drawn from a non-
degenerate distribution in any equilibrium that attains V . The appendix shows how W is
computed.
   We now describe the equilibrium that attains V . Under this equilibrium, along the path
of play the mediator recommends bid (b,  = 1) to the winner, with b drawn from c.d.f.
F  (·; rt ). The loser is recommended to bid (b,  = 0), where b is the largest point in the
support of F  (·; rt ). If either bidder deviates, the mediator sends bidding recommendations
(bi , i ) = (0, 1) to i = 1, 2 from the next period onwards, and players adhere to this rec-
ommendation; i.e., they play Bertrand-Nash. Note that, while deviations by the loser are
publicly observed, deviations by the winner may only be detected by the mediator (since bid-
ding recommendations are private). The mediator's messages following a deviation provide
the winner with incentives to follow the recommended bid.
   Next, we show how we derive the distribution F  (·; r). Recall that the loser's discounted
continuation payoff is W . Suppose that the winning bid at time t is drawn from c.d.f. Ft .
Let b and b denote, respectively, the largest and smallest points in the support of Ft . For
the loser not to have an incentive to deviate and place a bid b < b, Ft must satisfy:

                                                                     W
                     b < b,    (1 - Ft (b))b  W  Ft (b)  1 -           .                   (1)
                                                                     b

Equation (1) implies b  W .
   Consider now the incentives of the predetermined winner. If the mediator recommends
bid b < b, the winner can increase its bid to b -       b and still win the auction. For the
winner to have incentives to follow the mediator's recommendation, we must have


                                        b +  2 W  b,                                       (2)


where the inequality follows since the winner's equilibrium continuation payoff is  2 W . Since
b  W (by equation (1)), inequality (2) gives us b   (1 +  )W . Distribution F  (·; r) is the
highest distribution (in terms of f.o.s.d.) with b  r satisfying (1) and (2). When W  r,


                                              13
F  (·; r) puts all its mass at r. When W < r, F  (·; r) is given by:
                               
                                0 if b < W ,
                               
                    F  (b; r) = 1 - W if b  [W , min{r,  (1 +  )W }),
                                      b
                               
                               1 if b  min{r,  (1 +  )W }.
                               


Note that distribution F  (b; r) has a mass point at min{r,  (1 +  )W }.



4        Description of the Bidding-Ring in the Court Ruling
In this section, we illustrate how our theoretical predictions are borne out by drawing on the
court rulings' descriptions of the events leading up to the Ohara Residences auction.10
     According to the Osaka District Court ruling, Mr. Kitagawa of Imakatsu Construction
started to believe, around April of 2006, that Tier B firms would be invited to bid on
the second part of the Ohara residences project and started mentioning the project at the
meetings of the Kumatori Contractors' Cooperative. In a meeting of the Cooperative in late
June 2006, Mr. Kitagawa stated that he wanted others to let his firm, Imakatsu Construction,
win the auction. He also told the members that he would be collecting the detailed project
plan that the town distributes at the on-site briefing. This was understood by the members
of the cooperative as a preventative measure to make defection more difficult by making cost
estimates for other firms harder.
     On August 3, 2006, the town office invited five contractors to bid on the housing complex
project, including Imakatsu Construction. All invited bidders were Tier B firms and members
of the Cooperative. On or around this day, Mr. Kitagawa asked Mr. Nishio to help him with
the operation and to obtain confidential information about the project from the town. Mr.
Nishio was the vice director of the Cooperative and a senior managing director of Nishinuki
Construction at the time. Nishinuki Construction was not one of the invited bidders.

    10
    The descriptions are taken from the Osaka District Court ruling (Ruling H21 (Gyo-U) No. 99) and the
Osaka High Court ruling (Ruling H24 (Gyo-Ko) No. 101).

                                                  14
   On August 4, 2006, after the general meeting of the Cooperative, Mr. Kitagawa met
with the four other bidders that were invited to bid on the Ohara Residences project and
repeated his intention to collect the project plans.
   The town of Kumatori held an on-site briefing for the Ohara residences project for the
five invited firms on August 7. At the on-site briefing, the town distributed the detailed
project plan as well as other documents required to estimate costs. These documents were
collected immediately after the briefing by an employee of the Cooperative. The plans
and the documents were not returned to the bidders until August 21, the day before the
auction. During this time, Imakatsu Construction was the only firm that had access to
the documents required to estimate costs. After the on-site briefing, Mr. Nishio obtained
information regarding the reserve price from an official of the Buildings Division of the town.
   On August 21, one day before the day of the auction, Mr. Kitagawa and Mr. Nishio met
at the office of Imakatsu Construction and decided on a bid of 630 million yen for Imakatsu
Construction and bids of above 700 million yen for all other bidders. According to the court
ruling, they decided to set the losing bids to be above 700 million yen so as to make it
hard for the other bidders to guess the lowest bid. Note that the bid difference between the
winning bid and the losing bids is around 70 million yen, more than 10% of the winning bid.
As we document in Section 2, the difference between the lowest bid and the losing bids were
on average 0.9% before this auction, and never above 4%.
   Also on the same day, Mr. Nishio contacted the four other invited bidders of the auction.
He told them that he would hand them the document containing each firm's break-down
of the estimated costs on the day of the auction. Mr. Nishio also told the bidders that he
would give instructions on how much to bid on the day of the auction. According to the
court ruling, Mr. Nishio's decision to hand the documents and give instructions on bids
on the day of the auction (as opposed to two days prior to the day of the auction, as was
customary for the bidding ring) was to prevent defection given the large size of the project.
   The auction for the public housing complex was held at the town office on August 22
2006. Mr. Nishio went to the town office and stapled together the documents containing the



                                              15
cost break-down of each bidder with the cover page brought by the representatives of the
firms. Mr. Nishio also indicated the amount that each bidder should bid by showing a slip of
paper with a number above 700 million yen. Importantly, the bid of Imakatsu Construction
was kept secret to the other bidders. The representatives of the invited bidders bid the same
or slightly above the amount shown on the slip of paper. As a result, Imakatsu Construction
won the auction with a bid of 630 million yen. The other bids were 705 million yen, 707
million yen, 710 million yen and 723 million yen, respectively.



5     Discussion
This paper highlights the value of keeping winning bids secret from other cartel members
in bidding rings. We think that the case study offers a first concrete documentation of the
value of privacy over transparency in cartels.
    We conclude the paper with discussions of (i) our model's implications for the price-
variance screen for collusion, and (ii) how our model explains puzzling bidding patterns
documented elsewhere.


Price-variance screen. Our model predicts that when the project is relatively small (i.e.,
                                                                               mini bi,t
rt is small), the winning bid measured as a fraction of the reserve price (      rt
                                                                                         )   will be close
to 1 and the money left on the table will be close to zero. This implies that the time series
                                mini bi,t
variance in the winning bids,     rt
                                          ,   will be close to zero and the within-auction variance
of bids will also be close to zero. These results are consistent with the premise of the price-
variance screen. However, when projects are relatively large, our model predicts that there
will be considerable time-series variance in the winning bids that results from randomization.
Moreover, the within-auction variance of bids will not be close to zero. Hence, increases in
the variance of prices should not be taken as failure of collusion when those increases are
associated with increases in project sizes.




                                                    16
Explaining other bidding patters. A distinct feature of the equilibrium in Proposition
2 is that the winner has a static incentive to raise its bid whenever the mediator recommends
a bid below b = supb supp F  (·; r). This feature is present in the bidding data analyzed in
Chassang et al. (2020).11 Chassang et al. (2020) study the sample distribution of normalized
bid differences i,t  (bi,t - b-i,t )/rt for procurement auctions let by the Ministry of Land,
Infrastructure and Transportation of Japan, and by cities in Ibaraki prefecture and the
Tohoku region (bid data from Kumatori are not included in the data analyzed by Chassang
et al. (2020)). That paper documents a missing mass in the distribution of  around  = 0:
In other words, winning bids tend to be isolated. This implies that upward deviations by
winners are profitable, consistent with the collusive scheme in Proposition 2.



Appendix
Proof of Proposition 1. Fix an equilibrium   CK . Let V w and V l denote, respectively,
the expected discounted payoff that the designated winner and loser at t = 0 obtain under
           w
 . Let V       be the highest payoff that the designated winner at t = 0 can obtain under an
                                            w                w
equilibrium in CK . Since V w  V                and V l  V       (since the loser at t = 0 is the winner at
                                w                                                           CK             w
t = 1), V w + V l  (1 +  )V . Since this inequality holds for all   CK , V                        (1 +  )V .
                                                                                             w
    Let b(r0 ) be the winning bid at time t = 0 under  . Note that b(r0 )  V . Indeed, the
                                                                         w
continuation payoff of the loser at t = 0 can't be larger V                  (since the loser at t = 0 is the
                                        w
winner at t = 1). If b(r0 ) > V , the loser would have a strict incentive to undercut b(r0 ).
                                                                  w                                    w
Since b(r0 ) must be lower than r0 , b(r0 )  min{r0 , V }. Hence, V w  EFr [min{r0 , V }] +
    w
 2 V . Since the inequality holds for all   CK ,

                                        w        1                  w
                                    V              2
                                                     EFr [min{r0 , V }].
                                                1-




  11
    T´oth et al. (2014), Imhof et al. (2016) and Clark et al. (2020) document similar patterns. Clark et al.
(2020) offer an explanation based on the bidders' desire to leave some margin of error.

                                                       17
              CK
   Let W           be the largest W  0 solving

                                                  1
                                          W =        EF [min{r, W }].                                              (3)
                                                1 - 2 r

                w       CK 12                             w        CK
Note that V         W      .    We now show that V            =W        . Consider the following strategy pro-
                                                                                                                CK
file. Along the equilibrium path, in each period t the designated winner bids min{r0 , W                             }
                                                                   CK
and  = 1, and the designated loser bids min{r0 , W                      } and  = 0. Deviations are punished
with Nash reversion. This strategy profile is an equilibrium in CK giving the winner at
                                                    CK                  w        CK               CK               CK
t = 0 an expected discounted payoff of W                 . Hence, V         =W        . Since V         (1 +  )W         ,
                                 CK
this equilibrium attains V            .



   For each reserve price r and each value W  0, let F (·; r, W ) be the c.d.f. given as
follows. If W  r, F (·; r, W ) puts all its mass at r. If W < r, F (·; r, W ) is given by:
                                     
                                      0 if b < W,
                                     
                       F (b; r, W ) = 1 - W if b  [W, min{r,  (1 +  )W }),                                         (4)
                                            b
                                     
                                     1 if b  min{r,  (1 +  )W }.
                                     


Proof of Proposition 2. Fix an equilibrium   . Let V w and V l denote, respectively,
                                                                                        ^w
the expected discounted payoff of the designated winner and loser at t = 0 under  . Let V
be the highest payoff that the winner at time t = 0 can obtain under an equilibrium in .
                                                                  ^ w.
By the same arguments as in the proof of Proposition 1, V  (1 +  )V
   Let F (b; r0 ) be the c.d.f. from which the winning bid at t = 0 is drawn under  . Let
b = supb supp F (·; r0 ) and b = inf b supp F (·; r0 ). Note that the designated loser at t = 0 must
place a bid weakly higher than b under  ; otherwise, it would win with positive probability.




  12                                                                         1                                      CK
       Since the right-hand side of (3) is bounded by r/(1 -  2 ), W >      1- 2 EFr   [min{r, W }] for all W > W        .

                                                         18
Moreover, we must have


                                 b < b,                            ^ w,
                                               (1 - F (b; r0 ))b   V                                   (5)

                                 b  supp F (·; r0 ),                 ^ w.
                                                             b  b + 2V                                 (6)


If inequality (5) didn't hold for some b < b, the loser would have a strict incentive to
bid b and win the auction with probability 1 - F (b; r0 ). If inequality (6) didn't hold for
b  supp F (·; r0 ), the winner would have an incentive to bid b - with  0 instead of b < b.
Condition (5) implies

                                                                  ^w
                                 ^ w and b < b, Fb (b; r0 )  1 -  V .
                              b  V                                                                     (7)
                                                                   b

Condition (6), together with b  r0 , implies


                                                            ^ w }.
                                         b  min{r0 , b +  2 V                                          (8)


Consider the problem of finding the c.d.f. F that maximizes expected winning bid                      bdF ,
                              ^ w  r0 , the c.d.f. F that solves this problem puts all its
subject to (7) and (8). When  V
                   ^ w < r0 , the c.d.f. F that solves this problem is given by (4), with
mass at r0 . When  V
               ^ w . Therefore, V w  EFr
r = r0 and W = V                                                               ^ w . Since the inequality
                                                                      ^ w ) + 2V
                                                           bdF (b; r, V
holds for all   ,
                                  ^w       1                          ^ w) .
                                  V           EF           bdF (b; r, V
                                         1 - 2 r

   Let W  0 be the largest solution to

                                           1
                                  W =         EF           bdF (b; r, W ) ,                            (9)
                                         1 - 2 r

              ^ w  W .13 For each r, let F  (·; r) be the c.d.f. given by F  (·; r) = F (·; r, W ).
and note that V
                    ^ w = W . Consider the following strategy profile. Along the equilib-
   We now show that V

  13                                                       1
       Since the right-hand side of (9) is bounded, W >   1- 2 EFr   bdF (b; r, W ) for all W > W .

                                                     19
rium path, in each period t, after observing rt the mediator sends bidding recommendation
(bi , i ) = (b, 1) to the designated winner, with b drawn from c.d.f. F  (·; rt ) = F (·; rt , W );
and sends bidding recommendation (bj , j ) = (bt , 0) to the designated loser, with bt =
supb supp F  (·; rt ). Deviations from the mediator's recommendations are punished with Nash
reversion.14 One can check that this strategy profile is an equilibrium in , and gives the
                                                        ^ w = W . Since V  (1 +  )V
designated winner at t = 0 a payoff equal to W . Hence, V                         ^ w,

this equilibrium also attains V .
   Finally, note that       bdF (b; r, W )  min{r, W } for each r, W , with strict inequality
                                              CK                                         CK
whenever W < r.15 Hence, W  W                      , with strict inequality whenever W        < r. Hence,
               CK                                       CK                CK
when r > W          , we have (1 +  )W = V > V               = (1 +  )W        .




  14
     Formally, following a deviation, the mediator sends bidding recommendations (bi , i ) = (0, 1), which
both bidders follow.
  15
     When W  r, r = bdF (b; r, W ). When W < r,

                                              W [1 + ln(1 +  )] if  (1 +  )W < r,
                 W <       bdF (b; r, W ) =
                                              W [1 + ln(r) - ln(W )] if  (1 +  )W  r.



                                                       20
References
Abrantes-Metz, R., L. Froeb, J. Geweke, and C. Taylor (2006): "A variance
  screen for collusion," International Journal of Industrial Organization, 24, 467­486.

Abrantes-Metz, R., M. Kraten, A. Metz, and G. Seow (2012): "Libor manipula-
  tion?" Journal of Banking & Finance, 36, 136­150.

Asker, J. (2010): "A study of the internal organization of a bidding cartel," The American
  Economic Review, 724­762.

Athey, S. and K. Bagwell (2001): "Optimal collusion with private information," RAND
  Journal of Economics, 32, 428­465.

------ (2008): "Collusion with persistent cost shocks," Econometrica, 76, 493­540.

Athey, S., K. Bagwell, and C. Sanchirico (2004): "Collusion and price rigidity,"
  The Review of Economic Studies, 71, 317­349.

Athey, S., J. Levin, and E. Seira (2011): "Comparing open and Sealed Bid Auctions:
  Evidence from Timber Auctions*," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126, 207­257.

Awaya, Y. and V. Krishna (2016): "On Communication and Collusion," American Eco-
  nomic Review, 106, 285­315.

Bajari, P. and L. Ye (2003): "Deciding between competition and collusion," Review of
  Economics and Statistics, 85, 971­989.

Baldwin, L. H., R. C. Marshall, and J.-F. Richard (1997): "Bidder collusion at
  forest service timber sales," Journal of Political Economy, 105, 657­699.

Borenstein, S. and A. Shepard (1996): "Dynamic Pricing in Retail Gasoline Markets,"
  The RAND Journal of Economics, 27, 429­451.

Carlton, D. (1986): "The Rigidity of Prices," The American Economic Review, 76, 637­
  658.

                                             21
Chassang, S., K. Kawai, J. Nakabayashi, and J. Ortner (2020): "Robust Screens
  for Non-Competitive Bidding in Procurement Auctions," .

Chassang, S. and J. Ortner (2019): "Collusion in Auctions with Constrained Bids:
  Theory and Evidence from Public Procurement," Journal of Political Economy, 127, 2269­
  2300.

Clark, R., D. Coviello, J.-F. Gauthier, and A. Shneyerov (2018): "Bid rigging
  and entry deterrence in public procurement: Evidence from an investigation into collusion
  and corruption in Quebec," The Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 34, 301­
  363.

Clark, R., D. Coviello, and A. D. Leverano (2020): "Complementary Bidding and
  the Collusive Arrangement: Evidence from an Antitrust Investigation," .

Compte, O. (1998): "Communication in repeated games with imperfect private monitor-
  ing," Econometrica, 597­626.

Condorelli, D. and B. Szentes (2020): "Information Design in the Holdup Problem,"
  Journal of Political Economy, 128, 681­709.

Conley, T. G. and F. Decarolis (2016): "Detecting bidders groups in collusive auc-
  tions," American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 8, 1­38.

Crede, C. (2019): "A Structural Break Cartel Screen for Dating and Detecting Collusion,"
  Review of Industrial Organization, 54, 543--574.

Ellison, G. (1994): "Theories of cartel stability and the joint executive committee," The
  Rand journal of economics, 37­57.

Green, E. J. and R. H. Porter (1984): "Noncooperative collusion under imperfect price
  information," Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, 87­100.

Haltiwanger, J. and J. Harrington (1991): "The Impact of Cyclical Demand Move-
  ments on Collusive Behavior," The RAND Journal of Economics, 22, 89­106.

                                            22
Harrington, J. E. (2008): "Detecting cartels," Handbook of antitrust economics, 213,
  245.

Harrington, J. E. and A. Skrzypacz (2011): "Private monitoring and communication
  in cartels: Explaining recent collusive practices," The American Economic Review, 101,
  2425­2449.

Hendricks, K. and R. Porter (1988): "An Empirical Study of an Auction with Asym-
  metric Information," American Economic Review, 78, 865­883.

                   ¨ k, and S. Rutz (2016): "Screening for bid-rigging-does it work?"
Imhof, D., Y. Karago
  Tech. rep., Universit´
                       e de Fribourg.

   ´nez, J. L. and J. Perdiguero (2012): "Does Rigidity of Prices Hide Collusion,"
Jime
  International Journal of Industrial Organization, 41, 223­248.

Kamenica, E. and M. Gentzkow (2011): "Bayesian persuasion," American Economic
  Review, 101, 2590­2615.

Kandori, M. and H. Matsushima (1998): "Private observation, communication and
  collusion," Econometrica, 627­652.

Kawai, K. and J. Nakabayashi (2018): "Detecting Large-Scale Collusion in Procurement
  Auctions," Available at SSRN 2467175.

Levenstein, M. (1997): "Price Wars and the Stability of Collusion: A Study of the Pre-
  World War I Bromine Industry," The Journal of Industrial Economics, 45, 117­137.

Maskin, E. and J. Tirole (1988): "A theory of dynamic oligopoly, II: Price competition,
  kinked demand curves, and Edgeworth cycles," Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric
  Society, 571­599.

Ohashi, H. (2009): "Effects of transparency in procurement practices on government ex-
  penditure: A case study of municipal public works," Review of Industrial Organization,
  34, 267­285.

                                            23
Ortner, J. and S. Chassang (2018): "Making corruption harder: Asymmetric informa-
  tion, collusion, and crime," Journal of Political Economy, 126, 2108­2133.

Perez-Richet, E. and V. Skreta (2018): "Test design under falsification," Work. Pap.,
  Sci. Po, Paris Access provided by University of Chicago Libraries on, 9, 04­19.

Pesendorfer, M. (2000): "A study of collusion in first-price auctions," The Review of
  Economic Studies, 67, 381­411.

Porter, R. (2005): "Detecting Collusion," Review of Industrial Organization, 26, 147­167.

Porter, R. H. (1983): "A study of cartel stability: the Joint Executive Committee, 1880-
  1886," The Bell Journal of Economics, 301­314.

Porter, R. H. and J. D. Zona (1993): "Detection of Bid Rigging in Procurement
  Auctions," Journal of Political Economy, 101, 518­38.

------ (1999): "Ohio School Milk Markets: An Analysis of Bidding," RAND Journal of
  Economics, 30, 263­288.

Rahman, D. (2014): "The power of communication," American Economic Review, 104,
  3737­51.

Rotemberg, J. J. and G. Saloner (1986): "A supergame-theoretic model of price wars
  during booms," The American Economic Review, 390­407.

Schurter, K. (2017): "Identification and inference in first-price auctions with collusion,"
  Tech. rep., working Paper, University of Chicago.

Skrzypacz, A. and H. Hopenhayn (2004): "Tacit collusion in repeated auctions," Jour-
  nal of Economic Theory, 114, 153­169.

Sugaya, T. and A. Wolitzky (2017): "Bounding equilibrium payoffs in repeated games
  with private monitoring," Theoretical Economics, 12, 691­729.



                                            24
------ (2018): "Maintaining privacy in cartels," Journal of Political Economy, 126, 2569­
  2607.

                       ´ Czibik, and I. J. To
 ´ th, B., M. Fazekas, A.
To                                          ´ th (2014): "Toolkit for detecting
  collusive bidding in public procurement," With examples from Hungary.

Wang, Z. (2009): "(Mixed) Strategy in Oligopoly Pricing: Evidence from Gasoline Price
  Cycles Before and Under a Timing Regulation," Journal of Political Economy, 117, 987­
  1030.




                                           25
