                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        EQUILIBRIUM IN THE MARKET FOR PUBLIC SCHOOL TEACHERS:
    DISTRICT WAGE STRATEGIES AND TEACHER COMPARATIVE ADVANTAGE

                                        Barbara Biasi
                                           Chao Fu
                                        John Stromme

                                      Working Paper 28530
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28530


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2021




We thank seminar and conference participants at Bocconi University, The University of Chicago,
Johns Hopkins University, Toulouse School of Economics, Tsinghua University, Yale University,
AEA, and SEA for helpful comments. All errors are ours. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

 2021 by Barbara Biasi, Chao Fu, and John Stromme. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including  notice, is given to the source.
Equilibrium in the Market for Public School Teachers: District Wage Strategies and Teacher
Comparative Advantage
Barbara Biasi, Chao Fu, and John Stromme
NBER Working Paper No. 28530
March 2021
JEL No. I20,J31,J45,J51,J61,J63

                                         ABSTRACT

We study the equity-efficiency implication of giving school districts control over teacher pay
using an equilibrium model of the market for public-school teachers. Teachers differ in their
comparative advantages in teaching low- or high-achieving students. School districts, which serve
different student bodies, use both wage and hiring strategies to compete for their preferred
teachers. We estimate the model using data from Wisconsin, where districts gained control over
teacher pay in 2011. We find that, all else equal, giving districts control over teacher pay would
lead to more efficient teacher-district sorting but larger educational inequality. Teacher bonus
programs that incentivize comparative advantage-based sorting, combined with bonus rates
favoring districts with more low-achieving students, could improve both efficiency and equity.


Barbara Biasi                                   John Stromme
Yale School of Management                       Department of Economics
165 Whitney Avenue                              University of Wisconsin - Madison
New Haven, CT 06520                             1180 Observatory Drive
and NBER                                        Madison, WI 53706
barbara.biasi@yale.edu                          jrstromme@gmail.com

Chao Fu
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin - Madison
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706
and NBER
cfu@ssc.wisc.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28530
1     Introduction
Education, as a production process, requires a substantial amount of interaction between a
teacher and their students. Students with different learning abilities and needs may disagree
on who the best teacher is, because some teachers may be better at stimulating high-achieving
students, while others at helping low-achieving students. Therefore, it would be most efficient
if teachers sort into teaching students according to teachers' comparative advantages.
    Unfortunately, the typical salary structure for U.S. public school teachers fails to incentivize
such sorting. Salaries follow rigid experience-education schedules set via collective bargaining;
despite differences in the composition of students they serve, districts cannot use salary schemes
to attract teachers better suited for their students. We label this regime the "rigid-pay regime."
Associated with pay rigidity, teacher-district sorting often exhibits a vertical pattern, where
teachers deemed better by various measures tend to teach in districts with more advantaged
students.1 Such vertical sorting can lead to both efficiency losses and large inequalities across
children from different backgrounds.2
    An alternative arrangement would be one where districts have the flexibility to design their
own teacher pay schedules, which we label as the "flexible-pay regime."3 This paper investigates
the implication of the flexible-pay arrangement in a market equilibrium setting, where districts
compete for their preferred teachers, and explores counterfactual policies to improve educational
efficiency and equity.
    To achieve this goal, we need a solid understanding of several key factors. The first is
teachers' preferences over non-pecuniary aspects of their jobs (e.g., student composition) relative
to monetary compensation, which govern how effectively teacher pay schemes can incentivize
sorting. The second is school districts' preferences over various attributes of a teacher, which
govern their hiring decisions, and if given the flexibility, their choices of teacher pay schedules.
A third factor is the competition among districts for teachers, which needs to be accounted for
when evaluating major policy reforms. Holding everything else fixed, a district will always be
weakly better off with more flexibility. However, when equilibrium responses by all districts are
taken into account, some districts may be worse off in the flexible-pay regime than they are in
the rigid-pay regime.
    An obstacle to understanding these factors is the lack of both flexibility and variation in
teacher pay schedules. Due to pattern bargaining by a state's teachers' union, very similar and
   1
     See, for example, Lankford et al. (2002); Ingersoll (2004); Clotfelter et al. (2005); Mansfield (2015); Jacob
(2007).
   2
     Some studies have found significant short-run and long-run effects of teachers on students, e.g., Chetty et al.
(2014); Rivkin et al. (2005); Jackson (2018).
   3
     Throughout the paper, flexible pay refers to a regime in which districts can choose their own teacher
pay schemes; it does not necessarily mean that all districts will choose to reward teacher effectiveness in the
equilibrium.


                                                         1
rigid pay schedules are often imposed on all districts in the state, which has made it difficult
to infer districts' preferences, let alone how they would choose teacher pay if allowed to do so.
A real-life exception provides us with an opportunity to gain more insight: In 2011, Wisconsin
passed a law known as Act 10, which discontinued collective bargaining over teacher salaries
and gave districts full autonomy over teacher pay.
    Using post-Act 10 Wisconsin as a platform, we build and estimate an equilibrium model
of the labor market for public school teachers. Teachers differ in their two-dimensional effec-
tiveness in teaching low- and high-achieving students. A teacher cares about their wage and
the characteristics of the district they work in, including its student composition (the fraction
of students with low/high prior achievement).4 A district cares about a teacher's contribution
to its students' achievement, and may also care directly about a teacher's experience and ed-
ucation. Given its budget, the goal of a district is to fill its capacity with teachers it prefers
the most, by setting a wage schedule and extending job offers. In particular, a wage schedule
specifies how teachers are rewarded for their contribution to the district's student achievement,
and for their experience and education. Districts simultaneously make wage and hiring deci-
sions, given their beliefs about the probabilities of acceptance by different teachers and how
these probabilities vary with their own wage offers. Among offers received, a teacher chooses
their most preferred district, net of moving costs. An equilibrium requires districts' beliefs be
consistent with decisions by all districts and teachers.
    This model highlights a major trade-off embedded in a flexible-pay regime. On the one hand,
given that student composition differs across districts, and teachers differ in their comparative
advantages in teaching certain types of students, teacher-district matching is not necessarily
a zero-sum game. Giving districts the flexibility to directly reward teacher contribution may
encourage comparative advantage-based sorting and hence improve efficiency. On the other
hand, districts make choices to maximize their own objectives without concerns about overall
efficiency. With teacher pay at their disposal, advantaged districts may find it easier to attract
teachers with absolute advantages in teaching both types of students, which would weaken
comparative advantage-based sorting and exacerbate cross-district inequality. When this second
force is strong, policy interventions favoring disadvantaged districts can be justified on grounds
of both equity and efficiency.
    To quantify the trade-off mentioned above and to design policy interventions, we first need
to estimate our model and tackle a major identification challenge: The researcher observes only
the accepted offers, making it hard to separate teacher preferences from district preferences.
We estimate our model via indirect inference, where we design auxiliary models based on the
following identification argument. First, with the mild assumption that district preferences for
  4
      Throughout the paper, we use the words pay, wage and salary interchangeably.



                                                      2
teachers are weakly increasing in teacher attributes (experience, education, and effectiveness),
we can infer from an observed match of district-teacher pair (d, i) that teachers who are weakly
better in all attributes and weakly cheaper than i must have been eligible for a position in d.
This observation allows us to infer a subset of feasible options each teacher must have faced.
Teachers' observed choices among these options inform us of teacher preferences. In contrast,
if one were to assume that all teachers had offers from all districts, the inferred "preferences"
would be different. The discrepancy between the two sets of inferred preferences arises because
certain districts did not make offers to certain teachers; this informs us of district preferences.
Furthermore, given that districts have control over teacher pay, we can learn about district
preferences from the degree to which a district's observed pay schedule favors or disfavors
certain teacher groups and how it varies with district characteristics.5
    We apply our model to administrative data from the Wisconsin Department of Public In-
struction, consisting of three linked panel data sets of at the student, teacher, and district
level. Extending the traditional value-added model, we define and estimate a teacher's two-
dimensional effectiveness as their value added to test scores of their students with low and high
prior scores, respectively. The data also allow us to track a teacher's employment history within
the state's public school system, including their salaries and job characteristics. Our data cover
eras both before and after Act 10. We use post-Act 10 data to estimate our model. With the
estimated parameters, we validate the model by simulating the pre-Act 10 equilibrium under
rigid pay and contrasting it with pre-Act 10 data. The model fits the data well in both eras.
    Using the estimated model, we first examine the implication of giving districts control over
teacher pay. Compared to the rigid-pay equilibrium, under the same initial market conditions,6
the flexible-pay equilibrium features more efficient teacher-district matching with a 0.08% im-
provement in overall student achievement. However, it enlarges the achievement gap between
low- and high-achieving students and reduces student achievement in districts with higher frac-
tions of low-achieving students.
    These findings suggest that, under flexible pay, there is room for policy interventions favoring
districts with more low-achieving students. We design a series of counterfactual state-funded
teacher bonus programs under two bonus formulae (B1 and B2) to account for both efficiency
and equity. Specifically, under both formulae, a teacher's bonus from the state is proportional to
their contribution to student achievement, which may incentivize more efficient sorting because
a teacher's contribution (and thus bonus) is higher when their comparative advantage better
matches with a district's student composition. To account for equity, we adjust bonus rates
   5
     For example, an experienced but ineffective teacher would prefer wages to be based mostly on experience
rather than effectiveness, while a young but effective teacher would prefer the opposite.
   6
     A comparison between pre-Act 10 data and post-Act 10 data is contaminated with differences in initial
market conditions.



                                                     3
based on a district's student composition. Relative to B1, B2 has an additional feature that
ties the state bonus to a district's wage schedule such that districts are incentivized to increase
their own reward for teacher contribution. Our simulations show that at the same total cost,
B2 programs with progressive bonus rates favoring districts with more low-achieving students
would benefit both low- and high-achieving students, and narrow the achievement gap between
the two groups. Moreover, student achievement improves more in districts with higher fractions
of low-achieving students than it does in an average district. In summary, under flexible pay,
carefully-designed intervention can induce more efficient and more equal teacher-district sorting.
    Our paper contributes to the extensive body of work on the labor market for teachers.
Most related to ours are papers studying this market via the lens of a structural model. A
large subset of these studies focuses on the supply side. For example, Stinebrickner (2001a,b);
Wiswall (2007); Lang and Palacios (2018) model individuals' dynamic choices between teaching
and non-teaching options. Behrman et al. (2016) further break down the teaching option into
teaching in one of three types of schools. Boyd et al. (2005) and Scafidi et al. (2007) use
competing risks models to study teachers' preferences for schools and find that teachers prefer
schools with fewer low-achieving and fewer minority students.7
    A smaller subset of work considers both sides of the market. Boyd et al. (2013) estimate
a two-sided matching model to disentangle teacher and school preferences, assuming that the
observed teacher-school matches are stable. While Boyd et al. (2013) study a context of the
rigid-pay regime, districts in our setting have control over teacher pay. We therefore explicitly
model the competition among districts, which choose both wage and hiring strategies. Tincani
(2021) estimates an equilibrium model where a representative private school sets teacher wages
and tuition; workers choose among teaching in the public school (which is passive in her model),
teaching in the private school, and non-teaching; and households choose between public and
private schools.8 Our paper and Tincani (2021) well complement each other. Tincani (2021)
focuses on how a given wage function for public school teachers would induce reactions from the
private school and affect teachers' and households' choices between public and private sectors.
We are interested in efficiency and equity within the public sector, and we study how public
school districts use wage and hiring strategies to compete with one another for better teachers.
    Our paper also contributes to the literature on the effect of teacher pay on teachers' behav-
ior and student outcomes (see Neal et al., 2011; Jackson et al., 2014, for reviews), and more
specifically on teachers' mobility and educational inequality. Hanushek et al. (2004) find that
teacher mobility is more related to student composition than salary, but salary has a modest
impact. Some studies suggest that financial incentives can attract and retain teachers in dis-
   7
    Dolton and Klaauw (1999) use a competing risk model to study teachers' decision to leave the profession.
   8
    Mehta (2017) estimates an equilibrium model of charter school entry, school input choices, and student
school choices.


                                                     4
advantaged schools (e.g., Clotfelter et al., 2008; Steele et al., 2010; Feng and Sass, 2018), while
some other studies find little or no effect (e.g., Clotfelter et al., 2008, 2011; Russell, 2020). Using
a randomized controlled trial in Pakistan, Brown and Andrabi (2020) find that performance
pay induces positive teacher sorting. Similarly, Biasi (2020) shows that under Wisconsin Act
10, higher-quality teachers tend to move to districts that adopted flexible pay. Motivated by
findings from Biasi (2020), we develop and estimate an equilibrium model to understand forces
underlying the observed outcomes, which in turn allows us to study how counterfactual policies
affect districts' wage and hiring decisions and equilibrium teacher-district matches.
    Unlike the studies mentioned above, we allow for multi-dimensional teacher effectiveness in
teaching different types of students, which leaves open the possibility that changing teacher-
district sorting can improve both equity and efficiency. This consideration is supported by
previous findings that teacher effectiveness might be specific to student composition. For ex-
ample, Jackson (2013) demonstrates the importance of match quality between teachers and
schools. Aucejo et al. (2019) and Graham et al. (2020) find significant complementarities be-
tween teachers and classroom composition, and show that reassigning teachers across classrooms
would have sizable effects on teachers' contribution to learning.9 Recognizing the importance
of student-teacher match quality, we explore how education policies can affect districts' and
teachers' decisions and thereby induce more efficient sorting in the equilibrium.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the background; Section 3
describes the model; Section 4 explains our estimation strategy; Section 5 describes the data;
Section 6 reports the estimation results; Section 7 conducts counterfactual experiments; and
Section 8 concludes. Additional details are in appendices.


2     Background
Most US public school districts pay teachers according to "steps-and-lanes" schedules, which
express a teacher's salary as a function of their experience and education (Podgursky, 2006).
Movements along the "steps" (experience levels) and "lanes" (education degrees) of a schedule
involve an increase in pay. In states with collective bargaining (CB), these schedules are nego-
tiated between school districts and teachers' unions.10 CB agreements usually prevent districts
from adjusting pay at the individual level, which implies that pay is rigid and does not reward
teachers for their effectiveness (Podgursky, 2006). Wisconsin introduced CB for public-sector
employees in 1959 (Moe, 2013). Since then, teachers' unions have gained considerable power
   9
     Other recent studies have considered heterogeneity in teacher effectiveness by student demographics (Lavy,
2016; Fox, 2016).
  10
     Most states use CB; in states without CB these schedules are typically determined at the state level (e.g.
Georgia). See, e.g., https://www.nctq.org/contract-database/collectiveBargaining


                                                      5
and have been involved in negotiations with school districts over key aspects of a teaching job.
Until 2011, unions negotiated all teacher salary schedules, which were included in each district's
CB agreement.
    Facing a projected budget deficit of $3.6 billion, on June 29, 2011, the Wisconsin state
legislature passed the Budget Repair Bill, also known as Act 10, which led to major reforms to
public-sector employment in the state.11 For public-school teachers, the most dramatic change
was the exclusion of salary schedules from union negotiations. Under Act 10, unions are only
allowed to negotiate base salaries (i.e., the starting pay for new employees), the annual growth
rate of which is capped at the rate of inflation. Above and beyond base salaries, school districts
are allowed ample flexibility to design teacher pay.12
    Act 10 also introduced a series of other provisions, applied uniformly to all school districts
in the state. First, Act 10 reduced employees' benefits reduced via an increase in employee
contributions to pension and healthcare. Second, Act 10 made it harder for teachers' unions
to operate: They are prohibited from automatically collecting dues from employees' paychecks
and are required to re-certify annually with the majority of votes of all members. As a result,
union membership dropped by nearly 50% in the 5 years after the passage of Act 10.


2.1     A Glance at the Market Before and After Act 10
We provide a first glance at the labor market for public school teachers in Wisconsin before
and after Act 10, using data from the Wisconsin Department of Public Instruction. The data,
which we describe in detail in Section 5, consist of three linked data sets at the teacher, student,
and district level, respectively.
Variation in Teacher Salaries: Figure 1 shows that, prior to Act 10, teacher wage variation,
as measured by the coefficient of variation (CV), was almost nonexistent within each district
among teachers with similar experience and education.13 After Act 10, wage variation increased
as districts gained control over pay and could reward teachers directly for their effectiveness.
Teacher Mobility: Figure 2a shows that movements of teachers across districts are rare, but
their frequency, i.e., the fraction of teachers employed in a district other than the one they
worked for in the previous year, more than doubled after Act 10. Figure 2b compares the wage
growth of movers relative to stayers both pre- and post-Act 10, controlling for teacher and
  11
      On July 1, 2011 the state legislature also passed Act 32, which reduced state aid to school districts and
decreased districts' revenue limits (the maximum revenue a district can raise through general state aid and local
property taxes).
   12
      For example, the 2015 employee handbook of the Mequon-Thiensville District states that "The District, in
its sole discretion, may place employees at a salary it deems appropriate."
   13
      We run a regression of wages on district-by-year and seniority-by-education fixed effects, from which we
obtain the standard deviation of wage residuals and the mean wage, and hence their ratio, i.e., CV.



                                                       6
                                                                                        Figure 1: Variation in Teacher Salaries

                                                                                         .09




                                                 coefficient of variation in salaries
                                                                                        .085




                                                                                         .08




                                                                                        .075

                                                                                                2009      2010     2011              2012     2013         2014
                                                                                                                          year


                     CV of residuals from a regression of salaries on district-year and experience-education fixed effects.



year fixed effects.14 Before Act 10, wage growth was small and negative in real terms for both
movers and stayers. After Act 10, wage growth remained small and negative for stayers, but
movers experienced significant wage growth ($1,750 at the median). This pattern is consistent
with districts using wage strategies to compete for teachers after Act 10.

                                                                                                 Figure 2: Teacher Mobility

                      .03                                                                                                                            t = 2010                   t = 2014
                                                                                                                                     2,000


                     .025
                                                                                                                                     1,500
       moving rate




                      .02
                                                                                                                                     1,000
                                                                                                                           wt-wt-1




                     .015
                                                                                                                                      500



                      .01                                                                                                               0



                     .005                                                                                                             -500
                            2009   2010   2011                                           2012      2013     2014                             Mover          Non-mover   Mover          Non-mover
                                                          year



                             (a) Share Changing District                                                                                     (b) Relative Wage Growth
Panel a: share of teachers working in a different district relative to year t-1. Panel b: Median difference in
salary residuals from a regression of salaries on teacher and year fixed effects.



Vertical Sorting of Teachers across Districts: Prior to Act 10, teachers with fewer than
3 years of experience, who tend to be less effective (Rockoff, 2004), were significantly more
  14
     Specifically, let wit be teacher i's real wage in year t, we regress wit on teacher fixed effects and year fixed
effects and obtain wage residuals it from this regression. Let it = it - it-1 , Figure 2b shows the median
it among those who moved across districts in t and the median it among those who stayed in the same
district between t - 1 and t, t = 2010 and 2014 are shown as examples.

                                                                                                                    7
likely to work in districts serving larger shares of students who scored lower than the state
median in math (Figure 3, lighter series). This relationship became much weaker after Act
10 (darker series). On the one hand, Figures 1 to 3 provide some suggestive evidence that,

                                                                      Figure 3: Vertical Sorting

                                                           .16




                                Share of novice teachers
                                                           .14


                                                           .12


                                                            .1


                                                           .08


                                                           .06
                                                                 .2                .4                       .6            .8
                                                                        Share of students with test scores below median

                                                                                  pre-Act 10      post-Act 10



Avg. share of teachers with experience<= 3 yrs by vingile of within-district share of low-achieving students.



under flexible pay, districts used wage strategies to compete for teachers and teacher-district
sorting became less vertical. On the other hand, these pre- versus post-Act 10 data patterns
cannot be interpreted as the effect of giving districts control over teacher pay because market
conditions differ in other aspects between the two eras (e.g., districts' budgets). To isolate the
equilibrium impact of replacing rigid pay with flexible pay and, more importantly, to conduct
counterfactual policy analysis, we resort to the following equilibrium model.


3       Model
We model a static equilibrium in the market for public school teachers, with a distribution of
teachers and D school districts. Districts compete for their preferred teachers using wage and
hiring strategies; each teacher chooses their most preferred district from those that offer them
a job. Model primitives are as follows.
Teachers: A teacher is characterized by (x, c, d0 ), where the vector x = [x1, x2 ] includes ex-
perience and education; c = [c1 , c2 ] is the vector of one's effectiveness in teaching low- and
high-achieving students, respectively;15 and d0 is the district one works in at the beginning of
the model, where d0  {1, ..., D} for incumbent teachers working in district d0 , and d0 = 0 for
those who are yet to find a job on this market.
 15
      A teacher's effectiveness c is partly attributable to teacher characteristics x, as we specify in Section 5.1.2.



                                                                                         8
Districts: District d is characterized by (qd , d , d , Md ): qd is a vector of district characteris-
tics; d is the fraction of students in d who are low-achieving (with prior test scores below the
state median); d is district d's capacity (number of teaching slots), and Md is its budget. The
sum of all slots across districts d d is equal to the total measure of teachers on the market.
A teacher's total contribution to student achievement in district d is given by

                                         T C (c, d )  d c1 + (1 - d ) c2 ,                                       (1)

which, for the same teacher, varies across districts with districts' student composition d .
Timing: The timing of the model is as follows:
1. Districts simultaneously choose their wage schedules {wd (x, c)} and job offers {od (x, c, d0 )} ,
where od (x, c, d0 ) = 1 if d makes an offer to teacher (x, c, d0 ) , and 0 otherwise.
2. Each teacher observes their taste shocks and chooses their most preferred offer.
    Notice that wages are assumed be blind to a teacher's origin d0 , which is consistent with
real-life practice.16 In contrast, job offers depend on d0 because the current tenure system
prevents a district from dismissing its tenured incumbent teachers.


3.1     Teacher's Problem
3.1.1    Teacher Preferences

For a teacher with (x, c, d0 ), the net value of working in d is given by

               Vd (x, c, d0 ) +   d    wd (x, c) + qd 0 + 1 ed + 2 d c1 -  (d, d0 , x1 ) +         d,            (2)

where d is an i.i.d. Type 1 extreme-value distributed taste shock with a scale parameter  .
Wage enters with a normalized coefficient of 1, so that teacher preferences are measured in
$1,000. Teachers' preferences for district characteristics qd are governed by the vector 0 . The
next two terms capture teachers' preferences for student composition (d ); these preferences
may vary across teachers with different effectiveness in teaching low-achieving students (c1 ) .17
  16
     Without this restriction, a district may want to pay incumbent teachers less than non-incumbent teachers
with the same (x, c) , since the former are easier to attract, due to teachers' moving costs. This restriction rules
out such predictions, which are at odds with the data.
  17
     It is disproportionally rare to see teachers move into districts with a high fraction of low-achieving students,
suggesting that teachers' preference over d might be convex. We therefore use ed in the utility function, which
does not involve additional parameters. Indeed, we have estimated a model with a linear preference over d ,
which does not fit the data well.




                                                         9
 () is the cost of moving from d0 to d, given by

                                   0 if d0 = 0
                 (d, d0 , x) =                                                          .                 (3)
                                   I (d = d0 ) (0 + x1 1 ) + I (zd = zd0 ) 2 otherwise.

The cost is set to zero for teachers who are not already employed in any district (d0 = 0) . For
others, the cost of leaving their original district (d = d0 ) may vary with experience; in addition,
we allow for an additional cost if the two districts are not in the same commuting zone, where
zd denotes the commuting zone where d is located.

3.1.2    Teacher's Optimal Decision

Among all received offers (od (x, c, d0 ) = 1), a teacher chooses the one with the highest value:

                                         max            {Vd (x, c, d0 ) +   d} .                          (4)
                                     d:od (x,c,d0 )=1


Let d (x, c, d0 , ) be the teacher's optimal choice.


3.2     District's Problem
3.2.1    District Preferences

A teacher's value to district d is given by

                                      xb0 + b1 d c1 + b2 (1 - d ) c2 ,                                    (5)

where b0 captures districts' direct preferences for teacher experience and education; b1 and b2
capture how much a district cares about a teacher's contribution to its low- and high-achieving
students, respectively.18 We assume that b  0, i.e., district preferences are weakly increasing
in all teacher attributes, and we normalize b1 to 1. A special case is b0 = 0 and b1 = b2 , in
which Equation (5) is equivalent to T C (c, d ), i.e., a district values a teacher only for their
total contribution to its students. More generally, if b1 and b2 are large relative to b0 , districts
would rank teachers differently depending on their student compositions d ; if b0 is dominant,
districts would largely agree on their rankings of teachers.
  18
    Given that we only observe accepted offers, it is hard to separate out teachers' home bias from districts'
direct preference over teachers' origins d0 . As such, we have ruled the latter out.




                                                           10
3.2.2    Choice Space for Wage Schedules

Because wage schedules are functions, the unrestricted choice space is of infinite dimensions. To
keep the model tractable, we assume that a district's wage schedule is a linear combination of
                                                      0
its pre-Act 10 experience-education wage schedule Wd    (x) and a teacher's contribution T C () ,
given by
                                       0
                                  1 Wd   (x) + 2 T C (c, d ) .

To avoid unrealistically high or low wages, we bound wages by [w, w] , such that19

                                             0
                    wd (x, c| ) = max min 1 Wd (x) + 2 T C (c, d ) , w , w .                              (6)

                                                                                                2
Under (6) , a district's wage strategy boils down to a choice of  = (1 , 2 )  , where   R         0
is assumed to be discrete and finite.
    Admittedly, the choice space implied by wage rule (6) is rather limited. However, as we show
in Section 5.1.3, wages calculated under (6) match the observed wages very well. Moreover, this
wage rule captures the essence of the wage-setting problem. In particular, if  = (1, 0)  ,
teachers are paid on the rigid experience-education schedule, as is imposed on most U.S. school
districts; if 2 > 0, teachers are rewarded for their contribution, echoing the idea of performance
pay. A central question is, if allowed to do so, how much would districts deviate from rigid pay
and reward teachers for their contribution in the equilibrium ? To answer this question, we first
characterize districts' optimal decisions.

3.2.3    District's Optimal Decisions

Taking all the other districts' policies and teachers' decision rules as given, a district aims to fill
its capacity with its most preferred teachers by making wage and job offer decisions, subject to
its budget constraint. A district's problem can be solved in two steps: First, a district chooses a
wage schedule  = (1 , 2 ); second, it makes job offers conditional on  . We solve the problem
via backward induction.
  19
   Empirically, w (w) is 0.3 standard deviations below (0.2 standard deviations above) the observed 1st (99th)
wage percentile in the sample.




                                                     11
Job Offers For a given wage schedule  , district d's job offers {od (x, c, d0 | )}(x,c,d0 ) solve the
following problem:

 d ( ) = max              od (x, c, d0 | ) hd (x, c, d0 | ) [xb0 + b1 d c1 + b2 (1 - d ) c2 ] dF (x, c, d0 )       (7)
              {od ()}

       s.t.       od (x, c, d0 | ) hd (x, c, d0 | ) dF (x, c, d0 )  d ,

                  od (x, c, d0 | ) hd (x, c, d0 | ) wd (x, c| ) dF (x, c, d0 )  Md

              od (x, c, d0 | ) = 1 if x1  3 and d0 = d,

where hd (x, c, d0 | ) is the probability that the teacher would accept the job if district d makes
them an offer (od (x, c, d0 | ) = 1) , i.e., the probability that the teacher prefers d over all the
other districts that offer them a job. Teachers' decision rule in Equation (4) implies

                                                                         Vd (x,c,d0 )
                                                                exp          
                hd (x, c, d0 | ) =                                                                            .    (8)
                                            Vd (x,c,d0 )                                       Vd (x,c,d0 )
                                     exp        
                                                           +        d D\d od (x, c, d0 ) exp       


The first two constraints in (7) are for capacity and budget. The third constraint prohibits
the district from dismissing its own tenured incumbent teachers, i.e., those with d0 = d and
at least 3 years of experience, as is the case in Wisconsin. Let {od (x, c, d0 | )} be the optimal
job offer decisions under wage schedule . Appendix A1 characterizes the solution to (7). In
particular, district d would rank all teachers, except for tenured incumbents in d (because
they are already guaranteed job offers from d). This ranking depends only on a teacher's
value xb0 + b1 d c1 + b2 (1 - d ) c2 and wage cost wd (x, c| ). Accounting for the acceptance
probabilities by all teachers, including its tenured incumbents, district d would make offers to
its n top-ranked teachers, where n is the maximum number of offers allowed by its capacity
and budget.

Wage Schedule District d chooses  to solve the following problem

                                                    d ( )
                                           max            - R ( ) +  ,                                             (9)
                                                     d
where d ( ) (given by (7)) is normalized by district capacity to make the scale comparable
across districts with different capacities. R () captures some resistance or friction against de-
viating from d = (1, 0) , i.e., a district's pre-reform wage schedule. We model R () as

                               R ( ) = I ( = [1, 0]) (r0 + r1 |1 - 1| + r2 2 ) ,                                  (10)


                                                               12
where r0 captures the fixed cost of deviating from the rigid-pay schedule; r1 and r2 capture the
incremental costs for larger deviations. Finally,  is an i.i.d. extreme-value distributed shock
associated with choosing , with a scale parameter  .


3.3     Equilibrium
Definition 1 An equilibrium is a tuple of decisions {{d (x, c, d0 , )} , {d       
                                                                                   , {od (x, c, d0 | )}}d }
                
and belief {{hd (x, c, d0 | )}d } such that
              
1) Given {d    , {o               
                   d (|d )}}d , d (x, c, d0 , ) solves the teacher's problem, for all (x, c, d0 , ).
2) For all d, given {h                                                    
                        d ()} , d is an optimal wage decision and {od (| )} are optimal job offer
decisions under  .
3) {h                                                       
      d ()}d is consistent with {{d ()} , {d , {od (|d )}}d } .

   To solve its problem, it is sufficient for a district to know teachers' acceptance probabilities
{hd (x, c, d0 | )} (defined by (8)). Given {hd ()}, knowledge about other districts' strategies is
redundant. An equilibrium requires a consistent belief about {hd (x, c, d0 | )} . However, forming
the exact belief about the high dimensional object {hd ()} is a daunting task for any decision
maker. As a feasible alternative, we assume that districts make their decisions based on a
simplified parametric belief about teachers' acceptance probabilities,20 given by

                                                               1
                           hd (x, c, d0 | ) =                                         ,                   (11)
                                                1 + exp (f (x, c, d0 , wd , qd , d ))

where

                             c1 + c2          wd (x, c| ) - w (x, c)
           f () = x1 + 2            + 3                                   + 4 qd + 5 ed + 6 d c1         (12)
                                2                     w(x,c)
                + (1 - I (d0 = 0)) [I (d = d0 ) (7 + 8 x1 ) + 9 I (zd = zd0 )] .

This simplified belief function captures the factors governing its counterpart {hd ()}. The first
two terms in (12) relate to the overall desirability of the teacher: A district should expect more
competitors for a better teacher. The next term captures the idea that a district offering a more
competitive wage should expect a higher acceptance rate. In particular, w (x, c) and w (x, c)
are the cross-district average and standard deviation of wages for a teacher with attributes
(x, c), according to the wage rules chosen by all districts in the equilibrium. We measure
the competitiveness of a wage offer wd (x, c| ) by its standardized difference from the average
w (x, c). The other terms in (12) mirror teachers' preferences over qd and d as in (2) and
teachers' moving costs as in (3) .
  20
    Similar approaches have been used in the literature to approximate equilibrium objects that are too complex
to compute exactly, e.g., Lee and Wolpin (2006) and Meghir et al. (2015).

                                                       13
    In the rest of the paper, we will study the market equilibrium with this simplified belief and
replace {hd (x, c, d0 | )} with hd (x, c, d0 | ) in Definition 1. Solving for the equilibrium with
the simplified belief boils down to finding {, w () , w ()} that guarantee consistency between
districts' belief hd () and teachers' acceptance rule h () given by Equation (8) . Notice that
{, w () , w ()} are all equilibrium-specific and policy variant. For each counterfactual policy,
we will search for the associated {, w () , w ()} that guarantee belief consistency, using the
equilibrium algorithm described in Online Appendix B1.


3.4     Discussion
For both tractability and data availability reasons, we abstract from several important aspects.
First, because we only have data within Wisconsin's public school system, we focus on the
competition among districts, while abstracting from their competition against teachers' outside
options (e.g., private schools, pubic schools in other states and other occupations).21 For the
same reason, we do not model teachers' decisions to enter or exit the market, and we take
the initial distribution of teachers on the market as pre-determined. Incorporating outside op-
tions in our framework would require additional data and modeling decision-making by outside
employers, which we leave for future work. Although we cannot be certain about how incorpo-
rating teacher entry/exit may affect our findings, some studies suggest that tying public school
teachers' wages to their effectiveness may improve the quality of the overall supply of teachers
in both public and private schools (e.g., Tincani, 2021).22 As such, the efficiency gain we find
in our counterfactual policy experiments may be understated.
    Second, given that wage schedules are set at the district level, we focus on the competi-
tion across districts while abstracting from the allocation of teachers across schools within a
district.23 Online Appendix B3 shows that the cross-district variation clearly dominates the
within-district, cross-school variation in terms of both teacher wages and the share of low-
achieving students. Introducing within-district competition into our framework would allow for
a more complete view but would involve substantial complications.
    Third, we take a district's student composition d as given. In particular, we assume away
potential households re-sorting across districts in response to our policy interventions.24 In our
data, the fraction of students moving across districts was very small and similarly so before
  21
     With a different focus, Dinerstein and Smith (2016) study private schools' responses to public school funding
policies.
  22
     Focusing on the supply side, Rothstein (2015) simulates individuals' dynamic self-selection into and out of
teaching under different pre-set parameters, and finds that the effect of performance pay on selection is very
small.
  23
     Of the 411 districts in Wisconsin, 173 only have one public elementary school.
  24
     For studies on household sorting and school district financing see, for example, Epple and Sieg (1999); Epple
and Romano (2003); Ferreyra (2007); Epple and Ferreyra (2008).


                                                       14
and after Act 10.25 Given that our counterfactual policies are much milder than Act 10, they
are unlikely to significantly affect households' location choices. However, readers should still be
aware of this limitation in interpreting our results.
    Finally, we abstract from the effect of financial incentives on individual teachers' effort and
effectiveness, which has been the focus of a large literature.26 We complement this literature
by focusing on a different channel via which financial incentives may improve education, i.e.,
financial incentives may incentivize more efficient teacher-district matching. To the extent that
teachers may improve their effectiveness in response to financial incentives, our counterfactual
policy results may understate the total policy effects.


4      Estimation
We estimate the model via indirect inference using post-Act 10 data, while holding out pre-Act
10 data for model validation. Indirect inference involves two steps: 1) compute from the data a
set of "auxiliary models" that summarize the patterns in the data; and 2) repeatedly simulate
data with the structural model, compute corresponding auxiliary models using the simulated
data, and search for model parameters such that the auxiliary models from the simulated data
match those from 1). In particular, let  denote our chosen set of auxiliary model parameters
computed from data; let  () denote the corresponding auxiliary model parameters obtained
from simulating a large dataset from the model (parameterized by ) and computing the same
estimators. In our case,  consists of 20 parameters governing teacher preferences and district
preferences. The estimated vector of structural parameters is the solution

                                = argmin [ () -  ] W [ () -  ] ,

where W is a weighting matrix.
   The estimation algorithm involves an outer loop searching for the parameter vector  and
an inner loop solving the model for each given  (detailed in Online Appendix B1). While
we need to find the fixed point for {, w () , w ()} in our counterfactual policy simulations,
we only need to find the fixed point for  during the estimation: Assuming that data were
generated from an equilibrium, {w ()} and {w ()} can be derived directly from the observed
  25
     Between 2007 and 2016, 4.4% of Grade 4-6 students changed districts between two adjacent years on average.
This fraction was stable before and after Act 10 (2011) at 4.2% in 2010, 4.3% in 2011, 4.2% in 2012 and 4.3%
in 2013.
  26
     Studies using data from outside of the US have found evidence that financial incentives for teachers affect
student achievement (Muralidharan and Sundararaman, 2011; Duflo et al., 2012; Lavy, 2002; Atkinson et al.,
2009; Glewwe et al., 2010). However, incentive programs implemented in the US have yielded mixed results, e.g.,
Epple and Ferreyra (2008); Fryer (2013); Imberman and Lovenheim (2015); Dee and Wyckoff (2015); Brehm
et al. (2017).


                                                      15
                         o
district wage schedules {d }d , where the superscript o denotes "observed."


4.1     Identification
A major identification challenge arises from the fact that among all offers made, the researcher
observes only the accepted ones, i.e., the realized teacher-district matches. This makes it hard
to separate teachers' preferences from districts' preferences. To overcome this obstacle, we fully
exploit the following features, which guide our choice of auxiliary models.

4.1.1     Optimal Job Offers and Observed Matches

First, consider district d's job offer decisions. The marginal benefit of hiring a teacher consists
of their contribution to district d's low-achieving students d c1 and high-achieving students
(1 - d ) c2 , and the direct value of their education and experience x. The marginal cost consists
                             o                                                                            o
of teacher wage wd (x, c|d     ) (calculated using wage rule (6) at the observed wage schedule d            )
                                   27
plus the shadow price of a slot. If district d hired teacher i, who was not a tenured incumbent
in d (hence the offer was for sure made based on d's preference instead of the non-dismissal
constraint), then for any district preference parameter vector b  0, a teacher j satisfying the
following (sufficient) conditions was at least as preferable as i and hence must also have had an
offer from d : 1) j had weakly higher c1 , c2 and x than i,28 and 2) wd (xj , cj |d    o                 o
                                                                                         )  wd (xi , ci |d ).
With this argument, we can use observed matches ((i, d) in this example) to infer offers for
other teachers (j in the example). We can then construct, for each teacher i, a subset of all the
                         s
offers they received Oi     {d : od (xi , ci , d0i ) = 1}, which consists of inferred offers, the accepted
offer, and, if i is tenured, the guaranteed offer from i's original employer d0i .
         s                                                     s
    If Oi  is not a singleton, a teacher's choice within Oi      informs us of teacher preferences, since
                   s               29
all options in Oi were feasible. In contrast, if one were to infer teacher preferences assuming
that teachers had offers from all districts, the inferred "preferences" would be different. The
discrepancy between the two sets of inferred preferences arises because certain districts did not
make offers to certain teachers. One can learn about districts' preferences from this observation.
In particular, districts' preference parameters have to generate not only the observed offers,
  27
     The shadow price of a slot, being common between two potential hires, does not affect how a district ranks
teachers. See Appendix A1 for more details.
  28
     We assume that teacher experience (x1 ) enters district preference as ordered categorical variables (0-2, 3-4,
5-9, 10-14, 15 years or more). Therefore, the comparison of teacher experience (x1 ) here is based on these
categories.
  29                                                   s                                                   s
     For 5,170 out 6,600 teachers in our sample, Oi      consists of at least two districts. Given that Oi   is only a
subset of feasible choices faced by i, our identification is facilitated by the I.I.A. property of the Type-1 extreme
value distributed preference shocks. However, as Fox (2007) shows, under standard conditions, multinomial
discrete-choice models are identified semiparametrically using a subset of choices.




                                                         16
but also the lack of offers from certain districts to certain teachers that would reconcile the
aforementioned discrepancy.30

Remark 1 The argument above relies on three maintained assumptions.
A1: (x, c) are observable to all districts. With our data, it is difficult to separate preferences
from information friction. We therefore rule the latter out.
A2: Districts cannot discriminate among teachers by factors other than (x, c).31 If some job
                                                                        s
offers were made for reasons other than (x, c), then the inferred Oi      might include infeasible
options for some teachers and thus introduce biases in the inferred teacher preferences based
      s
on Oi   . However, as long as most job offers are based on (x, c), such biases would be small and
                                       s
teacher preferences inferred from Oi     would still be much closer to their true preferences than
those inferred assuming that teachers had offers from all districts. In such cases, the essence
of our identification strategy still holds, although the argument would not be as sharp.
A3: We have assumed away job posting costs, which is plausible because in reality districts post
openings publicly on online platforms.32 We also assume that teachers get offers without having
to apply. This assumption does not affect our inference of teacher preferences. In particular,
the following two cases would both imply that district d was not attractive enough to teacher j :
1) d made an offer to j and j did not accept; 2) j was eligible for a job position in d but did
not apply.33

4.1.2     Wage Schedule and District Pre-Determined Conditions

Under Act 10, districts can choose how to reward teachers. Therefore, the extent to which wage
schedules favor teachers with different (x, c) and how this relates to districts' pre-determined
conditions are informative about district preferences.34
   To see the intuition, notice that wage schedules can serve both to pull and to push teachers.
To pull teachers with its preferred attributes (x, c) , a district should choose a wage schedule
that favors (x, c). The need to do so is higher when these teachers are not district incumbents
  30
      Districts' offer decisions, of course, depend on how they rank teachers. Noticeably, as seen in Equation (5) ,
the more districts value c relative to x, the more each district's ranking of teachers, and hence its offer decisions,
would depend on the district's student composition (d ) .
   31
      The identification argument holds as long as districts' decisions are based on (x, c) even if c measures teacher
effectiveness with errors. The fundamental assumption is that districts value teachers for their (x, c), which we
also observe.
   32
      See,      for    example,      the     Wisconsin   Education      Career     Access     Network     (WECAN),
https://wecan.education.wisc.edu/.
   33
      If it is costly for teachers to apply for jobs (more so for jobs in districts other than one's initial district),
then these costs would be absorbed in teachers' moving costs in our model.
   34
      A district's pre-determined conditions include its student composition d , characteristics qd , capacity d ,
budgets Md , the composition of district incumbent teachers (those with di0 = d) and that of teachers working
in other districts but within the same commuting zone.



                                                          17
 because moving is costly for teachers, especially across commuting zones. Meanwhile, although
 a district cannot dismiss its tenured incumbents with undesirable (x , c ), it can push them out
 by choosing a wage schedule that disfavors (x , c ). Notice that for teachers with (x , c ) who
 are not tenured incumbents in d, district d can avoid them simply by not offering them jobs.
 Therefore, the incentive to use a wage schedule disfavoring (x , c ) is stronger if the district has
 more tenured incumbents with (x , c ) .
     Finally, district preferences over teachers may not be sufficient to explain the data (24% of
 districts in our data kept their pre-reform wage schedules after Act 10). Districts' choices that
 are not explained by their preferences for teachers are attributed to the resistance cost R () .


 4.2     Auxiliary Models
 Following the identification argument, we target the following auxiliary models jointly.

Aux 1 Coefficients from two regressions of the following form

                                                                  m
              m                                   I (d = d0i ) xi 2           m   m d   m
        yid = 1 w (xi , ci |d )+ I (d0i > 0)         m
                                                                         + qd 4 + 5 e + 6 c1i d + i + m
                                                                                                      id ,
                                                  +3   I (zd = zd0i )
        where yid = 1 if teacher i is matched with district d, and 0 otherwise. The right-hand-side
        variables are the same as those entering teachers' preferences, including w (xi , ci |d ) , the
        wage i would be paid by district d under wage rule (6). i is a teacher dummy that
        relates all {(i, d)}d observations associated with teacher i.35 The two regressions differ in
        the number of observations, reflecting the identification argument in Section 4.1.1.

                                                                                           s
    Aux 1a The first regression includes all teachers whose inferred subsets of offers Oi     contain
           more than one district; an observation (i, d) is a teacher-district pair in these inferred
           subsets.36
    Aux 1b The second regression includes every possible teacher-district pair.

Aux 2 Moments of district-level teacher characteristics (x, c1 , c2 ) by district groups (quintiles of
      d , quintiles of budget per slot, and urban/suburban status).37
   35
      Although conditional logit regressions would be a more intuitive way to summarize discrete choices, they
 are computationally too costly to run during the estimation. We use a linear regression with teacher dummies;
 these dummies capture the idea that the same teacher is choosing one district out of a given set of districts.
   36                                                                                    s
      To run this regression in the data, we take observed (i, d) matches and construct Oi following the procedure
 described in Section 4.1.1. To run this regression in the model, we take model simulated ((i, d) |) matches and
                                          s
 use the same procedure to construct Oi     ().
   37
      To calculate these district-level moments, we first calculate the averages of one-way teacher characteristics
 within each district, and then calculate the averages within each district group, treating each district as an
 observation.


                                                        18
Aux 3 Coefficients from regressions of wage schedule dn , n = 1, 2, on district's pre-determined
      conditions, reflecting the identification argument in Section 4.1.2:

             w       w   w     w     w         w   w         w        w                             tenure    w           w
        dn = 0 n +qd 1n +2n d +3n d +4n Md +Xd 5n +6n T C d +7n T Cd +8n T C d                               +9 n T C Zd +dn ,

                             w       w
        where coefficients 1  n to 4n are associated with district characteristics and constraints;
          w      w
        5  n to 8n are associated with the composition of district incumbents. In particular, Xd
        is the average x, T C d (T Cd ) is the average (standard deviation) of T C among teachers
                                tenure
        with d0i = d, and T C d        is the average T C among the district's tenured incumbents
        (d0i = d and x1i  3). Finally, T C Zd is the average T C of teachers originally working in
        other districts within d's commuting zone (i.e., d0i = d, but zd0i = zd ).38
                                                                         2        2
Aux 4 Cross-district wage schedule moments: E (1 ) , E (2 ) , E (1         ) , E (2 ) , E (1 2 ) , and
      E [I ((1 , 2 ) = (1, 0))] (the fraction of districts using pre-Act 10 schedules).


 5      Data
 Our data, from the Wisconsin Department of Public Instruction (WDPI), consist of three linked
 data sets that provide information about teachers, students, and districts respectively.
 Teacher-Level Data (PI-1202 Fall Staff Report) cover all individuals employed by WDPI
 between 2006 and 2016.39 This panel provides information about teachers' education, years of
 teaching experience, total wages, full-time equivalency units, school and district identifiers, and
 grades and subjects taught.
 Student-Level Data include scores for all public school students in Grades 3 to 8 in state
 standardized tests between 2007 and 2016, and their demographics.
 District-level Information: Using student test score data, we calculate d , the fraction
 of students in district d whose prior math scores were below the grade-specific state median.
 District characteristics qd include indicators for urbanicity (urban, suburban or rural), and an
 indicator for being in a large metropolitan area, all based on the 2010 Census classification.
 Each district is assigned to one of 19 commuting zones zd .
   38
      All else equal, teachers in nearby districts face lower costs for moving to d and therefore may be easier to
 attract than teachers in far-away districts. We do not include the average x of these teachers or the characteristics
 of near-by districts in our final specification of Aux 3, because they are insignificant when included.
   39
      All of our data are reported by academic years, and referenced by the calendar year of the spring semester
 (e.g. 2014 for 2013-14 academic year).




                                                          19
5.1     Empirical Definitions
To map our equilibrium model to the data, we use the following empirical definitions (more
details are in Online Appendix B2).

5.1.1    The Market

Our model is in a static equilibrium setting. For estimation and counterfactual policy analyses,
we use data in 2014, i.e., 3 years after Act 10; by then, all the CB agreements pre-dating Act
10 had expired (Feng and Sass, 2018), and districts had obtained full autonomy over teacher
pay. To validate the estimated model, we simulate the market equilibrium under rigid-pay and
initial conditions in 2010 data, i.e., the year preceding Act 10.
    In both years, we focus on the market for non-substitute full-time public-school math teach-
ers in Grades 4-6, for the following reasons. We exclude the few substitute and part-time
teachers because they face different types of contracts than regular, full-time teachers.40 We
exclude secondary-school teachers because they often teach multiple grades, making it hard to
identify individual teacher contribution (Kane and Staiger, 2008; Chetty et al., 2014). Among
elementary-school teachers, effectiveness measures are obtainable for teachers in Grades 4-6;
and we restrict attention to those teaching the same subject (math), so that the effectiveness
measures are comparable across teachers.41 The estimation sample contains 411 districts and
6,600 teachers; and the validation sample contains 411 districts and 6,741 teachers.
    By focusing on a subgroup of teachers, we have implicitly assumed that a district's capacity
and budget constraints for these teachers do not interact with those for other teachers. This
assumption will hold if, for example, a district commits certain resources for the math education
of its Grade 4-6 students.

5.1.2    Teacher Characteristics

Teacher Effectiveness ci1 and ci2 are teacher i's contributions to the achievement of low-
and high-achieving students, respectively. To obtain (ci1 , ci2 ) for each i, we modify the student
achievement model in Kane and Staiger (2008) to allow for two-dimensional effectiveness as
  40
     Among all public school teachers teaching Grades 4-6 math in 2014 (2010), 2.0% (1.8%) were substitute
teachers and 2.8% (3.9%) were part-time teachers.
  41
     We need student test scores from the previous year to calculate teachers' effectiveness; and our test score
data start from Grade 3. We choose math over English because previous studies have found that teacher effects
on students are larger in math than in reading or language (e.g. Rivkin et al., 2005; Kane and Staiger, 2008;
Chetty et al., 2014).




                                                      20
follows:42
                             s                           I (k = 1) (1 xit + vi1 )
                      Akt = Zkt +                                                        + kt ,                   (13)
                                        i:SGkt =SGT
                                                        +I (k = 2) (2 xit + vi2 )
                                                  it

                                                                              s
where Akt is student k 's achievement (standardized math score) in year t; Zkt  includes a vector
of student observables (including Akt-1 ), a school-grade fixed effect, and a year fixed effect.
In the summation, SGkt (SGT    it ) denotes the school-grade student k (teacher i) belongs to in
year t; k denotes a student's type: k = 1 if k is low-achieving or k 's prior score is below
the grade-specific state median; conversely, k = 2 if k is high-achieving. For a student of
achievement type n  {1, 2} , teacher i's contribution is given by n xit + vin , where xit denotes
i's education and experience in year t, and vin is the part unexplained by xit . Assuming kt
is an i.i.d. idiosyncratic component, we estimate  , 1 and 2 via OLS using data from 2007
to 2016; then, we use the Bayes estimator of Kane and Staiger (2008) to estimate vi1 and vi2 .
Finally, we construct teacher effectiveness (ci1 , ci2 ) in our model as

                                         cin  n xit + vin , n  {1, 2},                                            (14)

where t is 2014 for the estimation sample and 2010 for the validation sample.43

Remark 2 Besides c being two-dimensional, Equations (13) and (14) have two additional fea-
tures.
Feature 1: We allow c to vary directly with x because experience has been shown to affect teacher
effectiveness (e.g., Wiswall, 2013; Rockoff, 2004).
Feature 2: In (13) , a teacher contributes to all students in their school-grade.
To estimate effectiveness with Feature 1 using our data, we have to assume Feature 2 because
of data limitation: We can link students and teachers only up to the school-grade level. In
an alternative achievement model where a teacher contributes only to students in their class,
we can use our data to identify teacher effectiveness assuming that it is invariant to one's ex-
perience. Identification of both models exploits teacher turnover across school-grades and the
assumption that kt and vin are uncorrelated. Notice that this assumption allows for endoge-
                                                                                        s
neous district-teacher sorting (as is the case in our model), because we control for Zkt  , which
                                                           44
includes school-grade fixed effects and year fixed effects. We have estimated both achievement
  42
      Online Appendix B2.3.4 shows that our two-dimensional teacher effectiveness model explains approximately
20% more variation in test scores compared to the one-dimensional effectiveness model.
   43
      Following the literature, we measure ci1 and ci2 as residual contributions to standardized test scores; given
that the mean of test scores is 0, ci1 and ci2 can be negative. In order to make sure that all teachers contribute
(weakly) positively to a district's objective value (7) and that a district would not want to leave classrooms
unstaffed, we replace c1 and c2 in (7) with (c1 - c1 ) and (c2 - c2 ) , where c1 (c2 ) is the minimum of c1 (c2 ) across
all teachers in the sample. Notice that this re-scaling is innocuous because it does not affect how a district
ranks teachers.
   44
      Consistent with our model, this assumption relies on random allocation of teachers within a school-grade,

                                                          21
models. Online Appendix B2.3 shows details of the estimation and identification. It also shows
that the estimated teacher effectiveness measures from the two achievement models are highly
correlated. More importantly, auxiliary models Aux 1a and 1b, which provide key informa-
tion for identifying our equilibrium model, are very similar using either type of effectiveness
measures.


Teacher's Origin District : For the estimation sample, we use teachers' employment histo-
ries between 2011 (when Act 10 was passed) and 2014, and define d0i as i's last employer before
2014.45 We follow the same procedure for the validation sample, using a teacher's employment
history between 2007 and 2010.

5.1.3     Wage Schedules and District Constraints

                                         0
Pre-Act 10 Wage Schedules {Wd              (xi )}d are obtained using data from 2007 to 2011. Specif-
          0
ically, Wd (xi ) is the predicted value from a regression of observed pre-Act 10 teacher real wages
(in 2014 dollars) on indicators for experience groups and education groups, where the regression
coefficients are allowed to differ across districts.46
Choice Set for Wage Schedules (): We first construct a grid o such that wages
wd (xi , ci | ) under (6) and   o provide a good coverage of the observed wage distribu-
tion. We then expand the grid range such that the model choice set   o to allow for the
possibility that district choices may go out of the empirical range in counterfactual scenar-
ios. We use the same , which contains 6  8 different (1 , 2 ) combinations, throughout our
estimation and simulations.47
District Wage Schedules : For each district, we find the grid point on  that best summarizes
                     o
the observed wages (wi ) of teachers working in d (d(i) = d):

                             o
                            (d     o
                               1 , d2 ) = arg      min                  o
                                                                      (wi - wd (xi , ci | ))2 ,
                                                (1 ,2 )
                                                           i:d(i)=d

                                                               o    o
where wd (xi , ci | ) is given by wage rule (6) . The pair (d   1 , d2 ) is treated as district d's wage
                                                          o      o
schedule in the realized equilibrium. The resulting {(d    1 , d2 )}d matches teachers' actual wages

while allowing for endogeneous matching of teachers across school-grades and hence across districts.
  45
     For example, if i moved at most once between 2011 and 2014, d0i is i's employer in 2011; if i worked in A
in 2011, moved to B in 2013, and then to C in 2014, we set d0i = B .
  46                                                                                   0
     Among the specifications we have tried, we found this specification of Wd            (xi ) , as detailed in Online Ap-
pendix B2.4.1, fits the wage data the best. The experience groups are 0, 1-2, 3-4, 5-9, 10-14 and 15 or more.
  47
     Specifically,          =      {0.9, 0.95, 1, 1.05, 1.1, 1.15}  {0, 10, 30, 50, 75, 100, 200, 225} , and o          =
{0.9, 0.95, 1, 1.05, 1.1}  {0, 10, 30, 50, 75, 100, 200}. Details are in Online Appendix B2.4.2.



                                                            22
very well.48
District Capacity and Budget Constraints are binding in the equilibrium. Assuming
data are generated from an equilibrium, d is then the number of teachers in our sample
                                                                 o
working in d in year t, and Md is the sum of wages (wd (xi , ci |d )) among these teachers, where
t = 2014 (2010) for the estimation (validation) sample.


5.2      Summary Statistics
                           Table 1: Teacher and District Characteristics (2014)
    A. Teacher Characteristics           All             x1 < 3                        x1  10
    x1 : Experience                  14.6 (9.2)         1.4 (0.5)                     19.7 (6.9)
    x2 : MA or above                 0.53 (0.50)      0.06 (0.24)                    0.68 (0.47)
    10c1                             0.12 (0.29)      0.04 (0.37)                    0.12 (0.26)
    10c2                             0.11 (0.33)      0.02 (0.42)                    0.12 (0.31)
    Corr (c1 , c2 )                     0.67                 -                             -
    # Teachers                          6,600             627                           4,384
    B. District Characteristics          All        d 1st Quartile                d 4th Quartile
    Urban                               0.04              0.02                           0.03
    Suburban                            0.15              0.34                           0.09
    d                                0.50 (0.12)      0.34 (0.07)                    0.65 (0.06)
    Capacity                         16.9 (30.5)      18.4 (15.9)                    14.3 (43.9)
    Budget/Capacity ($1,000)         50.9 (6.6)        53.0 (6.8)                     48.9 (6.3)
    Characteristics of District Incumbent Teachers (d0 = d)
    Average experience               17.7 (4.8)        17.4 (4.5)                     17.7 (5.7)
    Share w/MA or above              0.56 (0.28)      0.64 (0.26)                    0.47 (0.29)
    Average 10c1                     0.14 (0.11)      0.14 (0.11)                    0.14 (0.12)
    Average 10c2                     0.14 (0.13)      0.13 (0.10)                    0.12 (0.14)
    # Districts                          411              103                            103
    Means and std. deviations (in parentheses) of teacher (Panel A) and district (Panel B) characteristics.

    Panel A of Table 1 shows summary statistics for all 6,600 teachers in the estimation sample,
for non-tenured teachers (x1 < 3), and for those with over 10 years of experience (x1  10).
Fifty-three percent of all teachers have a graduate degree; this share is 6% among non-tenured
teachers and 68% among teachers with over 10 years of experience. On average, non-tenured
teachers are less effective than more experienced teachers in terms of both c1 and c2 . However,
  48                                               o                               o
    The estimated slope coefficient of a model of wi as a function of wd (xi , ci |d ) equals 0.98 (with a standard
                        2
error of 0.001) and an R of 0.99.


                                                        23
the overall correlation between experience (x1 ) and either c1 or c2 , not shown in the table, is
only around 0.04.49 The last row of Panel A shows that the correlation between c1 and c2 is
0.67, which implies the existence of both absolute and comparative advantages across teachers
in teaching different types of students.
    Panel B of Table 1 summarizes districts' characteristics and the composition of a district's
incumbent teachers (d0i = d). We present statistics for all the 411 school districts in the
estimation sample and separately for districts belonging to the 1st and 4th quartiles of the
distribution of d (the fraction of low-achieving students). Districts with fewer low-achieving
students are more likely to be located in suburban areas and to have larger capacity and
per-teacher budgets (throughout the paper, all dollar values are in 2014 dollars). Incumbent
teachers in these districts are more likely to be highly-educated.

                               Table 2: OLS of Teacher-District Match (2014)
                     Teacher's Choice Set         Inferred Offer Seta       All Districtsb
                     wage                            0.002 (0.0002)      -510-6 (210-6 )
                     ed                              -0.004 (0.009)       -0.0001 (0.0001)
                     c1 d                             0.52 (0.29)          -0.02 (0.006)
                     I (d = d0 )                      -0.72 (0.02)           -0.80 (0.01)
                     I (d = d0 )  experience        -0.008 (0.001)        -0.008 (0.0005)
                     I (zd = zd0 )                    -0.06 (0.006)       -0.0006 (0.0001)
                     qd : urban                       0.01 (0.002)         0.003 (0.0002)
                     qd : suburban                    0.01 (0.002)         0.001 (0.0001)
                     qd : large metro                  0.11 (0.03)           0.01 (0.002)
                     # Obs                               57,068               2,712,600
                     a(b): OLS specified in Aux 1a (1b), teacher fixed effects included.
                     Robust standard errors are in parentheses.

    Column 1 of Table 2 shows the OLS estimates from Aux 1a (Section 4.2), which summarize
                                                                             s
how teachers made their choices given their inferred subsets of offers Oi      . Column 2 shows
OLS estimates from Aux 1b, which would reflect teachers' preferences only if all teachers
received offers from all districts. Some clear differences exist between the two columns. For
example, Column 1 shows that teachers care about wages (Row 1) and that teachers who are
more effective with low-achieving students are more willing to teach in districts with higher
fractions of these students (Row 3); however, neither of these relationships exist in Column 2.
These differences arise because certain teachers did not get offers from certain districts and are
informative about district preferences.
 49
      This is consistent with, for example, Rockoff (2004).


                                                        24
                                Table 3: District Wage Schedules (2014)
                                                                o
          A. Summary stats of (1 ,2 )               B. wd (x, c|d ) in Realized Matches ($1,000)
          1 mean (std)          0.99 (0.04) All Teachers: mean (std)               55.1 (11.6)
          2 mean (std)          31.3 (50.8) Experience          <3                 37.2 (4.4)
          Corr (1, 2 )             -0.19                      [3, 4]               41.0 (5.6)
          Fr((1 , 2 ) = (1, 0))     0.24                      [5, 9]               48.0 (6.4)
          Fr(2 > 0)                 0.50                        10                 56.5 (7.2)
          C. District Characteristics by 2                   2 = 0                   2 > 0
          Rural                                               0.80                    0.83
          d >median                                           0.48                    0.52
          Budget/Capacity ($1,000)                            51.2                    50.7
          Incumbent Teachers in d(d0i = d)
          Average experience                                  17.8                    17.6
          Share w/MA or above                                 0.57                    0.55
          Average 10c1                                        0.14                    0.14
          Average 10c2                                        0.14                    0.13
          # Districts                                         205                      206
          Standard deviations are in parentheses.

    Panel A of Table 3 summarizes districts' wage schedule choices. Districts' choices of 2
(rewards for teacher contribution) are more dispersed than their choices of 1 . Although given
the flexibility, 24% of districts continued to use their pre-reform wage schedules ( = (1, 0)) and
only 50% of districts chose to reward teacher contribution (2 > 0). Panel B summarizes wages
in the realized district-teacher matches. On average, more experienced teachers are paid more.
Panel C compares districts' characteristics and the composition of each district's incumbent
teachers among districts that did not reward teacher contribution and those that did. The
difference is small, but districts with 2 > 0 appear more disadvantaged: They are more likely
to be in rural areas and have higher fractions of low-achieving students, smaller per-teacher
budgets, and slightly weaker composition of incumbent teachers.50
  50
   One possible explanation is the following: It would be difficult and costly for disadvantaged districts to
compete for experienced and effective teachers. By setting a higher 2 (which implies a lower 1 to balance the
budget), these districts can improve their attractiveness to young but effective teachers.




                                                      25
6      Estimation Results
6.1     Parameter Estimates
                                       Table 4: Parameter Estimates
       A. Teacher Preference                            B. District Preference
       wage ($1,000)           1      normalized        c1                         1        normalized
        d
       e                     -5.33       (2.72)         c2                       0.90         (0.23)
       c1 d                 86.09      (21.53)         Yrs of experience:
       qd : urban            14.10       (1.86)                         1-2      0.006        (0.01)
       qd : suburban         14.03       (2.53)                         3-4      0.011        (0.02)
       qd : large metro      18.34       (3.45)                         5-9      0.014        (0.01)
       I (d = d0 )           -90.97      (1.37)                      10-14       0.022        (0.04)
       I (zd = zd0 )         -83.38     (91.45)                         15       0.058        (0.07)
       I (d = d0 ) x1        -2.33       (0.08)         MA or above           1.310-5     (5.810-6 )
                             19.98       (1.45)
       C. Wage Setting Cost R ()
       r0 : I ( = [1, 0])     0.93       (0.72)         r1 : |1 - 1|             16.59        (24.15)
       r2 : 2 /100            0.76       (0.39)                                  0.75         (0.33)
       *Std errors (in parentheses) are derived numerically via the Delta Method.

   Table 4 shows estimated model parameters, with standard errors in parentheses.51 Panel A
shows estimated parameters governing teachers' preferences. For an average teacher, districts
with higher fractions of low-achieving students (d ) are less desirable. However, teachers who are
more effective in teaching low-achieving students are more willing to teach in these districts.52
We also find that rural districts are less attractive than their urban counterparts. The rest
of Panel A show that, on average, teachers face high moving costs, especially when moving
across commuting zones. However, individuals compare the total value of each option when
making their choices, including their preference shocks (governed by the scale parameter  ).
High average moving costs help explain the lack of teacher mobility in general, while preference
shocks absorb idiosyncratic reasons for mobility. Our findings, i.e., both the average moving
cost and the dispersion of preference shocks are large, are consistent with those in previous
studies on worker mobility (e.g., Kennan and Walker, 2011). One possible explanation, which
we abstract from, is the family joint location problem: The tied stayer would appear to have
  51
    Standard errors are derived numerically via the Delta Method.
  52
    For example, a teacher whose c1 is at the 10th percentile (c1 = -0.02) would put a premium of $4,227 on
a district with d = 0.3 over an otherwise identical district with d = 0.7; for a teacher whose c1 is at the 90th
percentile (c1 = 0.05) , this permium is only $1,817.



                                                      26
very high moving costs, while the tied mover would appear to have very low and even negative
moving costs (e.g., Gemici, 2011).
    Panels B and C show district-side parameter estimates, which tend to have larger standard
errors than those in Panel A, since we have many more teacher observations (6,600) than district
observations (411). Panel B suggests that districts significantly value a teacher's contribution
to its students' achievement but do not value teacher experience and education per se. We
also find that districts value a teacher's contribution to its low-achieving students slightly more
than their contribution to its high-achieving students, although the difference between these
two parameters is not significant. Panel C shows the cost a district faces for deviating from the
pre-Act 10 wage schedule.53


6.2     Within-Sample Fit
Table 5 shows within-sample model fits of the coefficients from the two regressions specified
in Section 4.2, Aux 1a on the left and Aux 1b on the right. Table 6 shows model fits for the
moments of district-level teacher characteristics (Aux 2). The model well replicates teacher-
district sorting patterns in both tables.

                     Table 5: Model Fit: OLS of Teacher-District Match (d () = d)
       Teacher's Choice Set              Inferred Offer Seta                       All Districtsb
                                      Data           Model                Data               Model
       wage                          0.002           0.003              -510-6            -310-6
       ed                       -0.004               -0.005             -0.0001             -0.00005
       c1 d                      0.52                0.25                -0.02              0.002
       I (d = d0 )               -0.72                -0.87               -0.80               -0.96
       I (d = d0 )  experience -0.008               -0.002              -0.008              -0.001
       I (zd = zd0 )             -0.06                -0.06             -0.0006              0.0001
       qd : urban                 0.01                0.01                0.003              0.002
       qd : suburban             0.01                 0.01                0.001              0.002
       qd : large metro          0.11                 0.54                0.01                0.03
       a(b): OLS specified in Aux 1a (1b), teacher fixed effects     included: data vs model, post Act 10.

  53
     Our model is silent on what causes these costs, which may arise, for example, from the resistance of teachers
or school boards. It is possible that such resistance may fade off over time, in which case, our policy implications
should be interpreted as short-run effects.




                                                        27
              Table 6: Model Fit: Average District Employee Characteristics (d () = d)
                                     Experience       Share MA or above                 10c1                   10c2
 District Group                     Data    Model     Data         Model         Data     Model         Data     Model
 d :                  Quintile 1    14.7     13.7      0.53        0.50          0.13      0.13         0.11      0.13
                      Quintile 2    15.5     14.5      0.51        0.49          0.12      0.13         0.13      0.15
                      Quintile 3    15.6     14.4      0.48        0.46          0.14      0.14         0.12      0.14
                      Quintile 4    16.3     15.2      0.48        0.48          0.14      0.14         0.16      0.15
 Budget/Capacity:     Quintile 1    11.5     11.5      0.29        0.33          0.14      0.15         0.12      0.14
                      Quintile 2    14.8     13.8      0.38        0.38          0.11      0.14         0.12      0.14
                      Quintile 3    15.9     14.8      0.48        0.46          0.13      0.13         0.12      0.13
                      Quintile 4    17.7     16.0      0.59        0.55          0.13      0.14         0.13      0.14
 Urban                              14.2     15.2      0.57        0.59          0.10      0.11         0.09      0.09
 Suburban                           14.7     13.5      0.60        0.56          0.14      0.13         0.13      0.12
 *Moments as specified in Aux 2: data vs model, post Act 10.


                             Table 7: Model Fit: District Wage Schedules
         A. Summary Stats (1 ,2 )              Data        Model                        Data       Model
         E (1 )                                0.99        0.99      E (2 )              31.3          30.8
             2                                                          2
         E (1  )                               0.98        0.98      E (2 )             3562.2     3076.6
         E (1 2 )                             30.47        30.46
         Fr((1 , 2 ) = (1, 0))                 0.24        0.30      Fr(2 = 0)           0.50          0.41
         B. District Characteristics by 2           2 = 0                         2 > 0
                                               Data        Model          Data                 Model
         Rural                                 0.80        0.81           0.83                  0.81
         d >median                             0.48        0.49           0.52                  0.50
         Budget/Capacity ($1,000)              51.2        51.1           50.7                  50.9
         Incumbent Teachers in d
         Average experience                    17.8        17.7           17.6                  17.8
         Share w/MA or above                   0.57        0.56           0.55                  0.55
         Average 10c1                          0.14        0.14           0.14                  0.13
         Average 10c2                          0.14        0.14           0.13                  0.13
         Summary stats of (1 , 2 ) and district characteristics by 2 : data vs model, post Act 10.

    The upper panel of Table 7 shows model fits for the distribution of . Overall, the model
fits the data well, although it underpredicts the dispersion of 2 and the fraction of districts
choosing 2 = 0. The lower panel shows model fits for district characteristics by whether or
not they reward teacher contribution; these statistics are not directly targeted. Consistent with

                                                      28
the data, the model predicts that districts with 2 > 0 are slightly more disadvantaged.54


6.3      Model Validation
               Table 8: Model Validation: OLS of Teacher-District Match (pre-Act 10)
       Teacher's Choice Set            Inferred Offer Seta                      All Districtsb
                                    Data           Model               Data                   Model
       wage                         0.001          0.0003            -310-6              -310-6
       ed                      -0.006              -0.009             -0.0001             -0.0001
       c1 d                     0.33                0.38              0.002                  0.003
       I (d = d0 )              -0.96                -0.95             -0.98                  -0.95
       I (d = d0 ) experience -0.001              -0.001              -0.001                 -0.002
       I (zd = zd0 )           -0.002              -0.019            -0.00003             -0.0003
       qd : urban               0.002                0.002             0.001                  0.001
       qd : suburban            0.001                0.004            0.0002                  0.0006
       qd : large metro         0.016                0.013             0.006                  0.011
       a(b): OLS specified in Aux 1a (1b), teacher fixed effects   included: data vs model, pre Act 10.


          Table 9: Model Validation: Average District Employee Characteristics (Pre-Act 10)
                                      Experience        Share MA or above              10c1                   10c2
 District Group                      Data    Model      Data       Model        Data     Model         Data     Model
 d :                   Quintile 1    16.1     15.3      0.56       0.54         0.10     0.11          0.11      0.13
                       Quintile 2    16.4     16.1      0.51       0.50         0.10     0.10          0.11      0.12
                       Quintile 3    17.6     17.1      0.46       0.47         0.10     0.11          0.13      0.14
                       Quintile 4    17.5     17.1      0.52       0.54         0.09     0.10          0.10      0.11
 Budget/Capacity:      Quintile 1    13.5     13.8      0.27       0.30         0.10      0.12         0.12      0.14
                       Quintile 2    17.7     17.2      0.42       0.43         0.11      0.13         0.12      0.13
                       Quintile 3    17.2     16.8      0.52       0.51         0.09      0.09         0.10      0.10
                       Quintile 4    18.7     17.9      0.60       0.57         0.08      0.09         0.10      0.11
 Urban                               15.2     15.2      0.56       0.55         0.14      0.14         0.13      0.13
 Suburban                            15.6     15.0      0.62       0.60         0.08      0.09         0.10      0.12
 *Moments as specified in Aux 2: data vs model, pre Act 10.

    Using the parameter estimates in Table 4, we apply our model to pre-Act 10 data, when
districts were restricted to use the rigid wage schedule. We simulate the model under rigid pay
and initial conditions from 2010 data. Tables 8 and 9 are counterparts of Tables 5 and 6, and
  54
    Appendix Table A1 shows that the model captures the correlation between  and district pre-determined
conditions as summarized by Aux 3.

                                                       29
they contrast model-predicted 2010 equilibrium outcomes with 2010 data outcomes. Despite
the nontrivial change in the policy environment, our model, estimated using post-Act 10 data,
is able to match pre-Act 10 data well. This validation exercise increases our confidence in the
model's ability to study counterfactual polices.


7      Counterfactual Experiments
We use our estimated model to first examine the educational equity-efficiency implication of
flexible pay, and then to evaluate a set of counterfactual state bonus programs. Let Pr (i in d|)
be the equilibrium probability that teacher i works in district d in a given policy environment
, we pay special attention to the following metrics:55
1. Average total contribution among teachers working in a given group of districts d  D :

                                       dD            Pr (i in d|) T C (ci , d )
                                                        i
                                                                                ,                          (M1)
                                                    dD    i Pr (i in d|)


where T C (ci , d ) = ci1 d + ci2 (1 - d ) is teacher i's total contribution to students in d (if i
works in d) and the numerator is the expected total contribution among teachers working in
D . The denominator is the expected total number of teachers working in D .56 Given that
teacher contribution enters student achievement additively, an increase in M1 maps one-to-one
into an increase in the average achievement for students in D . Therefore, when D = D, M1
measures the overall match efficiency in the market. Moreover, a policy will improve cross-
district educational equity if it increases M1 more for high-d districts, i.e., districts with higher
fractions of low-achieving students, than it does for low-d districts.
2. Average teacher contribution to low-achieving students in the state

                                                d           i   Pr (i in d|) ci1 d
                                                                                   ,                     (M2.1)
                                                    d           i Pr (i in d|) d


and to high-achieving students in the state

                                        d       i   Pr (i in d|) ci2 (1 - d )
                                                                              ,                          (M2.2)
                                            d       i Pr (i in d|) (1 - d )
  55
     Teacher-district matching is probabilistic because of shocks { d } to teachers' choices, and shocks { }
to districts' wage choices. For a given policy, we calculate the expected equilibrium outcomes by numerically
integrating over { } and deriving teachers' choice probabilities analytically, detailed in Online Appendix B1.2.1.
We use the same set of random shocks throughout our analysis.
  56
     In equilibrium, i Pr (i in d|) equals to d's capacity d .




                                                                    30
where ci1 d and ci2 (1 - d ) are teacher i's contribution to low- and high-achieving students
in district d (if i works in d), respectively. An increase in M2.1 (M2.2) maps one-to-one to an
increase in the average achievement for low-achieving (high-achieving) students in the state. A
policy will narrow the achievement gap between the two groups of students if it improves M2.1
more than it does M2.2.


7.1     Flexible Pay versus Rigid Pay
To examine the equity-efficiency implication of a regime switch from rigid pay to flexible pay, we
contrast the baseline flexible-pay equilibrium (as described in Section 3) with the counterfactual
equilibrium where all initial conditions are kept the same but the rigid wage schedule  = (1, 0)
is imposed on all districts.57
                                    Table 10: Flexible Pay vs Rigid Pay
                                                                                 Flexible-Rigid
                                                                    Flexible          Rigid
                                                                                                  (%)
           M1: TC for all students in the state (efficiency)          0.113             0.08
           M2.1 c1 for all low-achieving students                     0.115             -0.06
           M2.2 c2 for all high-achieving students                    0.112             0.23
           M1: TC in top quintile d districts                         0.108             -1.04
           M1: TC in above median d districts                         0.107             -0.57
           
              Numbers in Column 1 are multiplied by 10 for easier reading.

    Column 1 of Table 10 presents outcomes in the flexible-pay equilibrium. The first three
rows report outcomes for all districts: average teacher total contribution to all students in
the state (M1), to low-achieving students (M2.1) and to high-achieving students (M2.2). The
next two rows report teacher total contribution to students in districts with higher fractions of
low-achieving students (M1 for subsets of D). Column 2 reports percentage changes in these
metrics associated with a shift from the rigid-pay regime to the flexible-pay regime. With
such a shift, we find that 1) average teacher total contribution in the entire state increases by
0.08% (efficiency improves); 2) average teacher contribution to low-achieving students decreases,
while contribution to high-achieving students increases, implying an enlarged achievement gap
between the two groups of students; and 3) average teacher total contribution decreases in
districts with higher fractions of low-achieving students.
    Changes shown in Table 10, although small in magnitude, reflect a major trade-off between
efficiency and equity.58 In particular, flexible pay allows districts to directly reward teacher con-
tribution, which encourages comparative advantage-based sorting and hence improves efficiency.
  57
     One cannot directly measure the impact of flexible pay using the observed differences before and after Act
10, because those differences are contaminated by other factors (e.g., changes in district budgets).
  58
     The small magnitudes and the equity-efficiency tradeoff in our findings are in line with previous studies on

                                                       31
However, all else equal, (most) teachers prefer working in districts with more high-achieving
students. Under flexible pay, it is even easier for these districts, which also tend to have more re-
sources (Table 1), to attract teachers at the cost of districts with more low-achieving students.59
As a result, achievement gaps are enlarged across districts and between low- and high-achieving
students.


7.2     State-Funded Bonuses
Results shown in Table 10 suggest that, under flexible pay, there is room for policy inter-
ventions favoring districts with more low-achieving students. Given that student composition
differs across districts and that teachers differ in their comparative advantages, teacher-district
matching is not necessarily a zero-sum game, and such interventions may improve both equity
and efficiency. In the following, we explore this possibility under flexible pay via a commonly
used policy tool: state-funded teacher bonuses.60
    We focus on the design of the bonus structure and develop two bonus formulae. Under
our first formula, a teacher with effectiveness c = [c1 , c2 ] teaching in district d would obtain a
state-funded bonus given by

                                 1                1
                                Bd (c) = min max rd T C (c, d ) , 0 , B .                                      (B1)

Between the lower bound 0 and the upper bound B,61 a teacher's bonus is their total contri-
                                                                 1
bution T C (c, d ) multiplied by a district-specific bonus rate rd . Because T C (c, d ) is higher if
a teacher's c better matches the district's student composition (d ), B1 incentivizes compara-
tive advantage-based sorting and therefore can improve efficiency. B1 also accounts for equity
                         1
because bonus rates {rd    }d are policy parameters that can be adjusted to provide stronger in-
centives for effective teachers to teach in disadvantaged districts. Different bonus rate vectors
   1
{rd  }d would induce different reactions from districts and teachers and hence different equilib-
rium outcomes.
imposed performance pay policies. For example, using data from North Carolina, Guarino et al. (2011) find
that imposing across-the-board pay for performance based on school results have very small effects on teacher
mobility and may exacerbate inequities in distribution of teacher qualification.
   59
      Notice that a district has strictly more choices under flexible pay than it does under rigid pay, yet some dis-
tricts lose in the flexible-pay regime. This highlights the importance of evaluating the policy from an equilibrium
perspective.
   60
      State-funded bonus programs have been used in some states (e.g., North Carolina and California) to reward
teachers for teaching in schools with more low-income or low-achieving students.
   61
      We consider non-negative state bonuses and set the lower bound at 0 (recall that student test scores are
normalized with mean 0 and that T C () can be negative). To avoid extreme bonuses, we also impose an upper
bound: B is twice the standard deviation of the overall wage distribution.




                                                         32
       Our second formula is similar to B1, but with an additional feature:

                           2                    2
                          Bd (c, d ) = min max rd d2 T C (c, d ) , 0 , B .                               (B2)

That is, B2 ties bonuses for teachers working in district d to the district's own reward rate for
teacher contribution d2 . District d would obtain more "free money" in the form of state-funded
bonuses for its teachers if it chooses a higher d2 . Therefore, B2 directly incentivizes districts
to reward teacher contribution in their own wage schemes.
    For illustration, we present equilibrium results from three bonus programs under flexible
pay. We calibrate the vector of bonus rates in each program such that all programs are equally
costly in the equilibrium, at about $1,560 per teacher or 10.3 million dollars in total. Given this
total cost, the equilibrium average state bonus for each recipient is about $2,360 or $3,940, de-
pending on program specifics. These amounts are comparable to relatively mild bonus programs
implemented in other states but with very different formulae than ours.62
                                                                                   1
    We start with two flat-rate programs: B1(flat) under Formula B1, with rd         = $87, 550 for
      63                                         2
all d; and B2(flat) under Formula B2, with rd = 3.4 for all d. The bonus rates are calibrated
to exhaust the same pre-specified total cost. Effects of the two programs are presented in the
first two columns in Panel A of Table 11. Compared to the baseline flexible-pay equilibrium,
B1(flat) leads to a 0.08% improvement in the overall teacher total contribution or efficiency.
The gains are similarly shared between low- and high-achieving students. In contrast, B2(flat)
leads to a higher efficiency gain at 0.13%. However, most of the gains are enjoyed by high-
achieving students, and districts with higher fractions of low-achieving students experience a
decline in total teacher contribution.
    Motivated by the fact that B2(flat) leads to more efficient but more unequal allocation
than B1(flat), we conduct a series of experiments under B2 with different vectors of progressive
bonus rates, in order to explore possible gains in both equity and efficiency. To be specific, we
divide districts into quintiles based on their d (the fraction of low-achieving students), and we
                                                           2
experiment with group-specific bonus rates such that rd      (weakly) increases as we move from
the lowest-d group to the highest-d group.64 Among the set of bonus vectors we have tried
  62
     For example, in 2014 dollars, the per recipient bonus was between $1,910 and $13,370 in the 1989 Tennessee
Career Ladder Evaluation (CLE) program, between $1,719 and $3,420 in the 2007 NYC bonus program, and
between $5,500 and $16,500 in the 2008 Tennessee POINT program (Neal et al., 2011). Findings from these
programs are mixed: Math scores improved by 3% under CLE; the NYC bonus program had no effect on
achievement; and POINT had no effect on achievement except for one grade, where the effect was positive but
only for one year.
  63
     In the baseline equilibrium, T C (c, d ) in realized teacher-district matches has a mean of 0.011 and a
standard deviation of 0.027.
  64
     An optimal search for district-specific bonus rates would be computationally too burdensome to do, as we
would have to solve for the market equilibrium for each vector of bonus rates and also guarantee the total cost
of bonuses be the same in the equilibrium.


                                                      33
that satisfy the pre-specified bonus budget, the following delivers the most promising results:
                                                  2
B2(Pro) under Formula B2, with bonus rates rd       set at 3, 3.25, 3.25, 3.75 and 4.5 for districts
in the 1st to 5th quintiles of the d distribution, respectively.


                                       Table 11: State-Funded Teacher Bonuses
 A. Effects on Teacher Contributiona
                                                                     B1(flat)-Base   B2(flat)-Base   B2(pro)-Base
 (%)                                                                        Base          Base           Base
 M1: TC for all students in the state (efficiency)                         0.08           0.13           0.13
 M2.1 c1 for all low-achieving students                                    0.07           0.02           0.16
 M2.2 c2 for all high-achieving students                                   0.08           0.25           0.10
 M1: TC in top quintile d districts                                        0.02          -0.89           0.24
 M1: TC in above median d districts                                        0.10          -0.13           0.42
 B. Teacher Reward and Program Cost
                                                         Baseline         B1(flat)      B2(flat)       B2(pro)
 Districts choosing 2d > 0                                 59%             59%            60%            60%
                                                     b
 Teachers rewarded by districts (2d T C> 0)                39%             39%            40%            40%
 Avg. reward E(2d T C |2d T C> 0) ($1,000)                 1.29            1.30           1.36           1.36
 Teachers receiving state bonuses (B>0)                       -            66%            40%            40%
 Avg. state bonus E(B|B>0) ($1,000)                           -            2.36           3.94           3.94
 Program cost ($1,000 per teacher)                            -                           1.56
 a
     Flexible-pay equilibrium with a given bonus scheme vs baseline flexible-pay equilibrium.
 b                                         0
     Teacher wage is given by max {min {1 Wd (x) + 2 T C (c, d ) , w} , w}

    The effect of B2(pro) is shown in the last column in Panel A of Table 11. B2(pro) leads to
0.13% gain in the overall efficiency (the same as B2(flat)). Both types of students gain, with a
0.16% gain for low-achieving students and a 0.10% gain for high-achieving students, implying a
narrowed achievement gap. Moreover, districts with higher fractions of low-achieving students
enjoy larger gains than an average district in terms of total teacher contribution. Admittedly,
these effects are not large, which is in line with findings in other studies that monetary incentives
have rather limited effects on attracting and retaining teachers.65 Nevertheless, counterfactual
results under B2(pro) demonstrate that carefully-designed bonus programs can improve both
efficiency and equity.
    Finally, Panel B of Table 11 shows the equilibrium reward for teacher contribution and
program costs. In the baseline, 59% of districts reward teachers for teacher contribution (T C ) by
setting 2d > 0; 39% of teachers are rewarded (2d T C > 0), with a mean reward of $1,290.
 65
      See, for example, Clotfelter et al. (2008, 2011); Russell (2020).


                                                         34
There is almost no change in any of these figures under B1(flat). By tying state bonuses to
2d , both B2(flat) and B2(pro) have some very limited effects on districts' wage choices with
60% of districts setting 2d > 0; 40% of teachers receive district reward for T C , with a mean
of $1,360. The lack of effects on 2d arises mainly from two costs faced by districts, which may
outweigh the small state bonuses we introduce. First, although by increasing its own 2d , a
district can obtain more state bonuses for its effective teachers, it has to reallocate its total
wage budget across its teachers with different T C , experience, and education. This distortion
can be very costly: A district cares about attracting and retaining teachers of higher values
to fill its capacity, where the value is based not only on effectiveness, but also on experience
and education. Second, districts also face an resistance cost, which increases with its deviation
from 2d = 0.66 It should be noted that our findings are better interpreted as short-run policy
effects. For example, in the long run, the resistance against deviating from rigid pay may fade
off, and state bonus programs may induce larger policy impacts.


8       Conclusion
We have developed an equilibrium model of the teachers' labor market, where teachers differ
in their comparative advantages in teaching low- and high-achieving students, and districts
compete for teachers using both wage and hiring strategies. We have estimated the model
using data from Wisconsin after a reform that gave districts control over teacher pay, and we
have validated the model using the pre-reform data under rigid pay.
    The estimated model implies that, ceteris paribus, giving districts control over teacher
pay would lead to more efficient but also more unequal teacher-district sorting. Efficiency is
improved because districts are allowed to directly reward teacher contribution, which encourages
comparative advantage-based sorting. Inequality is enlarged because all else equal, (most)
teachers prefer working in districts with more high-achieving students, and flexible pay makes
it even easier for these districts to attract teachers.
    We have further demonstrated that under flexible pay, carefully-designed interventions can
improve both equity and efficiency. In particular, progressive state-funded bonus schemes that
incentivize comparative advantage-based teacher-district sorting could both improve overall
student achievement and narrow the achievement gap between low- and high-achieving students.
    We have abstracted from several important aspects of the teachers' market; extending our
framework along these lines is worth pursuing. With additional data, the first extension is to
incorporate decisions by the private education sector and to consider the competition not only
among public school districts, but also between public and private sectors. The second extension
 66
      As a purely illustrative exercise, in Appendix A3 we show the effect of cutting R () to 0.5R ().


                                                         35
is to incorporate household sorting (e.g., Epple and Ferreyra, 2008). Third, the efficiency gains
we have found are likely to under-state the total effect of our counterfactual policy intervention,
since our model takes teacher effectiveness as pre-determined. An interesting extension is to
add teachers' effort choices into our framework. Finally, our static equilibrium model is better
suited to study short-run policy effects. An important but very difficult extension is to consider
the market in a dynamic equilibrium setting, which would allow for investigation of long-run
policy impacts.


References
Atkinson, A., S. Burgess, B. Croxson, P. Gregg, C. Propper, H. Slater, and D. Wilson (2009).
  Evaluating the impact of performance-related pay for teachers in England. Labour Eco-
  nomics 16 (3), 251261.

Aucejo, E. M., P. Coate, J. C. Fruehwirth, S. Kelly, and Z. Mozenter (2019). Match effects in
 the teacher labor market: Teacher effectiveness and classroom composition.

Behrman, J. R., M. M. Tincani, P. E. Todd, and K. I. Wolpin (2016). Teacher quality in
  public and private schools under a voucher system: The case of Chile. Journal of Labor
  Economics 34 (2), 319362.

Biasi, B. (2020). The labor market for teachers under different pay schemes. American Economic
  Journal: Economic Policy (forthcoming).

Boyd, D., H. Lankford, S. Loeb, and J. Wyckoff (2005). Explaining the short careers of
  high-achieving teachers in schools with low-performing students. American Economic Re-
  view 95 (2), 166171.

Boyd, D., H. Lankford, S. Loeb, and J. Wyckoff (2013). Analyzing the determinants of the
  matching of public school teachers to jobs: Disentangling the preferences of teachers and
  employers. Journal of Labor Economics 31 (1), 83117.

Brehm, M., S. A. Imberman, and M. F. Lovenheim (2017). Achievement effects of individual
  performance incentives in a teacher merit pay tournament. Labour Economics 44, 133150.

Brown, C. and T. Andrabi (2020). Inducing positive sorting through performance pay: Ex-
  perimental evidence from Pakistani schools. University of California at Berkeley Working
  Paper .

Chetty, R., J. N. Friedman, and J. E. Rockoff (2014). Measuring the impacts of teachers
 i: Evaluating bias in teacher value-added estimates. American Economic Review 104 (9),
 25932632.

Clotfelter, C., E. Glennie, H. Ladd, and J. Vigdor (2008). Would higher salaries keep teachers
  in high-poverty schools? evidence from a policy intervention in North Carolina. Journal of
  Public Economics 92 (5-6), 13521370.

                                                36
Clotfelter, C. T., H. F. Ladd, and J. Vigdor (2005). Who teaches whom? Race and the
  distribution of novice teachers. Economics of Education review 24 (4), 377392.

Clotfelter, C. T., H. F. Ladd, and J. L. Vigdor (2011). Teacher mobility, school segregation, and
  pay-based policies to level the playing field. Education Finance and Policy 6 (3), 399438.

Dee, T. S. and J. Wyckoff (2015). Incentives, selection, and teacher performance: Evidence
  from impact. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 34 (2), 267297.

Dinerstein, M. and T. D. Smith (2016). Quantifying the supply response of private schools to
  public policies. University of Chicago Working Paper .

Dolton, P. and W. v. d. Klaauw (1999). The turnover of teachers: A competing risks explana-
 tion. Review of Economics and Statistics 81 (3), 543550.

Duflo, E., R. Hanna, and S. P. Rya (2012). Incentives work: Getting teachers to come to school.
 American Economic Review 102 (4), 12411278.

Epple, D. and M. M. Ferreyra (2008). School finance reform: Assessing general equilibrium
  effects. Journal of Public Economics 92 (5-6), 13261351.

Epple, D. and H. Sieg (1999). Estimating equilibrium models of local jurisdictions. Journal of
  Political Economy 107 (4), 645681.

Epple, D. N. and R. Romano (2003). Neighborhood schools, choice, and the distribution of
  educational benefits. In The economics of school choice, pp. 227286. University of Chicago
  Press.

Feng, L. and T. R. Sass (2018). The impact of incentives to recruit and retain teachers in
  "hard-to-staff" subjects. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 37 (1), 112135.

Ferreyra, M. M. (2007). Estimating the effects of private school vouchers in multidistrict
  economies. American Economic Review 97 (3), 789817.

Fox, J. T. (2007). Semiparametric estimation of multinomial discrete-choice models using a
  subset of choices. The RAND Journal of Economics 38 (4), 10021019.

Fox, L. (2016). Playing to teachers' strengths: Using multiple measures of teacher effectiveness
  to improve teacher assignments. Education Finance and Policy 11 (1), 7096.

Fryer, R. G. (2013). Teacher incentives and student achievement: Evidence from New York
  City Public Schools. Journal of Labor Economics 31 (2), 373407.

Gemici, A. (2011). Family migration and labor market outcomes. Royal Holloway, University
 of London Working Paper .

Glewwe, P., N. Ilias, and M. Kremer (2010). Teacher incentives. American Economic Journal:
  Applied Economics 2 (3), 205227.

Graham, B. S., G. Ridder, P. M. Thiemann, and G. Zamarro (2020). Teacher-to-classroom
  assignment and student achievement. NBER Working Paper .

                                               37
Guarino, C. M., A. B. Brown, and A. E. Wyse (2011). Can districts keep good teachers in the
 schools that need them most? Economics of Education Review 30 (5), 962979.

Hanushek, E. A., J. F. Kain, and S. G. Rivkin (2004). Why public schools lose teachers. Journal
  of Human Resources 39 (2), 326354.

Imberman, S. A. and M. F. Lovenheim (2015). Incentive strength and teacher productivity:
  Evidence from a group-based teacher incentive pay system. Review of Economics and Statis-
  tics 97 (2), 364386.

Ingersoll, R. M. (2004). Why do high-poverty schools have difficulty staffing their classrooms
  with qualified teachers?

Jackson, C. K. (2013). Match quality, worker productivity, and worker mobility: Direct evidence
  from teachers. Review of Economics and Statistics 95 (4), 10961116.

Jackson, C. K. (2018). What do test scores miss? the importance of teacher effects on non춗est
  score outcomes. Journal of Political Economy 126 (5), 20722107.

Jackson, C. K., J. E. Rockoff, and D. O. Staiger (2014). Teacher effects and teacher-related
  policies. Annual Review of Economics 6 (1), 801825.

Jacob, B. A. (2007). The challenges of staffing urban schools with effective teachers. The Future
  of Children , 129153.

Kane, T. J. and D. O. Staiger (2008). Estimating teacher impacts on student achievement: An
 experimental evaluation. NBER Working Paper .

Kennan, J. and J. R. Walker (2011). The effect of expected income on individual migration
  decisions. Econometrica 79 (1), 211251.

Lang, K. and M. D. Palacios (2018). The determinants of teachers' occupational choice. NBER
  Working Paper .

Lankford, H., S. Loeb, and J. Wyckoff (2002). Teacher sorting and the plight of urban schools:
  A descriptive analysis. Educational evaluation and policy analysis 24 (1), 3762.

Lavy, V. (2016). What makes an effective teacher? Quasi-experimental evidence. CESifo
  Economic Studies 62 (1), 88125.

Lavy, V. C. (2002). Evaluating the effect of teachers' group performance incentives on pupil
  achievement. Journal of Political Economy 110 (6), 12861317.

Lee, D. and K. I. Wolpin (2006). Intersectoral labor mobility and the growth of the service
  sector. Econometrica 74 (1), 146.

Mansfield, R. K. (2015). Teacher quality and student inequality. Journal of Labor Eco-
 nomics 33 (3), 751788.

Meghir, C., R. Narita, and J.-M. Robin (2015). Wages and informality in developing countries.
 American Economic Review 105 (4), 150946.

                                               38
Mehta, N. (2017). Competition in public school districts: charter school entry, student sorting,
 and school input determination. International Economic Review 58 (4), 10891116.

Moe, T. M. (2013). A primer on America's schools, Volume 486. Hoover Institution Press.

Muralidharan, K. and V. Sundararaman (2011). Teacher performance pay: Experimental evi-
 dence from India. Journal of Political Economy 119 (1), 3977.

Neal, D. et al. (2011). The design of performance pay in education. Handbook of the Economics
  of Education 4, 495550.

Podgursky, M. (2006). Teams versus bureaucracies: Personnel policy, wage-setting, and teacher
  quality in traditional public, charter, and private schools. Education Working Paper Archive .

Rivkin, S. G., E. A. Hanushek, and J. F. Kain (2005). Teachers, schools, and academic achieve-
  ment. Econometrica 73 (2), 417458.

Rockoff, J. E. (2004). The impact of individual teachers on student achievement: Evidence
  from panel data. American Economic Review 94 (2), 247252.

Rothstein, J. (2015). Teacher quality policy when supply matters. American Economic Re-
  view 105 (1), 100130.

Russell, L. (2020). Effects of the federal Teacher Loan Forgiveness Program on school-level
 outcomes. Dartmouth College Working Paper .

Scafidi, B., D. L. Sjoquist, and T. R. Stinebrickner (2007). Race, poverty, and teacher mobility.
  Economics of Education Review 26 (2), 145159.

Steele, J. L., R. J. Murnane, and J. B. Willett (2010). Do financial incentives help low-
  performing schools attract and keep academically talented teachers? Evidence from Califor-
  nia. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 29 (3), 451478.

Stinebrickner, T. R. (2001a). Compensation policies and teacher decisions. International Eco-
  nomic Review 42 (3), 751780.

Stinebrickner, T. R. (2001b). A dynamic model of teacher labor supply. Journal of Labor
  Economics 19 (1), 196230.

Tincani, M. M. (2021). Teacher labor markets, school vouchers and student cognitive achieve-
  ment: Evidence from Chile. Quantitative Economics 12, 1732016.

Wiswall, M. (2007). Licensing and occupational sorting in the market for teachers. Unpublished
 manuscript, Department of Economics, New York University .

Wiswall, M. (2013). The dynamics of teacher quality. Journal of Public Economics 100, 6178.




                                               39
                                                      Appendix

   A1. Optimal Job Offer Decisions

   For a given wage schedule  , district d's job offers od (x, c, d0 | )  {0, 1} solve the following
problem:
d ( ) =

             max         od (x, c, d0 | ) hd (x, c, d0 | ) [xb0 + b1 d c1 + b2 (1 - d ) c2 ] dF (x, c, d0 )   (15)
             {od ()}

      s.t.       od (x, c, d0 | ) hd (x, c, d0 | ) dF (x, c, d0 )  d ,

                 od (x, c, d0 | ) hd (x, c, d0 | ) wd (x, c| ) dF (x, c, d0 )  Md

         od (x, c, d0 | ) = 1 if x1  3 and d0 = d.

Let  (x, c, d )  [xb0 + b1 d c1 + b2 (1 - d ) c2 ] be the teacher's marginal contribution to the
district's payoff. For non-incumbent teachers and untenured teachers, the first-order condition
is
                               (x, c, d ) -  - wd (x, c| ) M = 0,
where  and M are the non-negative multipliers associated with the adjusted capacity and
budget constraints. The capacity (budget) is adjusted by netting out the expected slots (wage
bill) filled by tenured incumbent teachers (x1  3 and d0 = d), for whom od (x, c, d0 ) has to be
1.
    If the district makes an offer to (x, c) and if it is accepted, the district must surrender a
slot from its limited capacity and pay the wage wd (x, c| ), thus inducing the marginal cost
 + wd (x, c| ) M . Balancing between the marginal benefit and the marginal cost, the solution
is characterized by:
                                  
                                   =1      if  (x, c, d ) -  - wd (x, c| ) M > 0
                  od (x, c, d0 | ) = 0     if  (x, c, d ) -  - wd (x, c| ) M < 0 ,           (16)
                                    [0, 1] if  (x, c, d ) -  - wd (x, c| ) M = 0
                                  

and
                                    od (x, c, d0 | ) hd (x, c, d0 | ) dF (x, c, d0 )  d ,                     (17)

                             od (x, c, d0 | ) hd (x, c, d0 | ) wd (x, c| ) dF (x, c, d0 )  Md .               (18)

Notice that d0 affects the optimal job offer decision od (x, c, d0 | ) only up to tenured incumbent
teachers; for other teachers, od (x, c, d0 | ) is independent of d0 , as seen in (16).
     For a given , a district's job offer decision can be derived by the following procedure.
0) Set od (x, c, d0 | ) = 1 for teachers with x1  3 and d0 = d.
1) Guess M , rank other teachers by  (x, c, d ) - wd (x, c| ) M .
2) Give offers to teachers from the top-ranked downwards, until the expected capacity or budget
is filled, i.e., (17) or (18) is binding.

                                                            40
3) Calculate the district's objective value associated with this M , and optimize over M to find
the maximum; od (| ) associated with the optimal M are the optimal job offer decisions under
.

   A2. Model Fit

    Table A1 presents the model fit for Auxiliary Model 3 as specified in Section 4.2. The left
(right) panel shows the coefficients from the OLS of a district's wage policy d1 (d2 ) on the
composition of its incumbent teachers, district characteristics, and the average TC (as defined
by Equation (1)) of teachers in other districts within the same commuting zone. Overall,
model predictions are well within the 95% confidence intervals (CI's) of the data estimates;
model predictions that are outside of these CI's are marked with asterisks.

                        Table A1: Model Fit: OLS of District Wage Schedule
      Auxiliary Model 3                                           d1                        d2
                                                         Data          Model        Data         Model
      Composition of incumbent teachers (d0 = d)
                          a
      Fr(experience 3-4 )                                  0.02          0.01        24.07      6.15
      Fr(experience 5-9)                                   0.01          0.01        7.54      -0.87
      Fr(experience 10-14)                               -0.001         0.004       17.28       1.94
      Fr(experience  15)                                   0.03        -0.0001      -13.48      1.70
      Fr(MA or above)                                     -0.03        -0.005*      -11.41     -2.16
      Average TC                                          -0.62          0.84       532.71     90.31
      Std dev. TC                                         -0.19         -0.06      -468.43    -33.93*
      Average TC among the Tenured                         0.49          0.76      -770.68    -255.40
      District Characteristics
      d                                                 0.01             0.03       17.52         4.16
      budget per teacher                               0.002            0.001*       0.57         0.002
      capacity                                       -0.00001           0.0002      -0.36        -0.03*
      urban                                            -0.03             -0.01      19.64          2.84
      suburban                                         -0.02           -0.002*      -1.26         1.98
      Teachers in nearby districts (zd0 = zd , d0 = d)
      Average TC                                       -1.04            0.01       1290.30       237.39
      # obs.                                            411                          411
      OLS as specified in Aux 3: data vs model, post Act 10.
      a
        The lowest experience of incumbent teachers is 1 to 2 years. Experience=0 teachers have d0 =0.
      * Outside of the 95% confidence interval of the estimates from the data.


   A3. Illustrating the Effect of Resistance Costs R ()

    We examine the effect of reducing the resistance cost, which is for illustration purposes only
because our model is silent on what underlies R () . Column 1 of Table A2 shows the effect
(relative to the baseline flexible-pay equilibrium) of reducing R () to 0.5R (): The overall
efficiency would improve by 0.02%; the fraction of districts rewarding teacher contribution
would increase from 59% to 75%. Column 2 shows the effect (relative to the baseline) of

                                                    41
B1(flat) combined with reducing R () to 0.5R (). For comparison, Column 3 repeats the effect
of B1(flat) under the original R () (i.e., it is the same as Column 1 in Table 11). Relative to
B1(flat) under R (), Column 2 shows that combining B1(flat) with a 50% cut in the resistance
cost would lead to a larger gain in efficiency (0.11% vs. 0.08%), but it would reduce teacher
total contribution in high-d districts.


                          Table A2: The Effect of Reducing R (): An Illustration
 A. Effects on Teacher Contribution
                                                            0.5R() -Base a   B1(flat)&0.5R() -Base b   B1(flat)-Base c
 (%)                                                            Base                  Base                  Base
 M1: TC for all students in the state (efficiency)               0.02                 0.11                   0.08
 M2.1 c1 for all low-achieving students                         -0.03                  0.02                  0.07
 M2.2 c2 for all high-achieving students                         0.07                  0.20                  0.08
 M1: TC in top quintile d districts                             -0.28                 -0.39                  0.02
 M1: TC in above median d districts                             -0.21                 -0.23                  0.10
 B. Teacher Reward and Program Cost
                                                 Base        0.5R ()a        B1(flat) & 0.5R ()
                                                                                                     b
                                                                                                          B1(flat)c
 Districts choosing 2d > 0                       59%            75%                   76%                   59%
 Teachers rewarded by districts (2d T C> 0) 39%                 50%                   51%                   39%
 Avg. reward E(2d T C |2d T C> 0) ($1,000) 1.29                 1.67                  1.92                  1.30
 Teachers receiving state bonuses (B>0)            -              -                   66%                   66%
 Avg. state bonus E(B|B>0) ($1,000)                -              -                   2.36                  2.36
 Program cost ($1,000 per teacher)                 -              -                          1.56
 a
   Flexible-pay equilibrium under 0.5R () vs. the baseline equilibrium.
 b
   Flexible-pay equilibrium under B1(flat) and 0.5R () vs. the baseline equilibrium.
 c
   Flexible-pay equilibrium under B1(flat) and R () vs. the baseline equilibrium.(Column 1 in Table 11)




                                                     42
