                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     ON THE DISTRIBUTION OF ESTATES AND THE DISTRIBUTION OF WEALTH:
                        EVIDENCE FROM THE DEAD

                                       Yonatan Berman
                                       Salvatore Morelli

                                      Working Paper 28546
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28546


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2021




We thank Facundo Alvaredo, Carolyn Fisher, Jonathan Goupille-Lebret, Oleg Kitov, Wojciech
Kopczuk, and Luis Valenzuela for comments and helpful discussions. We also thank Margaret R.
Jones and other participants of the CRIW-NBER conference on "Measuring and Understanding
the Distribution and Intra/Inter-Generational Mobility of Income and Wealth," Washington, D.C.,
March 5-6, 2020, for helpful comments. We acknowledge financial support, at different stages,
from the Agence Nationale de la Recherche (YB), and the Stone Center on Socio-Economic
Inequality at the Graduate Center, CUNY (SM). The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Yonatan Berman and Salvatore Morelli. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
On the Distribution of Estates and the Distribution of Wealth: Evidence from the Dead
Yonatan Berman and Salvatore Morelli
NBER Working Paper No. 28546
March 2021
JEL No. D3,H2,N3

                                          ABSTRACT

Detailed information about the distribution of estates left at death has commonly served as the
basis for the estimation of wealth distributions among the living via the mortality multiplier
method. The application of detailed mortality rates by demographics and other determinants of
mortality is crucial for obtaining an unbiased representation of the wealth distribution of the
living. Yet, in this paper we suggest that a simplified mortality multiplier method, derived using
average mortality rates and aggregate tabulations by estate size, may be sufficient to derive
compelling estimates of wealth concentration. We show that the application of homogeneous
multipliers leads to estimates that are close in level and trend to the concentration of wealth
derived in the existing literature with the detailed mortality multiplier method for a variety of
countries. The use of mortality rates graduated by estate size does not confute this finding. We
also derive the general formal conditions for the similarity between the distributions of wealth of
the living and estates at death and discuss the main caveats. These findings may unlock a wide
array of aggregate estate tabulations, previously thought to be unusable, for estimating historical
trends of wealth concentration.


Yonatan Berman
London Mathematical Laboratory
8 Margravine Gardens
London W6 8RH
United Kingdom
y.berman@lml.org.uk

Salvatore Morelli
University of Roma Tre
Via Ostiense, 163
Dipartimento di Giurisprudenza
Rome, 00154
Italy
salvatore.morelli@uniroma3.it
1    Introduction

The information from estates (the net value of real and financial property of a deceased person)
has commonly served as the basis for the estimation of the distribution of wealth among the living
via the mortality multiplier method since the works by Mallet (1908) and Mallet and Strutt (1915)
for the United Kingdom. The principle of the method is very basic, even if a number of important
conceptual challenges are involved: the set of deceased people are taken as a sample of the living,
and each estate is expanded by a multiplier (weight) equal to the inverse probability of death.
Death, however, does not randomly sample the population. Older individuals, as well as males and
people from poorer backgrounds, have, other things being equal, higher mortality risk. Differential
mortality multipliers should be used to transform the estate data into estimates of wealth-holding.
When demographic multipliers (i.e., related to age and gender) were first employed in the United
Kingdom, it was seen as overcoming a "fatal" objection to the use of estate data with a constant
multiplier. In fact, death occurrence can be seen as an effective sampling of the living population
only under the assumption that death is random within specific cells of observed demographic
strata. For instance, recent work by Saez and Zucman (2016) brought to the fore long-standing
concerns about the mortality multiplier method, suggesting that the failure to appropriately control
for decreasing mortality of wealthy individuals may severely underestimate the top wealth shares
(see also Atkinson and Harrison (1978)).
These considerations point to the fact that the distribution of wealth of the living is conceptually
different from that of decedents. In other words, the application of detailed multipliers (that
is, those taking into account the dimensions that affect the probability of dying) can increase or
decrease the estimates of wealth concentration or inequality, as well as affect their trends over time.
Yet, the distribution of estates at death has recently come under extensive scrutiny. Recent research
has surprisingly highlighted that the application of mortality multipliers may not significantly alter
the distribution of estates as previously thought (Alvaredo, Atkinson and Morelli, 2018). In this
paper, we scrutinize the latter result and implement a simplified multiplier method which makes use
of the average mortality rate in the population. We first provide empirical evidence that the levels
and trends of wealth concentration derived with a homogeneous multiplier are sufficiently close to
those obtained where the detailed mortality multiplier method was applied in existing works. This
exercise was carried out for Australia, France, Italy, Korea, the United Kingdom, and the United
States.
The paper then addresses more formally the following issues: What is the nature of the relationship
between the distribution of estates at death and that of the wealth of the living through the
mortality multiplier method? What are the general conditions under which the concentration of
estates at death provides the same informative content as the concentration of the wealth of the
living? What drives the relevance and the direction of the potential bias created by the lack of
appropriate control for the growing longevity of wealthy individuals?



                                                  1
The formalization of the problem leads to several insights. First, we show that the top wealth shares
are trivially equal to the top estate shares in the special case when homogeneous multipliers are
applied to the population of decedents. Thus, for simplicity, we may refer interchangeably to the
distribution of estates and the distribution of wealth derived with homogeneous multipliers. Second,
we derive the formal conditions for the equality between top wealth and estate shares and then test
the relevance of these conditions using empirical data. In fact, when heterogeneous multipliers are
used (e.g., when mortality rates differ by demographic characteristics), the concentration of wealth
and estates may not be identical.
We begin by considering the case of heterogeneous mortality multipliers differentiated by demo-
graphic characteristics. This is an important starting point as mortality rates by age and gender
generally map most of the variability in mortality observed in a country in a given year. More-
over, these data are available throughout history for many countries. We then consider the case
of heterogeneous multipliers differentiated by socio-economic characteristics. Accounting for this
heterogeneity would create a more accurate picture of mortality multipliers and hence lead to a
more realistic estimation of top wealth shares. We find that the difference between the top wealth
shares obtained with heterogeneous or homogeneous multipliers cannot be large under realistic as-
sumptions and given the observed regularities of the interrelation between the wealth distribution
and demographic characteristics.
After controlling for realistic mortality-wealth gradients, we find that the newly estimated top
wealth share is close to the one derived with the use of the average multiplier among adults.
Although individuals at the top of the estate distribution have higher mortality rates, as they
are relatively older on average, this is counterbalanced by their higher economic status, which
may lead to healthier lives and better medical care, reducing their probability to die, other things
being equal. As a result, the differences between the mortality multipliers at the top of the estate
distribution and the average mortality multiplier of the entire decedent population are small enough
to create only a limited discrepancy between the two top wealth shares estimated with differential
and average multipliers.
We believe these findings may unlock a wide array of aggregate tabulations that were previously
thought to be unreliable and unusable. Information about the distribution of wealth is scarce,
for the recent period and even more so for historical series. Yet, many countries have published
detailed data on the distribution of estate taxes. These are only rarely accompanied by demographic
characteristics such as age and gender. Thus, one cannot apply heterogeneous mortality rates to the
estate tax data. The simplified multiplier method may be implemented in such cases for estimating
historical trends of wealth concentration.
Nonetheless, one important caveat remains. Although, as discussed, changes in the multipliers
do not dramatically affect the shape of the wealth distribution, they may have a large impact
on estimated aggregate variables, such as wealth totals and the ratio between the average estate
and the average wealth among the living. These aggregate variables are usually of lesser interest


                                                 2
if the goal is obtaining information on the distribution of wealth. However, the derivation of
macroeconomic aggregate series are of direct interest to economists (see Piketty and Zucman (2014)
and Alvaredo, Garbinti and Piketty (2017)), and, we argue, may well serve as an indirect test of
the appropriateness of the multipliers used to derive distributional measures. Mortality multipliers
thus matter in various respects.


2         The mortality multiplier method

The mortality multiplier method makes use of the information on the wealth and the demographic
characteristics of decedents reported to the tax authorities for the administration of inheritance
or estate taxes. The decedent population can then be re-weighted and become representative of
the living population to estimate its distribution of wealth. Let's consider the population of NE
decedents and the total value of their estates, WE :

                                                                 NE
                                                        WE =           wE,i .                                               (2.1)
                                                                 i=1

The estates wE,i are arranged in descending order, i.e., wE,i  wE,j , if i < j . The following
relationship holds:
                                                              NE
                                                       W =           mi wE,i ,                                              (2.2)
                                                              i=1
                                                                                          1
where W is the total wealth among the living population, and mi                           pi   is the mortality multiplier
of individual i, equal to the inverse of the individual mortality rate.
The mortality rates vary across a set of socio-demographic characteristics. Therefore each multiplier
represents the number of living individuals who share the same socio-demographic characteristics
of decedent i.
The average mortality multiplier, m
                                  ¯ , is defined as the ratio between the number of the living, N ,
and the number of the deceased, NE . Similarly, we define its inverse, the overall mortality rate, p
                                                                                                   ¯,
as NE /N .1
We are interested in estimating the wealth share of the top quantile 0 < q < 1, where q = 0.1
corresponds to 10%, q = 0.01 corresponds to 1%, etc. It is natural to think that the value of
multipliers will affect the number of decedents that will be needed in order to account for the top
q quantile among the living (i.e., for qN living individuals). For example, if the multipliers of the
rich decedents are high, compared to the average multipliers in the population, fewer decedents
would be required to account for the top q quantile among the living than when the multipliers of
     1                                                                                                             1      NE
         m
         ¯ , the average mortality multiplier, is equal to the arithmetic mean of individual multipliers: m
                                                                                                          ¯ =     NE      i=1 mi   =
N          1                                                                                                  1      N
NE
     =     ¯
           p
             .   p
                 ¯, the overall mortality rate, is the arithmetic mean of mortality rates among the living   (N      j =1 pi ).




                                                                 3
the rich decedents are lower. This number is represented by the index Iq such that2

                                                        Iq
                                                              mi = qN .                                    (2.3)
                                                       i=1

This way we can define the top q wealth share as

                                                                      Iq
                                                          W           i=1 mi wE,i
                                              (1 - Lq )       =                      .                     (2.4)
                                                                        W


3        The concentration of wealth in a simplified mortality multiplier
         method: heterogeneous vs. average multipliers

The application of the full mortality multiplier method is conditioned on the availability of detailed
mortality data as well as detailed estate data by demographic characteristics. However, such
information may not be readily available for estate tabulations. It may not be differentiated by
demographic characteristics, or detailed mortality data may not exist for a particular country or
year.
Work by Alvaredo, Atkinson and Morelli (2018) has shown that the concentration of estates at
death and the derived concentration of wealth at the top following the application of mortality
multipliers (based on gender, age, social class differentials, or wealth differentials) are very close
to one another. In their words, "the application of mortality multipliers does not alter the picture
concerning the distribution of the wealth of the living, as commonly believed." As described by
Cowell (1978), referring to Atkinson and Harrison (1978), "though the particular refinement of
mortality multiplier that is used considerably affects the calculation of total wealth, the resultant
effect on top wealth shares is not all that great." An implicit recognition of this similarity can
be also found in Piketty, Postel-Vinay and Rosenthal (2006) and Moriguchi and Saez (2008), who
treat the distribution of estates, estimated using estate tax records, as a de facto equivalent to the
distribution of wealth.
Thus, an alternative and simplified solution when detailed mortality data are unavailable would be
to rely on average mortality rates, assuming mi = m
                                                  ¯ . Under this working assumption, the top q
quantile among decedents represents the top q quantile (i.e., Iq = qNE ), and the top wealth shares
will take the following form
                                                                        qNE
                                                                              wE,i
                                              (1 - Lq )W
                                                       avg = m
                                                             ¯          i=1
                                                                                     .                     (3.1)
                                                                          W
We compare top wealth share series for several countries for which the full mortality multiplier
method was performed in the existing literature, using heterogeneous multipliers, to series derived
    2                                                                                    Iq
        If there is no equality, Iq is defined as the smallest index such that           i=1   mi > qN .




                                                                  4
using the simplified mortality multiplier method, i.e., using average mortality rates.3 Importantly,
noting that (1 - Lq )W
                     avg is formally equivalent to the top q estate share, this exercise would be
equivalent to comparing wealth and estate top shares as done in Alvaredo, Atkinson and Morelli
(2018).4
Figure 1 presents these results for Australia, France, Italy, the Republic of Korea (South Korea),
the United Kingdom, and the United States. For each country, the evolution of top wealth shares
reported in the literature is compared to estimates of top wealth shares derived in this paper using
the average mortality multiplier. The empirical exercise highlights that in all countries the top
wealth shares estimated with the simplified mortality multiplier method strongly co-move with
those reported in the literature, and they are generally similar in level. The largest differences
appear in the cases of the United States and South Korea.
The quality and features of estate data in each of these countries differ substantially (see Ap-
pendix A). For example, in Italy the data cover roughly 60% of decedents every year; however, only
tabulations are publicly available. In France the data cover a much smaller share (about 10%) of
the decedent population, yet micro data are available. In the United States, only a tiny share of the
decedent population is covered (roughly 0.2% in recent years) and public aggregate tabulations as
well as detailed micro data are available to researchers. Despite the specific differences between the
data sources, the application of the mortality multiplier method is similar and requires the same
information--the values of estates at the top of the estate distribution (or equivalent tabulations),
the corresponding mortality multipliers at the top of the estate distribution, and the total personal
wealth.
Different works make use of different adjustments to the data to allow for underreporting, tax
avoidance and evasion. In the United States, Kopczuk and Saez (2004) include estimates of wealth
held in trusts and the cash surrender value of pensions and life insurance assets. In France, Garbinti,
Goupille-Lebret and Piketty (2020) impute missing net wealth to provide consistency with official
national balance sheet data for the household sector. Other works, such as Acciari, Alvaredo and
Morelli (2020) for Italy, provide a full array of adjusted, unadjusted, and imputed series. As we are
able to make use of the unadjusted series which is derived from the pure application of mortality
multipliers here, we primarily use the case of Italy for our empirical analysis in the following
sections.
To gain a better understanding of how sensitive the results can be to the choice of multipliers, we
use equations Eq. (2.4) and Eq. (3.1) and derive the conditions for the equality of the top wealth
   3
      See Appendix B for a discussion of the different possible choices of average multiplier and the effect this has on
estimates of wealth concentration. We continue our analysis using m   ¯ = N/NE as explained above, where N will be
taken as the living adult population and NE as the number of adult decedents.
    4
      When mi = m ¯ , then W = N    E
                                  i=1 mi wE,i = m ¯ N   E
                                                      i=1 wE,i = mW
                                                                  ¯ E . We obtain
                                               Iq                  qNE
                                                  mi wE,i   m
                                                            ¯         wE,i
                             (1 - Lq )W
                                      avg =
                                               i=1
                                                          =        i=1
                                                                           = (1 - Lq )E .                          (3.2)
                                                  W         m
                                                            ¯       WE
See also Appendix C for more details.



                                                           5
                                            Australia - top 1%                                                                                   France - top 1%
                          30                                                                                              30
                                   Katic & Leigh (2016)
Top 1% wealth share (%)




                                                                                              Top 1% wealth share (%)
                          25       Average multiplier                                                                     25

                          20                                                                                              20

                          15                                                                                              15

                          10                                                                                              10

                          5                                                                                               5          Garbinti, Goupille-Lebret & Piketty (2018)
                                                                                                                                     Average multiplier
                          0                                                                                               0
                          1950   1955     1960       1965      1970      1975          1980                               1980           1985            1990          1995           2000
                                                    Year                                                                                                 Year

                                               Italy - top 1%                                                                                    Korea - top 1%
                          30                                                                                              50
                                   Acciari, Alvaredo & Morelli (2020)
Top 1% wealth share (%)




                                                                                              Top 1% wealth share (%)
                          25       Average multiplier
                                                                                                                          40

                          20
                                                                                                                          30
                          15
                                                                                                                          20
                          10

                                                                                                                          10
                          5                                                                                                          Kim (2018)
                                                                                                                                     Average multiplier
                          0                                                                                               0
                          1990   1995     2000       2005      2010      2015          2020                               2000    2002    2004        2006   2008     2010    2012    2014
                                                    Year                                                                                                 Year

                                        United Kingdom - top 1%                                                                            United States - top 0.1%
                          70                                                                                              20
                                                 Alvaredo, Atkinson & Morelli (2018)
                                                                                              Top 0.1% wealth share (%)




                          60
Top 1% wealth share (%)




                                                 Average multiplier
                                                                                                                          15
                          50

                          40
                                                                                                                          10
                          30

                          20
                                                                                                                          5
                          10                                                                                                         Saez & Zucman (2019)
                                                                                                                                     Average multiplier
                          0                                                                                               0
                          1920    1940         1960          1980         2000                                            1985     1990     1995         2000       2005     2010     2015
                                                    Year                                                                                                 Year

Figure 1: The top wealth shares in Australia, France, Italy, South Korea, the United Kingdom,
and the United States. Tabulations and and the top wealth shares were taken from Katic and
Leigh (2016), Garbinti, Goupille-Lebret and Piketty (2020), Acciari, Alvaredo and Morelli (2020),
Kim (2018), Alvaredo, Atkinson and Morelli (2018), and Saez and Zucman (2019), respectively.
The estimated top wealth shares were produced using the mortality multiplier method assuming
the average multiplier for all observed decedents. The mortality data were taken from The Human
Mortality Database (2018).

shares with the average multiplier and with heterogeneous multipliers:

                                                 Iq                           qNE                                         Iq                    qNE
                                                 i=1 mi wE,i                           wE,i                                     mi
                                                                    =m
                                                                     ¯        i=1
                                                                                                                                   wE,i =             wE,i , *                       (3.3)
                                                      W                          W                                              m
                                                                                                                                ¯
                                                                                              6                           i=1                   i=1
and the equality is trivially satisfied if multipliers do not vary across the population (i.e., mi = m
                                                                                                     ¯ ).
We define
                                                   qNE                     Iq
                                                   i=1   wE,i              i=1 wE,i
                                 w
                                 ¯qNE =                         ; w
                                                                  ¯ Iq =                             (3.4)
                                                   qNE                      Iq
and
                                                          Iq
                                  ¯qNE - w
                                  w      ¯ Iq =              Cov [mi , wE,i ] ,                      (3.5)
                                                         mqN
                                                         ¯ E
                           1    Iq            1      Iq
where Cov [mi , wE,i ] =   Iq   i=1   mi -    Iq     j =1 mj      wE,i - w
                                                                         ¯Iq .
Now, rearranging terms, it is possible to explicitly denote the difference between the top wealth
shares and obtain via the same notation and using the same expansion:

                                                  mqN
                                                  ¯ E                    Iq
                (1 - Lq )W - (1 - Lq )W
                                      avg =               w¯ Iq - w
                                                                  ¯qNE +    Cov [mi , wE,i ]
                                                    W                    W                           (3.6)
                                                  Iq
                                                =    m¯ Iq w¯ Iq - w
                                                                   ¯qNE + Cov [mi , wE,i ] ,
                                                  W
                                                                             q        I
where m
      ¯ Iq is the average multiplier at the top of the estate distribution (i=1 mi /Iq ).
The right-hand side of Eq. (3.6) shows that the difference between top wealth shares depends on
an average level effect of the multipliers, m    ¯ Iq - w
                                            ¯ Iq w      ¯qNE , and on the covariance, Cov [mi , wE,i ].
The average level effect is such that the closer the average of the multipliers at the top is to the
                                                                                             ¯Iq - w
average multiplier, the closer the index Iq is to qNE , and hence, the closer the difference w     ¯qNE
would be to zero, leading to a smaller difference between the two top wealth shares estimated with
heterogeneous and homogeneous multipliers.
In practice, the average multiplier at the top tends to be lower than m
                                                                      ¯ . This is a straightforward
result of life cycle effects--mortality is predominantly determined by age, and older people tend
to be richer, on average (Shorrocks, 1975; Modigliani, 1986). Therefore, the top of the estate
distribution is likely to be composed of people that are older than the average age among the adult
population. In order to account for the top qN living individuals, we would then need more than
                                      N
qNE decedents (note that m
                         ¯ =          NE ).                                   ¯ Iq - w
                                              For this reason, the difference w      ¯qNE would tend to be
negative, and using the average multiplier would lead to overestimation of the top wealth shares
when compared to heterogeneous demographic multipliers.
The covariance (Cov [mi , wE,i ]) also tends to be negative in practice, but it is generally small.
Mortality rates increase exponentially with age above the age of 40 (see Appendix D). Wealth
increases with age more weakly and the variability of age within wealth groups is large. Thus, the
covariance between estates and multipliers at the top of the estate distribution is negative but close
to zero, which may lead to a similarity between the top wealth shares derived above. Figure 2
illustrates this point for France in different years, using a sample of the richest decedents obtained
from the estate tax records. It shows the large variability in age within top wealth groups, and the
weak dependence of age on wealth rank at the top of the estate distribution.



                                                            7
                                       1984                                                                 1987
      100                                                                  100


       80                                                                   80


       60                                                                   60
Age




                                                                     Age
       40                                                                   40


       20                                                                   20
                                2
                Slope: 0.0023, R : 0.016                                             Slope: 0.002, R 2 : 0.013
        0                                                                    0
            0          500      1000        1500   2000   2500                   0          500        1000       1500   2000   2500
                                    Wealth rank                                                         Wealth rank


                                       1994                                                                 2000
      100                                                                  100


       80                                                                   80


       60                                                                   60
Age




                                                                     Age




       40                                                                   40


       20                                                                   20
                                2
                Slope: 0.0017, R : 0.0091                                            Slope: 0.0015, R2 : 0.0068
        0                                                                    0
            0          500      1000        1500   2000   2500                   0          500        1000       1500   2000   2500
                                    Wealth rank                                                         Wealth rank

Figure 2: The age of a sample of the richest decedents in France according to their wealth rank (1
­ least wealthy). The slope and R2 are given for a linear fit of the data in each year.


We note that a similar derivation of the comparison between top wealth shares (Eq. (3.6)) can
be used to compare the coefficient of variation (CV) of the wealth distribution with homogeneous
and heterogeneous multipliers (see Appendix E). It clarifies the intuition for the result obtained
for top shares above. In particular, it shows that the difference between the CV of wealth and
estates is mainly driven by the multipliers at the top of the estate distribution. This supports the
observation that a similarity between the multiplier at the top of the estate distribution and the
average mortality multiplier would result in a similarity between the estimated concentration of
wealth and the concentration of estates.




                                                                 8
3.1    Accounting for multipliers graduated by wealth levels

Mortality rates are clearly influenced by demographic factors, such as gender and age. However,
social and economic conditions can also exert a substantial influence on the longevity of individuals
(Chetty et al., 2016). In particular, higher wealth levels may be systematically associated with lower
mortality rates, over and above the effect of demographics and other factors. Failure to account
for this additional source of heterogeneity in mortality rates may lead to systematic biases in the
application of the mortality multiplier method (Atkinson and Harrison, 1978; Saez and Zucman,
2016, 2019). To account for the contribution of wealth to lower mortality over and above the
effect of age, we use Italian estate tabulations from Acciari, Alvaredo and Morelli (2020) and apply
mortality rate adjustment factors for wealth used by Garbinti, Goupille-Lebret and Piketty (2020).
The formalization described by equation Eq. (3.6) is well suited to take this issue into account and
explain the main findings. Accounting for the mortality-wealth gradient does, indeed, increase the
covariance, other things being equal, possibly creating a positive association between estate values
and mortality multipliers at the top of the estate distribution. At the same time, the gradient
increases the average multiplier at the top, bringing it closer to the average mortality multiplier,
m                                                ¯ Iq - w
¯ . This would, in turn, increase the difference w      ¯qNE , i.e., make it closer to zero. We should
also expect, therefore, that the top wealth shares derived via wealth-gradient multipliers will be
higher than those derived through demographic multipliers alone.
The results are presented in Figure 3, where the derived series of top wealth shares using a mortality-
wealth gradient is compared to those derived with the average multiplier as well as heterogeneous
multipliers by demographic characteristics. The results show that a steep mortality-wealth gradient
can have a salient effect on the top wealth shares.5
Nevertheless, the wealth effect on mortality can counterbalance the small negative correlation
between multipliers and estates at the top. Combined, the wealth and age effects on mortality
may lead to correlation that is very close to 0. If, indeed, the decreasing mortality of wealthy
individuals is not accounted for, the correlation would be underestimated. At the same time,
decreasing mortality by wealth acts to increase the life expectancy of older, wealthy individuals.
This, in turn, leads to the decrease of the covariance between multipliers and estates at the top.
For these reasons, a large positive covariance between estates and multipliers at the top, which will
lead to large positive differences between the top wealth shares with and without heterogeneous
multipliers, is implausible.
More surprisingly, Figure 3 shows that the top wealth series derived using the simplified mortality
multiplier method using average multipliers provides very similar results to those obtained by
applying detailed multipliers by demographic and wealth status. The wealth gradient of mortality
rates reduces the mortality rates of the richest individuals, increasing multipliers. This means
that wealth provides an "age premium" to older rich individuals. In turn, this leads to mortality
   5
    We note that it is possible that the mortality-wealth gradient described in Garbinti, Goupille-Lebret and Piketty
(2020) may not be representative of Italy.


                                                         9
                                            30



                                            25



                  Top 1% wealth share (%)
                                            20



                                            15



                                            10



                                            5                     Baseline (demographic multipliers)
                                                                  Baseline + wealth gradient
                                                                  Average multiplier
                                            0
                                            1990   1995   2000   2005       2010        2015           2020
                                                                 Year

Figure 3: The top 1% wealth shares in Italy estimated using different multiplier choices: hetero-
geneous demographic multipliers (blue); wealth-adjusted heterogeneous demographic multipliers
(gray); average (homogeneous) multiplier (black).


multipliers at the top of the estate distribution that are close to the average multiplier in the overall
adult population.


4    Additional effects of using average multiplier and graduated
     multipliers

The mortality multiplier method, and, in particular, the application of a mortality-wealth gradient
to the data, may give rise to several problems, which are not commonly taken into account. The
mortality-wealth gradient leads to mortality multipliers that are higher than without it among
the wealthiest individuals. This makes the resulting average wealth among the living higher than
without applying the gradient. If the gradient applied is too steep, µ, the ratio between the average
wealth at death to the average wealth among the living, will be less than 1. µ < 1 is a very unlikely
case, implying that the decedents are poorer, on average, than the living. This is possible, in
theory, if the rich are very unlikely to die, but that is an extreme case, undocumented so far (see,
for example, Alvaredo, Garbinti and Piketty (2017); Alvaredo, Atkinson and Morelli (2018)). An
additional potential problem is an overestimation of identified wealth. This may be an issue if the
coverage of the data is relatively high. If the coverage is particularly low, e.g., in France or in the
United States, the problem may be less visible but might still exist and go unnoticed.



                                                                 10
Figure 4 demonstrates these issues for Italy. It shows the evolution of various variables under
the mortality multiplier method with different multiplier choices. In particular, it shows that the
mortality-wealth gradient used might be too steep in the Italian case, as it implies that µ is less
than 1 for almost the entire period. In addition, when including the mortality-wealth gradient (as
well as when using the average multiplier) it is possible for the identified wealth to be higher than
the total personal wealth from the national accounts. This is possible if the unobserved population
has negative net wealth. Yet, this is also a rather extreme case, which requires verifying the validity
of the mortality-wealth gradient applied. In particular, this may serve as a warning sign.
                                     1.6                                                                                                             4
                                               Baseline (demographic multipliers)                                                                             Baseline (demographic multipliers)
                                               Baseline + wealth gradient                                                                           3.5       Baseline + wealth gradient
                                     1.4       Average multiplier                                                                                             Average multiplier
                                                                                                                                                     3




                                                                                                        I q / q NE
                                     1.2                                                                                                            2.5

                                      1                                                                                                              2

                                                                                                                                                    1.5
                                     0.8
                                                                                                                                                     1

                                     0.6                                                                                                            0.5
                                      1990   1995      2000       2005        2010   2015   2020                                                     1990   1995      2000       2005        2010   2015   2020
                                                                  Year                                                                                                           Year
                                                                                                         Share of total personal wealth in NA (%)




                                     75                                                                                                             140
Share of identified population (%)




                                               Baseline (demographic multipliers)                                                                             Baseline (demographic multipliers)
                                     70        Baseline + wealth gradient                                                                                     Baseline + wealth gradient
                                               Average multiplier                                                                                   120       Average multiplier

                                     65
                                                                                                                                                    100
                                     60
                                                                                                                                                    80
                                     55

                                                                                                                                                    60
                                     50

                                     45                                                                                                             40
                                      1990   1995      2000       2005        2010   2015   2020                                                     1990   1995      2000       2005        2010   2015   2020
                                                                  Year                                                                                                           Year

Figure 4: The evolution of various variables in Italy using different multiplier choices. Top left:
                Iq
µ; Top right: qN  E
                    ; Bottom left: The share of identified population from total population; Bottom
right: The identified wealth as share of total personal wealth from the national accounts. Mortality
data are taken from The Human Mortality Database (2018), the estate tabulations and demographic
data as well as the total personal wealth are taken from Acciari, Alvaredo and Morelli (2020). The
mortality-wealth gradients used were those used for France in Garbinti, Goupille-Lebret and Piketty
(2020).




                                                                                                   11
5    Conclusion

By clarifying the functioning of the mortality multiplier method and its structural limitations, this
paper contributes to the evolving literature on wealth distribution estimation as well as on the
important ongoing methodological debate surrounding the mortality multiplier method itself.
On the one hand, the validation of the empirical finding that top estate and wealth shares co-move
and have similar levels (Alvaredo, Atkinson and Morelli, 2018) can be crucial for the expansion
of severely sparse data series on wealth distribution, both across countries and over time. Indeed,
in the case of the United Kingdom, the close relationship between estate distribution and wealth
distribution provides a strong measurement benchmark in order to extend the wealth concentration
series back in time to 1895 and to fill in missing years. Similarly, construction of long series can
become possible in other countries when the relevant information for the application of the mortality
multiplier (i.e., detailed estate tabulations or detailed mortality rates) method cannot be retrieved.
On the other hand, the answers to the main questions raised in this paper are crucial for the relia-
bility of the mortality multiplier method, which remains one of the few viable benchmark methods
to estimate wealth concentration, particularly in a historical perspective. This is important, as the
use of different methodologies and sources of data for the estimation of wealth distribution remains
essential for illuminating the limitations of each data source and methodology and to inform us
about the levels and trends of wealth concentration. Moreover, and as a matter of fact, the mortal-
ity multiplier method is often the only one available to yield estimates of wealth distribution and
concentration for specific countries or time periods.
We specifically discuss the relevance of unobserved heterogeneity in mortality rates, such as the
potential wealth effect on mortality that is operating over and above the effect of demographic
characteristics. Accounting for a mortality-wealth gradient would create a more accurate picture
of mortality multipliers and hence lead to a more realistic estimation of top wealth shares. We
find that the difference between the top wealth shares obtained with or without mortality-wealth
gradients cannot be large under realistic assumptions and given the observed regularities of the
interrelation between the wealth distribution and demographic characteristics. While the mortality-
wealth gradient can be steep for younger age groups, it is not as steep for older age groups, as
economic status does not counterbalance the biological limitations to human longevity. Therefore,
adjusting the multipliers at the top of the distribution and taking into account the mortality-wealth
gradient is muted by the fact that relatively older people are more represented among the richest
decedents. Also, within the top of the estate distribution, there is only a weak dependence of age
on wealth rank. As a result, the multipliers at the top may continue to be poorly correlated with
wealth ranks, and may continue to be close to the average multiplier of the overall population.
This leads to the important finding that taking into account both demographic multipliers and
mortality-wealth gradient yields very similar top wealth shares to those obtained using the average
multiplier. Although individuals at the top of the estate distribution have higher mortality rates


                                                 12
(as they are relatively older on average), this is counterbalanced by their higher economic status,
which may lead to healthier lives and better medical care, reducing their probability to die, other
things being equal. As a result, the differences between the mortality multipliers at the top of
the estate distribution to the average mortality multiplier of the entire decedent population are
small enough to create only a limited discrepancy between the two top wealth shares estimated
with refined multipliers and the average multiplier. These results are of particular relevance for the
estimation of historical series of wealth concentration. They would enable the use of a wide array
of aggregate estate tabulations that were previously thought to be unreliable and unusable.
We end with an important practical remark. Information about the wealth gradient of mortality
rates is scarce, and we know little about how this gradient has evolved over time. In only a
few cases, such as France and the United States during the last several decades, do we have some
information about the income gradient of mortality and its trend. Hence, in practice, the application
of a mortality-wealth gradient is surrounded with considerable uncertainty. Thus, applying such
gradients may not necessarily be satisfactory. At the same time, applying an average multiplier to
the entire decedent population, as we suggest, can also create a similar problem. For these reasons
we highlight the need to be careful and transparent when using the mortality multiplier method
and to make use of as much data as possible for consistency. Applying the population average
multiplier to all decedents may indeed provide reliable estimates of top wealth shares, especially in
a historical context. Yet, they still need to be taken with the necessary caution. We also note that
the discussion in this paper presupposes that the information provided by the value of estates at
death is valid. In some cases it could be argued that the estates recorded by the tax administration
are particularly imperfect, due to high level of exemptions, evasion, or through the effects of tax
planning. In such cases the concerns about the effect of mortality multipliers become less crucial
compared to the inaccuracy of observed estates in describing the personal wealth of decedents.
However, these discussions exceed the scope of this paper.


References
Acciari, Paolo, Facundo Alvaredo, and Salvatore Morelli. 2020. "The Concentration of
  Personal Wealth in Italy: 1995­2016." Mimeo.

Alvaredo, Facundo, Anthony B. Atkinson, and Salvatore Morelli. 2018. "Top Wealth
  Shares in the UK Over More Than a Century." Journal of Public Economics, 162: 26­47.

Alvaredo, Facundo, Bertrand Garbinti, and Thomas Piketty. 2017. "On The Share of
  Inheritance in Aggregate Wealth: Europe and the USA, 1900­2010." Economica, 84(334): 239­
  260.

Atkinson, Anthony B., and Allan J. Harrison. 1978. Distribution of Personal Wealth in
  Britain. Cambridge University Press.


                                                 13
Chetty, Raj, Michael Stepner, Sarah Abraham, Shelby Lin, Benjamin Scuderi,
  Nicholas Turner, Augustin Bergeron, and Cutler David. 2016. "The Association Between
  Income and Life Expectancy in the United States, 2001­2014." JAMA, 315(16): 1750­1766.

Cowell, Frank A. 1978. "Review: Distribution of Personal Wealth in Britain by A. B. Atkinson,
  A. J. Harrison (1978)." The Economic Journal, 88(351): 581­583.

Garbinti, Bertrand, Jonathan Goupille-Lebret, and Thomas Piketty. 2020. "Accounting
  for Wealth Inequality Dynamics: Methods, Estimates and Simulations for France." Journal of
  the European Economic Association. Forthcoming.

Katic, Pamela, and Andrew Leigh. 2016. "Top Wealth Shares in Australia 1915­2012." Review
  of Income and Wealth, 62(2): 209­222.

Kim, Nak N. 2018. "Wealth Inequality in Korea, 2000­2013: Evidence from Inheritance Tax
  Statistics." Journal of the Korean Welfare State and Social Policy, 2(1): 26­57.

Kopczuk, Wojciech, and Emmanuel Saez. 2004. "Top Wealth Shares in the United States,
  1916­2000: Evidence from Estate Tax Returns." National Tax Journal, 57(2): 445­488.

Mallet, Bernard. 1908. "A Method of Estimating Capital Wealth from the Estate Duty Statis-
  tics." Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, 71(1): 65­101.

Mallet, Bernard, and H. C. Strutt. 1915. "The Multiplier and Capital Wealth." Journal of
  the Royal Statistical Society, 78(4): 555­599.

Modigliani, Franco. 1986. "Life Cycle, Individual Thrift, and the Wealth of Nations." Science,
  234(4777): 704­712.

Moriguchi, Chiaki, and Emmanuel Saez. 2008. "The Evolution of Income Concentration
  in Japan, 1886­2005: Evidence from Income Tax Statistics." The Review of Economics and
  Statistics, 90(4): 713­734.

Piketty, Thomas, and Gabriel Zucman. 2014. "Capital is Back: Wealth-Income Ratios in Rich
  Countries, 1700­2010." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(3): 1255­1310.

Piketty, Thomas, Gilles Postel-Vinay, and Jean-Laurent Rosenthal. 2006. "Wealth Con-
  centration in a Developing Economy: Paris and France, 1807­1994." American Economic Review,
  96(1): 236­256.

Saez, Emmanuel, and Gabriel Zucman. 2016. "Wealth Inequality in the United States since
  1913: Evidence from Capitalized Income Tax Data." The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  131(2): 519­578.

Saez, Emmanuel, and Gabriel Zucman. 2019. "Progressive Wealth Taxation." Brookings Pa-
  pers on Economic Activity.

                                                   14
Shorrocks, Anthony F. 1975. "The Age-Wealth Relationship: A Cross-Section and Cohort Anal-
  ysis." The Review of Economics and Statistics, 57(2): 155­163.

The Human Mortality Database. 2018. http://www.mortality.org/, Accessed: 01/25/2018.




                                              15
A     Estate data coverage

Estate data usually represent only a share of the decedent population, with substantial heterogeneity
across countries. Figure 5 shows the share of the decedent population represented in the data in
the group of countries analyzed in Figure 1.

                                                               100
                                                                       Australia
                 Share of identified decedent population (%)


                                                                90     France
                                                                       Italy
                                                                80     Korea
                                                                       United Kingdom
                                                                70     United States

                                                                60

                                                                50

                                                                40

                                                                30

                                                                20

                                                                10

                                                                0
                                                                1920   1940         1960          1980   2000   2020
                                                                                           Year

Figure 5: The share of decedents covered in the estate data in Australia, France, Italy, Korea,
the United Kingdom, and the United States. The data were taken from Katic and Leigh (2016),
Garbinti, Goupille-Lebret and Piketty (2020), Acciari, Alvaredo and Morelli (2020), Kim (2018),
Alvaredo, Atkinson and Morelli (2018), and Saez and Zucman (2016), respectively, combined with
mortality data from The Human Mortality Database (2018).




                                                                                        16
B     Which homogeneous multiplier?

For implementing the simplified mortality multiplier method one has to choose the homogeneous
multiplier to be applied. The choice in the average multiplier of the adult population, m
                                                                                        ¯ , is only
one possible choice. In the absence of detailed demographic data for the decedents included in the
estate tax records, it is possible to use an approximation for their mortality multiplier to estimate
the top wealth shares. Even when demographic data are available, homogeneous multipliers can
simplify the estimation process. We list below several possible choices of a homogeneous multiplier
and present the differences between them, and demonstrate their corresponding resulting top wealth
shares in the case of Italy:

    · m1 : A simple and natural choice of such a multiplier is the average multiplier m
                                                                                      ¯ , which is the
      ratio between the population size of the living and the dead. Considering such a multiplier
      makes an implicit assumption that the mortality rate of the observed decedents is similar to
      that of the unobserved decedents.

    · m2 : If detailed demographic data are available, it is possible to take the arithmetic average of
      the individual multiplier mi . m2 is expected to be lower than m1 , since the average multiplier
      among the observed decedents tends to be lower than the average multiplier; however, this is
      not always the case.

    · m3 : m2 changes the identified wealth compared to the case in which the individual multi-
                                                         N
                                                        i E mi NE
      plier mi is considered, because N E
                                      i mi wE,i =        NE i wE,i .      Another possible choice of
      homogeneous multiplier would be a multiplier that is consistent with the identified wealth:
              NE
             i mi wE,i
      m3 =    NE         .
              i wE,i

    · m4 : If no demographic data are available, but mortality data are, it is possible to assume that
      the representative multiplier of the observed decedents is the multiplier that corresponds to
      an individual whose age is the average age at death, based on the mortality data. Typically,
      since this age is higher than the average age of decedents in the tax records, this multiplier
      will be substantially lower than the other choices of multiplier.

    · m5 : The same m2 but after adding a mortality-wealth gradient to the demographic data to
      obtain heterogeneous individual multipliers.

The evolution of these multipliers over time and the resulting top 1% wealth shares are presented
in Figure 6. The choice of a homogeneous multiplier matters for the estimated top shares. Yet
almost all the options considered lead to levels of inequality that closely follow the results when
heterogeneous multipliers are used.
The major exception is m4 , the multiplier that corresponds to the average age of decedents in
a given year. m4 is much lower than the other suggested choices, as it effectively ignores the


                                                  17
             100                                                                                       35
                                                                                                                Baseline - only demographic multipliers
              90                                                                                                Baseline + wealth gradient
                                                                                                       30       m1
                                                                                                                m2
              80
                                                                                                                m3




                                                                             Top 1% wealth share (%)
                                                                                                       25       m4
              70
                                                                                                                m5

              60
Multiplier




                                                                                                       20
              50
                                                                                                       15
              40

              30                                                                                       10
                            m1
              20            m2
                            m3                                                                         5
              10            m4
                            m5
              0                                                                                        0
              1990       1995    2000    2005    2010    2015    2020                                  1990   1995       2000         2005          2010         2015   2020
                                         Year                                                                                         Year

Figure 6: Homogeneous mortality multipliers in Italy 1995­2016. Mortality data were taken from
The Human Mortality Database (2018), and the estate tabulations and demographic data were
taken from Acciari, Alvaredo and Morelli (2020). The mortality-wealth gradients used were those
used for France in Garbinti, Goupille-Lebret and Piketty (2020). The homogeneous multipliers
used are: m1 --the average multiplier m
                                      ¯ , the ratio between the population size of the living and
                                                                                                                                               NE
                                                                                                                                             i       mi wE,i
the dead; m2 --the arithmetic average of the individual multiplier mi ; m3 =                                                                      NE             ; m4 --the
                                                                                                                                               i          wE,i
multiplier that corresponds to an individual whose age is the average age at death, based on the
mortality data; m5 ­ the same m2 but after adding a mortality-wealth gradient to the demographic
data.


presence of younger decedents among the wealthiest decedents. As seen previously for France
in Figure 2, top wealth groups include a significant presence of younger individuals. Since mortality
rates are approximately exponential in age, the impact of these younger individuals on the most
representative multiplier for decedents is, in fact, substantial.6




              6
                  This is a direct implication of Jensen's inequality for the exponential function:

                                                            Exp [E [a]] < E [Exp [a]] ,                                                                                 (B.1)

where a is decedent age. Because the multipliers depend exponentially on age, the multiplier corresponding to the
average age at death is much lower than the average multiplier. Had the dependence of the mortality rate on age
been linear, for example, the two quantities would have been equal.


                                                                        18
C     The concentration of estates at the top

As shown by Alvaredo, Atkinson and Morelli (2018), relying on unadjusted tax data on estate value
can also be informative about the concentration of wealth at the top. To show that, we first need
to define the top estate share of quantile q

                                                               qNE
                                                                     wE,i
                                       (1 - Lq )E =            i=1
                                                                            .                      (C.1)
                                                                WE

This requires summing the estates of the richest qNE decedents and estimating the total value of
estates of the full decedent population, WE . However, the estimation of the latter is not a trivial
exercise. It requires the estimation of the total value of unobserved estates of the deceased excluded
                       exc . This creates uncertainty in the top estate share estimates.
from the tax records, WE
                         exc can be done using the total wealth of the living population not
In practice, estimating WE
                                                                                    NE
represented by the re-weighted tax records (excluded population), N exc = N -       i=1 mi .   The latter
can be directly estimated from external sources of data, such as surveys or other administrative
records, if the general identity of the excluded population could be inferred.
The total identified wealth is known through the multipliers and observed estate values:
                                                         tax
                                                        NE
                                         W iden =              mi wE,i .                           (C.2)
                                                         i=1

In the absence of heterogeneous multipliers this becomes
                                                  tax
                                                 NE
                                      iden                         iden
                                  W          =          mw
                                                        ¯ E,i = mW
                                                                ¯ E     .                          (C.3)
                                                 i=1

The total excluded wealth is then
                                         W exc = W - W iden .                                      (C.4)

At the same time
                                             W exc = m
                                                     ¯ exc WE
                                                            exc
                                                                ,                                  (C.5)

      ¯ exc is the average multiplier of the excluded decedents. m
where m                                                          ¯ exc can be estimated depending
on how refined the demographic data and mortality data available are. If mortality by age and
gender is available, it is possible to define a different multiplier for the excluded decedents in each
age and gender:
                                                            exc
                                                          Na,g
                                              mexc
                                               a,g =       exc ,                                   (C.6)
                                                          NE,a,g
       exc is the number of living with age a and gender g not observed by the tax records, and
where Na,g
 exc is the number of decedents with age a and gender g not observed by the tax records. In this
NE,a,g


                                                         19
     ¯ exc would be the average of all multipliers mexc
case m                                              a,g . Alternatively, in the absence of such data,
¯ exc can be defined as the ratio between the excluded living population and the excluded decedent
m
population:
                                                    N exc
                                        ¯ exc =
                                        m                 tax .                                (C.7)
                                                  NE - NE
                                                                                     exc . This leads
It is clear that different sets of multipliers would lead to different estimates of WE
to different total values of estates, which, in turn, leads to different top estate share estimates.
In Sec. 3 we use this calculation to provide different estimates of top estate shares and compare
them to top wealth shares reported in the literature.




                                                   20
D                                      Mortality rates by age

Age is the most important statistical determinant of mortality. Figure 7 shows the mortality rates
in France, Italy, the United Kingdom, and the United States in 1950, 1970, 1990, and 2010, based
on The Human Mortality Database (2018) data. It illustrates that mortality rates increase expo-
nentially with age above the age of 40.

                                                  1950                                                               1970
                                10 3                                                                  10 3
     Deaths (per 1000 people)




                                                                           Deaths (per 1000 people)
                                                                                                      10 2
                                10 2

                                                                                                      10 1


                                10 1
                                                                                                      10 0



                                10 0                                                                  10 -1
                                    20       40    60    80     100                                        20   40    60    80            100
                                                   Age                                                               Age


                                                  1990                                                               2010
                                10 3                                                                  10 3
Deaths (per 1000 people)




                                                                           Deaths (per 1000 people)




                                10 2                                                                  10 2



                                10 1                                                                  10 1


                                                                                                                                 France
                                10 0                                                                  10 0                       Italy
                                                                                                                                 UK
                                                                                                                                 US

                                10 -1                                                                 10 -1
                                     20      40    60    80     100                                        20   40    60    80            100
                                                   Age                                                               Age

Figure 7: Mortality rates in France, Italy, the United Kingdom, and the United States in 1950,
1970, 1990, and 2010. Source: The Human Mortality Database (2018).




                                                                      21
E     The coefficient of variation of estates and of wealths

To illustrate the similarity between the concentration of wealth and of estates it is possible to
compare the coefficient of variation (CV) of the wealth distribution with and without multipliers.
The derivation is inspired by a derivation presented in Atkinson and Harrison (1978), comparing
the CV between capital income and wealth for the capitalization method. It clarifies the intuition
for the result obtained for top shares discussed above. Yet it is conceptually simpler, since the
index Iq does not play a role in the CV. It is also not limited to a specific quantile q , but involves
the entire distribution.
The coefficient of variation of estates, denoted YE , follows

                                                               E2
                                                     2
                                                    YE =         2 .                                     (E.1)
                                                               w
                                                               ¯E

The coefficient of variation of wealths, denoted YE , follows

                                                               W2
                                                    2
                                                   YW =          2 ,                                     (E.2)
                                                               w
                                                               ¯W

      2 is the variance of estates,  2 is the variance of wealths, w
where E                                                            ¯E is the average estate, and
                                    W
w
¯W is the average wealth.
We begin by writing down expressions for the variance estates and wealths:
                                                                                     2
                           2             1      NE   2           1        NE
                           E        =   NE      i=1 wE,i   -    NE2       i=1 wE,i       ;               (E.3)
                                                                                             2
                           2        1        NE      2          1      NE
                           W    =   N        i=1 mi wE,i   -    N2     i=1 mi wE,i                   .   (E.4)

Therefore we get
                                                                                     2
                                         1      NE   2           1        NE
                                        NE      i=1 wE,i   -    NE2       i=1 wE,i
                                2
                               YE =                                        2                 ,           (E.5)
                                                    1          NE
                                                   NE2         i=1 wE,i

and
                                                                                                 2
                                    1        NE      2          1         NE
                                    N        i=1 mi wE,i   -    N2        i=1 mi wE,i
                             2
                            YW =                                               2                     .   (E.6)
                                                  1        NE
                                                  N2       i=1 mi wE,i


µ is the ratio between the average estate and the average wealth

                                          1   NE                         NE
                                         NE   i=1 wE,i                   i=1 wE,i
                               µ=       1   NE
                                                                ¯
                                                               =m      NE
                                                                                         ,               (E.7)
                                        N   i=1 mi wE,i                i=1 mi wE,i




                                                           22
so
                                     NE               2                            NE             2
                            1                                1  1
                                           mi wE,i         = 2· 2                        wE,i         ,               (E.8)
                            N2                              µ NE
                                     i=1                                           i=1

and therefore
                                                                                                  2
                                     1       NE 2      2                1              NE
                                     N       i=1 µ mi wE,i       -     NE2             i=1 wE,i
                             2
                            YW =                                                   2                  .               (E.9)
                                                      1          NE
                                                     NE2         i=1 wE,i

                       2 and get
We can then rearrange YW

                                              1      NE   2                  1         NE 2        2
                        2        2           NE      i=1 wE,i                N         i=1 µ mi wE,i
                       YW   =   YE   -                             2   +                             2    .       (E.10)
                                            1     NE                          1           NE
                                           NE2    i=1 wE,i                   NE2          i=1 wE,i


Taking N = mN
           ¯ E we get

                                                                       µ2 mi
                                                                                                
                                                   1        NE                        2
                                                  NE        i=1         m¯       - 1 wE,i
                             2    2
                            YW = YE 1+                                   2
                                                                                                .                 (E.11)
                                                                       E


This result leads to several important observations that clarify the similarity between inequality
of estates and of wealth. First, the difference between the CV of wealth and estates is mainly
                                                                                                              µ2 mi
driven by the multipliers at the top of the distribution. This is because the difference                       m¯     -1
is weighted by the level of estates. Thus, the similarity between YW and YE , like the top shares,
mainly depends on the interaction between estates and multipliers among the richest decedents.
Second, there is a dampening effect that limits the extent to which YW and YE are distant from
one another. If the multipliers at the top are high in comparison to the average multiplier then
mi /m
    ¯ > 1. µ is then likely to be lower than 1. The inverse is true if mi /m
                                                                           ¯ < 1. This creates a
                                                           µ2 mi
dampening effect that makes the expressions                 m¯     - 1 in Eq. (E.11) generally close to 0.
Third, comparing the coefficients of variation further demonstrates that the similarity in inequal-
ity measures between estates and wealth may not be limited to top shares, but also when full
distributions are taken into account.




                                                            23
