                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         DOING BUSINESS IN CHINA:
           PARENTAL BACKGROUND AND GOVERNMENT INTERVENTION
                     DETERMINE WHO OWNS BUSINESSES

                                          Ruixue Jia
                                        Xiaohuan Lan
                                     Gerard Padró I Miquel

                                      Working Paper 28547
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28547


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2021




We are grateful to seminar participants at Brown University, MIT Sloan, the World Bank, the
CfPE conference at UBC and the TED conference at Fudan University. We thank Shuo Chen and
Zhikuo Liu for sharing some data. Padr i Miquel gratefully acknowledges financial support from
The Whitney and Betty MacMillan Centre of International and Area Studies. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Ruixue Jia, Xiaohuan Lan, and Gerard Padró I Miquel. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Doing Business in China: Parental Background and Government Intervention Determine Who
Owns Businesses
Ruixue Jia, Xiaohuan Lan, and Gerard Padró I Miquel
NBER Working Paper No. 28547
March 2021
JEL No. D02,D72,O12,O38,O53

                                        ABSTRACT

While intergenerational transmission of entrepreneurship is a well-known regularity, we
hypothesize that in a transition economy where the state retains an important role, those whose
parents are government workers may also be more likely to become business owners. We test the
hypothesis in China and show that (1) on average, both entrepreneurs and government workers
have a higher likelihood of having children who own incorporated businesses and (2) In
provinces where government involvement is higher, the likelihood that children of government
workers (entrepreneurs) own incorporated businesses is significantly higher (lower). Our study
demonstrates that the local economic business environment shapes the influence of parental
background on business ownership.

Ruixue Jia                                     Gerard Padró I Miquel
School of Global Policy and Strategy           Departments of Economics and Political Science
University of California at San Diego          Yale University
9500 Gilman Drive #0519                        Rosenkranz Hall 335
La Jolla, CA 92093                             115 Prospect Street
and NBER                                       New Haven, CT 06520
rxjia@ucsd.edu                                 and NBER
                                               gerard.padroimiquel@yale.edu
Xiaohuan Lan
600 Guoquan Road
School of Economics
Shanghai, China
xhlan@fudan.edu.cn
1     Introduction
Entrepreneurship has long been regarded as one of the most important inputs in economic growth
(e.g., Schumpeter 1911, Lucas 1978, Baumol 1990). For the last two decades, the literature on
entrepreneurship has posited a number of environmental and individual factors that influence the
choice of becoming an entrepreneur. One of the most robust findings in this literature is parental
transmission of entrepreneurship: descendants of entrepreneurs have a much higher likelihood of
being entrepreneurs themselves (see Dunn and Holtz-Eakin 2000 among many others). While the
relative importance of the different channels underlying transmission of entrepreneurship is still a
matter of scholarly debate, the literature has so far overlooked the possibility that the importance
of parental background for entrepreneurship may be contingent on the business environment.
      Meanwhile, a political economy literature has long recognized that the institutional environ-
ment shapes the business environment across countries. For instance, Baumol, Litan, and Schramm
(2007) characterize countries into "good capitalism" ­ a mix of big-firm and entrepreneurial capi-
talism, and "bad capitalism" ­ state-guided and oligarchic capitalism; Zingales (2012) emphasizes
the difference between "crony capitalism" that favors the elites and "a capitalism for the people"
which allows open access to opportunities; and the World Bank publishes a yearly Doing Business
Report which again highlights how the regulatory environment and state capabilities influence en-
trepreneurship. Since the skills, attitudes and networks needed to run successful businesses across
these institutional environments are very different, the corresponding relevant parental background
should also vary.
      The main contribution of this paper is to show that the type of parental background that matters
for doing business varies significantly with the institutional environment, more specifically with
the role of government in the economy. The setting for our empirical analysis is modern China,
a context with two particular features that are very useful for the analysis. First, while modern
China offers space for successful entrepreneurship, as exemplified by companies such as Alibaba
and Tencent, the government is still a central agent in the economy. Second, the transition towards
a market economy has been geographically uneven, and currently there is a wide heterogeneity in
government involvement in the economy. While some provinces have followed a bottom-up free

We cannot provide a fair overview of the extensive literature. See the textbook of Parker (2018) for an extended discus-
sion of the literature, where he reviews both individual determinants and macro factors influencing entrepreneurship.



                                                           1
enterprise route to economic development, others have instead focused on large conglomerates and
heavy government intervention. For example, Huang (2008) contrasts Shanghai, a provincial-level
municipality that has championed state-led capitalism, with Zhejiang, which exemplifies bottom-up
capitalism. Both of these provinces are among the most developed in China. However, there are
substantially more private firms and registered patents per capita in Zhejiang than in Shanghai.
      The paramount role of the government in the economy suggests that a successful business
career may require access to specific knowledge about the internal workings of government as
well as networks that extend into government institutions. Hence, in terms of determining one's
business aptitude, having parents who work in the government (henceforth, "cadre parents") may
be as important as having parents who are entrepreneurs. In fact, both types of parental links are
often emphasized by observers and scholars. A report in the Financial Times in 2015 noted "lift
the curtain on many a rags-to-riches story in China, and one finds a father or grandfather who was
a businessman or a government official". Moreover, those with cadre parents should have a larger
advantage in those provinces where the government is more involved in the economy. Therefore, by
comparing the relative importance of entrepreneur and cadre parental background across provinces,
we can infer whether the institutional environment is determining the networks and specific human
capital that are necessary to run a business with the advantage of a within-country design, which
keeps other potential confounders constant.
      We explore these hypotheses using the Chinese General Social Survey (CGSS). This survey
has two useful features. First, it asks for the profession of the respondent as well as the profession
of the parents at the time the respondents were adolescents. Second, for the respondent generation
it distinguishes between those who own incorporated businesses ("business owners" henceforth)
and the self-employed.         In modern China, these categories align with the distinction between
transformational or opportunity entrepreneurship and subsistence or necessity entrepreneurship.
While the empirical entrepreneurship literature traditionally conflated these two categories, this
distinction has recently been shown to be important (e.g., Schoar 2010, Levine and Rubinstein
2017).
      We first show that having entrepreneur parents is associated with a higher likelihood of both
business ownership and self-employment, and the magnitude of such intergenerational transmission

Consistent with this, while Li et al.(2008) find that political connections influence the performance of Chinese firms,
and Djankov et al (2006) show that having friends and family members who are entrepreneurs is an important driver
of entrepreneurship in China.
Self-employment often denotes a low-quality business with no employees which results from lack of access to salaried
jobs.



                                                          2
is comparable to other countries. We then show that having cadre parents leads to a higher propensity
of business ownership, but not to self-employment. When we account for the fact that descendants
of cadre parents disproportionately take government jobs, the propensity of children of cadre parents
to become business owners is very close and statistically indistinguishable from the propensity of
the children of entrepreneurs to become business owners.
      We then show that the influence of parental background on business-ownership is contingent
on the government's role in the business environment. We measure it using Provincial Government
Expenditure on Business-related activities over GDP, which we henceforth refer to as PGEB. This
measure varies at the province-year level, can be readily obtained from statistical yearbooks, and
aggregates the budgetary items that are most likely to generate transfers or payments from the
government to private business. Controlling for province-year fixed effects, we show that cadre
parents' propensity to have business-owner children is strongly increasing in PGEB. In contrast,
higher PGEB is associated with a lower likelihood that business owners have entrepreneur parents.
These differing patterns are both statistically and economically significant: one standard deviation
larger PGEB is associated with a 0.8 percentage points reduction in the probability that children
of entrepreneurs are business owners and a 0.5 percentage point increase in the probability that
children of cadres are business owners. These are very large effects since the average probability
of business-ownership in the population is just 2.2 percentage points.
      To interpret these associations it is important to elucidate the correlates of PGEB, which is
surely not randomly assigned to provinces. PGEB is only weakly correlated with GDP per capita.
However, when we explore the provincial indices of marketization developed by Wang, Fan and Yu
(2016), we find that higher PGEB provinces consistently show lower marketization scores. More
specifically, in these provinces the relative share of the private sector in the economy is smaller,
private businesses have a smaller share of loans, the provincial government is more interventionist
and has weaker rule of law. This being said, among these measures, PGEB is the best province-level
predictor for the probability that cadre parents have business-owner children. This suggests that
public budgetary allocations that potentially lead to higher government-to-business flows have the
strongest impact on the selection of people that go into business.
      Individual characteristics and their transmission across generations can also have bearing on
the interpretation of our findings. For instance, having cadre parents may capture other parental
transmissible characteristics such as human capital, skills or attitudes which are useful to the conduct
of business. We explore the role of formal human capital in the form of college education and

Indeed, the literature on entrepreneurship mentioned above has tried to elucidate these channels to explain the observed


                                                           3
find that having a college-educated parent interacted with PGEB does not weaken our coefficient
of interest. To further probe this hypothesis, we explore an alternative dataset, the China Family
Panel Studies (CFPS), which also tracks the profession of the parents of the respondent and which
includes other individual characteristics such as risk attitudes and social skills. We show that none
of these characteristics, which could potentially be transmitted within the family, can explain the
cross-province pattern.
      As a complementary exercise, we show that our findings also hold when we exploit the Fiscal
Stimulus in 2008 for arguably exogenous variation in PGEB. More specifically, we show that in
provinces with traditionally high PGEB, the large increase in PGEB brought about by the Stimulus
is associated with an increase in the propensity of business ownership among descendants of cadres.
In contrast, the same proportional increase in PGEB has no such effect in provinces where PGEB
had been traditionally lower.
      By and large, there are three broad interpretations of this striking cross-province pattern in the
likelihood of business-ownership among cadre children. First, recall that provinces with high PGEB
are provinces where the private sector is lagging behind. Hence, it is possible that catching up in
the development of the private sector has been a goal of these provincial government. This policy
emphasis could spur children of cadres to engage in private business. We collect data on provincial
reports and we show that private business development is less mentioned in provinces with high
PGEB, which suggests this explanation cannot account for the pattern. Second, the intergenerational
transmission hypothesis suggests that what we find is a consequence of the transmission of talent,
aptitude or attitudes within a family. In China, talented individuals traditionally went to the
government and now that the country has transited to a market economy, their children became
business owners due to inherited or cultivated talent. This explanation can account for the link
between cadre parents and business-owner children, but we can not find evidence that it explains
the cross-province pattern. As detailed above, neither college education, nor risk attitudes display
the correlations that could generate a higher likelihood of cadre children's business ownership in
higher PGEB provinces. Finally, our findings could be generated by political connections. More
specifically, there are advantages for politically connected children (e.g., better information on

intergenerational transmission of entrepreneurship.
We find that a risk-loving attitude is correlated with being a business-owner, which aligns with existing literature (e.g.
Levine and Rubinstein 2017). However, there is no strong correlation between having a cadre parent and one's own
risk attitude, and the interaction of risk attitude with PGEB has no explanatory power on becoming a business-owner.
We thank a referee for bringing up this possibility.
While these are the most plausible candidates, we obviously cannot reject the existence of other unobservable omitted
variables.


                                                            4
business opportunities, easier access to capital, personal networks within government institutions)
which are inputs to the successful running of business and whose importance increases with the role
of the government in the business environment. We show two ancillary results that are consistent
with this explanation. First, using opinion survey questions on the key determinants in career
success, we find that business owners are more likely to identify connections with political power
as the key determinant of success in business; and this identification is significantly stronger in
provinces with higher PGEB. Therefore business practitioners are cognizant of the importance of
connections, and more so wherever government looms larger. Second, the gap in reported income
between business owners who are cadre children and those who are not is significantly increasing
in PGEB. This is consistent with the idea that businesses led by cadre children are able to capture
a large share of the government-to-business flows proxied by PGEB.
     Limited by available survey data, our study has several important caveats. In particular, we
cannot directly study business performance and sector, which means our evidence on the underlying
channels is circumstantial. Ideally, one should use firm-level data to examine how personal
background affects business opportunities of a firm, which has to be left for future work. Our main
contribution is to document that the local economic business environment significantly shapes
the influence of parental background on entrepreneurship. Overall, we demonstrate that "crony
capitalism" can vary greatly across regions within a country, thus contributing to the literature on
modes of capitalism which has so far focused on cross-country variation (e.g., Baumol, Litan, and
Schramm 2007, Zingales 2012). Our interpretation is related to an extant literature that emphasizes
the importance of personal links to power in the conduct of business (e.g., Fisman 2001, Khwaja
and Mian 2005, Faccio 2006 among many others). We are the first to note that these links can
systematically influence the characteristics of the entire set of business owners and therefore that
these effects are not limited to very large enterprises. Our findings imply that the role of personal
links hinges on the role of government in the economy, which has been less studied by the existing
literature.
     The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the background and the data. Section 3
presents the main empirical patterns. Section 4 discusses suggestive evidence on how to interpret
our findings, and Section 5 concludes.




                                                 5
2     Background and Data
We combine individual-level surveys with provincial-level data in our analysis. We first describe
the individual-level data. We then explain government business-related expenditure and the drivers
of its variation.


2.1     Individual-level Data: Parental Background and Entrepreneurship
We obtain our individual-level data from the Chinese General Social Survey from 2006 to 2013
(CGSS), a Chinese version of the General Social Survey in the U.S. conducted by the National
Opinion Research Center. The CGSS is also a part of the International Social Survey Program
(ISSP) that covers 48 countries. The CGSS is a repeated cross-sectional survey, jointly conducted
by the Renmin University of China and the Hong Kong Science and Technology University. Our
sample includes five waves of the survey conducted in 2006, 2008, 2010, 2012, and most recently
in 2013, which collects information in the year before the survey (i.e., 2005, 2007...,2012).                 A
typical wave of the CGSS includes about 10,000 urban and rural households. Since owning an
incorporated business is rare for the rural population, we focus on 22,801 urban residents aged
between 25 and 80. Our sample covers all the 31 provinces in mainland China and provides a
province-level panel dataset.
      The CGSS uses multi-stage stratified sampling design, with counties as primary sampling units.
The survey adjusts its sampling frames according to existing population census. To examine the
representativeness of the survey, we compare the characteristics in the survey with those in the
census. As shown in Appendix Table A, the demographic characteristics are comparable between
the survey and the census 2010. Because 2010 census does not provide occupation, we turn to the
quasi-census 2005 for comparison.


Business Owners. In order to classify respondents into entrepreneurship status we use two
categories. The first is business owner, which comprises all owners of incorporated businesses,
who must pay corporation tax and follow corporation law. The second is self-employed, which
includes owners of non-incorporated small businesses.                  The existing literature often uses an

We cannot use earlier waves because they did not ask about entrepreneur status or parental background.
The CGSS 2006 uses China's fifth census of 2000 as sampling frame; the CGSS 2008 uses the 1% national population
survey data in 2005 ("2005 quasi-census") as sampling frame; and the last three waves use China's sixth census of
2010 as sampling frame.
Only 17% of this category hire any other worker, and none of them hire more than 8 people.


                                                         6
encompassing category of self-employment as a proxy for entrepreneurship, but recent contributions
have shown this can be problematic as it mixes necessity or subsistence entrepreneurship with
opportunity or transformational entrepreneurship. On average, business-owners account for 2.2%
of our respondents, and the share is higher among those with cadre parents (defined next), as shown
in Table 1 for summary statics. In contrast, 11% of respondents are self-employed individuals,
and the share is lower among those with cadre parents. We use the term "entrepreneur" to refer
to both categories when needed in the analysis (that is, "entrepreneurs" are those who are either
self-employed or business owners).


Parental Background.      We focus on two types of parental background. The first one captures
whether at least one parent works in government or in a public organization affiliated with the
government (known as "shi ye dan wei" in Chinese, meaning public institutions). We call it a
cadre parent for brevity. Public institutions are essential branches of the Chinese government,
endowed with great power and influence. For example, the two major institutions that supervise
and regulate the whole financial sector, the China Banking & Insurance Regulatory Commission
and the China Securities Regulatory Commission are not officially a part of the government, but
are public institutions. The parents' employer is defined as their employer at the time when the
respondent was 14 years old (except for the 2005 data in which it is when the respondent was 18
years old). As reported in Table 1, 19% of urban households belong to the cadre parent group.
We use all cadres as one group in our main analysis and differ the ranks of the cadre positions in
additional analysis.
     It is reasonable to assume that having cadre parents or not changes little over time. Job
mobility between governments and private sectors is fairly low among older generations, as Chinese
government is a fairly closed system. In our data, most cadre parents started to work for the
government long before their children reached working age or even before their children were born.
For example, among government workers who had an adult child in 2005, 83% had their whole
career in government and 12% started in state-owned enterprises.
     The second important parental background is entrepreneurship. While the 2009-2012 waves
of the CGSS distinguishes parents' profession between business-owners and self-employed, these
two categories are lumped into a single category in the 2005 and 2007 waves. In order to preserve
sample size, the analysis in the paper uses the term "entrepreneur parents" which uses this category
for the 2005 and 2007 waves and merges business-owners and self-employed parents for the 2009-
2012 waves. Because China did not begin transitioning towards market economy until the late


                                                 7
1970s, it is rare for parents of older respondents to have been business owners when they were 14.
Thus, besides constraints imposed by the data, there is a good reason to merge these two categories.


Individual Characteristics. The CGSS also contains additional information on gender, age,
marital status, educational attainment and minority classification of the respondents, which we use
in the analysis.


2.2     Provincial Variation in Government Intervention
Government expenditure over GDP has been shown to be useful in capturing the influence of
the government on economic activities (e.g., Alesina et al. 2002). To this end, we obtain data
on provincial fiscal expenditure from 2005 to 2012 from the statistical yearbooks.                          To zoom
into potential flows from government to private business, as opposed to expenditure on public
services and insurance programs, we focus on expenditure in two categories: infrastructure, and
manufacturing, commerce, and finance (MCF). Even though the level of disaggregation reported
in the statistical yearbooks varies by year, we can always aggregate up to these two categories. To
make this total comparable across provinces, we divide government business expenditure at the
province level by provincial GDP. We refer to this measure as Provincial Government Expenditure
on Business-related activities, henceforth PGEB. We describe the details in Appendix Table B.1.
On average, PGEB accounts for 16% of provincial total fiscal expenditure and amounts to about
3% of provincial GDP.
      Two additional facts support the relevance of this proxy as a measure of the role of govern-
ment on the private business environment. First, in Appendix Table B.2 we show that PGEB is
strongly correlated with private firms' receipt of government subsidies. More specifically, using
data from the second National Economic Census (NEC) in 2008, we show that a one standard
deviation increase in PGEB (0.02) is associated with a 0.6 percentage point increased probability
of subsidy receipt, a very large effect compared to the mean probability (1.3 percentage points).
This relationship is also true at the intensive margin and is robust to introducing firm-level controls.
      The second fact pertains to the large fiscal economic stimulus plan that the Chinese central
government approved in November of 2008 to combat the effects of the great recession and which

Expenditure is a better measure than revenues since the majority of tax revenues is collected by the central government,
but the majority of fiscal expenditure remains in lower level governments.
Because infrastructure creates many business opportunities, we include infrastructure spending in our baseline measure.
We also report the results after excluding infrastructure and focus on the narrower MCF definition.



                                                           8
was explicitly designed to increase business activity. Of the 4 trillion RMB stimulus package, 25%
was devoted to reconstruction work in the regions destroyed by the Sichuan earthquake in 2008.
However, a full 75% of the remainder went to PGEB.                  As a result, PGEB went from about 2.4
percent (of provincial GDP) prior to the stimulus package to 4.8 percent post the stimulus package,
while the increase in other fiscal expenditure was modest and proportionally insignificant (see the
density distribution in Appendix Figure B.3). 70% of the provincial fiscal expansion between 2008
and 2010 is in this category of expenditure.


PGEB and Marketization Index. Wang, Fan and Yu (2016) construct a set of province-year
indices which are meant to capture the quality of the private business environment. These indices
purport to capture different avenues of government intervention in the economy, which we expect
to be correlated with PBEG. There are five components to the overall marketization index: (1)
"government-market relationship" measures government size and general regulations; (2) "private
economy development" measures the share of non-state-owned economy in manufacturing, fixed
asset investment, and employment; (3) "product market development" measures price regulation
and local protectionism; (4) "factor market development" measures credit allocation, FDI, and labor
mobility; and (5) "intermediary service and law development" measures rule of law, intellectual
property rights, and consumer protection. For each measure, a higher index indicates a better
performance.
     We present the correlations of PGEB with the overall index and its components in Table 2.
There are several noteworthy features to this correlational table. First, PGEB is negatively correlated
with all dimensions of the private business environment including the overall Marketization index.
Hence, provinces where the government has higher PGEB correspond to provinces where the
private business environment is more restrictive. Second, the negative correlation with "private
economy development" shows that the private sector is relatively small in provinces with high
PGEB, possibly as a result of the restrictive environment.              Finally, "factor market development"
includes the private share in total bank loans, and therefore captures financial access for the private
sector, relative to the public sector. The correlation with PGEB is also negative but it is the weakest
among the subindices. This makes sense, since governments can foster private access to credit
without a large direct budgetary investment.

For the breakdown of the stimulus package, announced by the National Development and Reform Commission, see:
http://www.eeo.com.cn/ens/finance_investment/2009/03/07/131626.shtml.
According to the documentation, this indicator combines three variables: private firms' share in the total revenue of
manufacturing; private share in the total fixed-asset investment; private share in urban employment.


                                                         9
      In short, the negative correlations demonstrate that more PGEB is associated with a less free
market economy. In the analysis below we will examine which of these provincial variables can
better explain business-ownership and its intergenerational determinants.


Explaining the Variation in PGEB.         The data suggests that PGEB mainly captures long-term
differences across provinces in the economic role of the government. This reflects the differences
already highlighted by Huang (2008), who contends that from the beginning of the reform era, some
provincial governments have embraced bottom-up capitalist expansion while others have chosen a
more state-driven approach. Two pieces of evidence support this interpretation. First, in our study
period ­ 2005 to 2012­ the variation in PGEB is primarily driven by differences across provinces,
as opposed to differences over time. Specifically, provincial fixed effects account for 72% of the
variation. Second, we find that 55% of the cross-provincial variation in PGEB in 2007 is explained
by the share of State Owned Enterprises (SOEs) in manufacturing in 1985 (presented in Appendix
Figure B.4), which reflects the long term determinants of the different developmental strategies.
      Crucially, it is worth noting that the cross-province variation in PGEB is only weakly associated
to relative economic development. As shown in Appendix Figure B.4, while the correlation between
PGEB and GDP per capita is negative, the latter only explains 22% of the variation of the former.
Both poor provinces, such as Yunnan, and rich provinces, such as Shanghai, pursue a statist
developmental route that is reflected in high PGEB.


2.3    Descriptive Patterns
We now present three descriptive patterns using data aggregated at the province level. We demean
PGEB by its sample mean so that a positive value means expenditure more than average. First,
as shown in panel (a) of Figure 1, there is a negative correlation between PGEB and the share
of respondents who are business owners. Thus, higher PGEB does not imply a better business
environment. If anything, as noted in Table 2, it indicates more government intervention that
hinders entrepreneurship.
      Second, panel (b) shows that the difference between the probability that a cadre descendant
is a business owner and the probability that a non-cadre descedant is a business owner is larger
in provinces with higher PGEB. A one standard deviation increase in PGEB (0.02) increases the
difference by about 0.75 percentage points or 35% of the mean. In other words, cadre children
are more likely to become business owners relative to others in provinces with higher PGEB.
The pattern remains similar if we exclude children of entrepreneurs in the non-cadre group, as in

                                                  10
Appendix Figure C.1.
       Third, panel (c) shows that the opposite is true for descendants of entrepreneurs. In provinces
where PGEB is low, children of entrepreneurs have a high likelihood of owning a business, but
this advantage disappears in provinces with high government involvement. The pattern remains the
same when we exclude children of cadres in the non-entrepreneur group, as in Appendix Figure
C.1.
       Thus, we observe that business ownership displays systematic patterns which intermingle
parental background and business environment at the province level. We probe the robustness of
these province-level patterns with individual-level information in the next section.



3      Empirical Results
We first explore the relationship between parental background, self-employment and business
ownership, followed by an analysis of the effect of the local economic context on these relationships.


3.1     Parental Background and Doing Business
We examine the difference in the probability of being in different occupations between those with
entrepreneur parents, cadre parents and others. We consider four occupations: being a business
owner/self-employed/a government worker/an employee in a firm, and employ both OLS and
multinomial logistic methods to reveal the links across generations.
       The specification is as follows:
            Yi = 1 CadreP arenti + 2 EntrepP arenti + Xi + P rovp × Y eart +i,p,t ,                   (1)
where Yi is a dummy indicating the respondent's occupation in our OLS estimations, with all the
                                                                                           y =j |parent,Xi )
other occupations grouped together in the reference group; in contrast, Yi is ln Pr(y=FPr(
                                                                                       irmEmployee|parent,Xi )
in our multinomial logistic estimations, where j can be a business owner/ self-employed/ govern-
ment worker, and we leave firm employee status as the reference group.
       Xi is a set of individual-level variables: gender, age, marital status, college education or not,
and minority status. We include province-by-year fixed effects so that we compare individuals
within a province-year cell.
       We report the OLS estimates in Table 3A. Intergenerational links within sector are clear:
children with cadre parents are about 60% more likely to work for the government, and children
of entrepreneurs also have a higher likelihood of becoming business owners or self-employed.


                                                   11
In addition, these coefficients feature some cross-sector influence of cadre parents: respondents
with cadre parents also appear to be more likely to own a business in columns (3) and (4),
although the coefficient is not significant in the latter. Note that the fact that cadre children are
so overwhelmingly predisposed to become government workers (as noted in the coefficients in
columns (1)-(2)) confounds the estimates for the rest of the columns due to the multiple choice
nature of occupational choice.
     To account for the nature of this choice, we report the relative risk ratios from multinomial
logistic estimations in Table 3B. Results are now clear-cut. For those with cadre parents relative
to those with non-cadre parents: (1) the relative risk for working in the government relative to
being a firm employee increases by a factor of 2, ceteris paribus the other variables in the model;
and (2) the relative risk for being a business owner relative to being a firm employee increases
by a factor of 1.4. In fact, these odds of cadre children owning a business, while lower, are not
statistically different from those of children of entrepreneurs. Note that cadre children do not differ
systematically from the general population in the likelihood of being self-employed.
     In contrast, for those with entrepreneur parents, the relative risk of being a business owner
and being self-employed is 1.8-1.6 times higher than those without entrepreneur parents, while the
relative risk of working in the government is not significantly different. The magnitude of 1.6 is
comparable to those found in the existing literature in other countries.   We are not aware of similar
studies examining the intergenerational link across sectors (i.e., the cadre parents-business children
link) and our estimate provides a benchmark for future studies.
     One potential confounder for the relationship between cadre parents and businessman status
could be educational attainment, which is correlated with both. Note, however, that in columns
(2) and (3) of Table 3B we control for individual characteristics which include college education.
Hence these intergenerational transmission links are not driven by formal education.
     In sum, in modern China, both entrepreneur and cadre parental backgrounds are associated
with respondents' higher likelihood of owning businesses. Once we take into account that those
with cadre parents have, on average, a higher probability of working in the government, both
parental backgrounds have a similar influence in the odds of business-ownership.

See e.g. Sørensen (2007) and Lindquist et al (2015).




                                                       12
3.2    Parental Background and Local Economic Context
Our focus now turns to investigating whether the local context determines the influence of parental
background on entrepreneurship. More specifically, we ask whether the association between
parental occupation and business ownership varies with the level of government intervention in
the business environment. To facilitate interpretation of the interaction effect, we employ a linear
specification as follows:
           BusinessOwneri,p,t = 1 CadreP arenti + 2 CadreP arenti × P GEBp,t
                                 + 3 EntrepP arenti + 4 EntrepP arenti × P GEBp,t                (2)
                                 + Xi + Xi × P GEBp,t + P rovp × Y eart + i,p,t ,
where the definitions are the same as before and P GEBp,t refers to provincial government expendi-
ture related to private business over GDP. We demean PGEB by its sample mean and divide by the
standard deviation so the interaction coefficient can be interpreted as the increase in propensity of
business-ownership associated with increasing PGEB by one standard deviation at the mean value
of PGEB.
      The interaction between parental background and PGEB on the probability of owning a
business is not only statistically but economically significant. Columns (1)-(3) of Table 4 presents
the estimates controlling for province-year fixed effects, individual characteristics, as well as the
interaction of individual characteristics and PGEB. As noted, the coefficient in column (3) implies
that an increase of PGEB by a standard deviation is associated with 0.5 percentage points increase
in the odds that cadre children own a business. This is a large effect considering the average share
of business owner is 2.2 percentage points. Note that this association is at the cost of those having
entrepreneur parents: an increase of PGEB by a standard deviation is associated with a reduction
in the business-ownership likelihood of the children of entrepreneurs of 0.75 percentage points.
Therefore, two standard deviations increase in government intervention are enough to wipe out the
main effect of having an entrepreneur parent.
      This result demonstrates that the advantage of cadre children in provinces with more govern-
ment intervention comes at the cost of other groups. The fact that children of entrepreneurs are
less likely to own business in provinces with higher PGEB implies a crowding-out effect. This
finding suggests that in these provinces, the skills/assets needed to create a business have more
to do with the ability to manage the government-dominated business environment than with the
entrepreneurial ability that children are likely to inherit from their parents.
      In Table 5 we compare the association of PGEB with the measures of marketization we


                                                  13
discussed in Section 2.2. In odd columns we report the coefficients for one standardized deviation
increase in the marketization index as well as its components, interacted with cadre parents. In the
even columns we run them together with PGEB. Two patterns emerge from these results. First, the
marketization measures deliver a message similar to that using PGEB: more marketization (i.e., less
government intervention) is associated with a lower propensity of business ownership among cadre
children. Second, the even columns show that PGEB is a more robust predictor of the variation of
this propensity across provinces than any of these other measures. Therefore, the relative size of
budgetary items that are linked to transfers and transactions with the private sector seems to most
precisely capture the aspects of the business environment which influence the decision of cadre
children to become business owners.
      There are two important sets of possible confounders that complicate interpreting the main
finding in Table 4. The first is that having cadre parents may capture other parental characteristics
such as more human capital to do business. To address this concern, note that in column (3)
we control for the interaction of personal characteristics and PGEB. This implies that the cross-
province patterns are not driven by other individual characteristics such as education attainment. If
anything, these controls make our estimate more precise. We discuss the human capital hypothesis
more explicitly as a possible interpretation of this finding in Section 4.
      A second concern is that PGEB may be correlated with other provincial characteristics which
may drive the differences across provinces. If these omitted provincial characteristics are di-
mensions of government intervention, it would be consistent with our view, as shown in Table
5. However, it would be a concern for our interpretation if PGEB is correlated with provincial
characteristics not directly related to government intervention in the business environment, such as
economic development or public goods provision. We conduct two checks regarding this concern.
First, as placebo tests, we replace PGEB in equation (2) with GDP per capita and public expenditure
(on healthcare, education and social welfare). If PGEB merely reflects development levels or public
goods provision, we would obtain a similar pattern with respect to these two measures. However,
as shown in columns (4)-(5) of Table 4, we find no similar pattern for either measure. Column (6)
shows that our main finding gets even stronger if we control for GDP per capita, public expenditure
and their interactions with parental background.

In a similar exercise, we can control for the number of prosecutions of cadres for "corruption and bribery" and "abuse
and dereliction of duty" reported in the provincial yearbooks. Adding the interaction of this measure with cadre parent
does not affect our coefficient of interest. Again, like the results above, this result is not to claim that PGEB is the only
measure that matters. Instead, it further suggests that compared with other measures, PGEB more precisely captures
the aspects of the business environment that drive selection into business-ownership.



                                                            14
     In addition, as a complementary design, we employ the Fiscal Stimulus Package in 2008 as an
exogenous shock to PGEB. As discussed above, the stimulus plan doubled PGEB in an unexpected
manner. We find that the propensity of cadre children to become business owners in provinces
with higher pre-stimulus PGEB gets even stronger after the stimulus, while there is no effect in
laissez-faire provinces. Moreover, this association in high PGEB provinces is particularly strong for
young respondents, which suggests these businesses were started during or after the stimulus plan
came online. This analysis, presented in Appendix Section C.2, shows that provinces with different
traditions of intervention yield different reactions to the same exogenous shock. In provinces with
a statist tradition, cadre children are more likely to start businesses when PGEB swells, while in
high marketization provinces the association is not present. This exercise provides time-varying
evidence that is consistent with the cross-province evidence we emphasize in the main text.
     As a final exercise, note that when replacing owning a business by being self-employed, we do
not find a similar pattern (column (7) of Table 4). The association of PGEB and the cadre children
likelihood of a business career is therefore limited to incorporated businesses. Again, this finding
confirms the importance of treating business ownership and self-employment as distinct categories,
as emphasized by a recent literature.


Additional Checks.         We conduct several measurement checks. First, recall that we categorize
those working in the government and public institutions as "cadre parents". Naturally, there exists
heterogeneity among cadres ­ highly-ranked officials are more powerful than government workers
with no rank. When separating cadre parents by their official ranks (only available in the surveys
during 2009-2012), we do not have enough power to obtain results for each group. Nevertheless,
we find the impact of CadreP arenti × P GEBp,t increases with rank (reported in Appendix Table
C.3).
     Second, recall that we include infrastructure expenditure as part of PGEB because infrastruc-
ture projects provide many business opportunities. Our results hold if we exclude infrastructure
expenditure from PGEB and focus on the narrower MCF definition. Results are reported in Ap-
pendix Table C.4.
     Third, our finding is robust to excluding migrants, allaying concerns that selective migration
might be behind our findings. It is also robust to using data during 2009-2012, where the PGEB
categories remain exactly the same and we can control for county fixed effects. See Appendix Table

The survey does not cover precisely the institution or department in which the respondent or the parents work, which
limits our ability to exploit variation across positions.



                                                        15
C.5 for these additional results.


Alternative Data and Individual Attitudes.        Finally, we explore an alternative source of data,
the China Family Panel Studies (CFPS), which in recent waves also record the profession of the
parents of respondents. Unfortunately the CFPS does not distinguish between business owners
and self-employed and hence comparison with the CGSS requires keeping this difference in mind.
To make the comparison with CGSS, we normalize the dependent variables by their means. In
Appendix Table C.6 we present the following results. First, in columns (1)-(4) of Table C.6 we
show that the cross-province pattern of association between the likelihood of entrepreneurship of
cadres and PGEB is also present in CFPS and the magnitude is comparable to that from CGSS
(around 20­25% of the mean). This result also suggests our main findings are very unlikely to be
the result of improper sampling patterns of the CGSS.
     One advantage of the CPFS is that it contains data on other personal characteristics of re-
spondents, such as risk attitudes and social skills. In columns (5)-(6) of Table C.6 we show that
while a risk-loving attitude is associated with entrepreneurship, it displays no interaction with
PGEB. In columns (7) and (8) we show that there is no association between the measure of social
skills and entrepreneurship. Thus, although these individual characteristics can be correlated with
entrepreneurship, it is difficult for them to explain the cross-province patterns in our main results.



4    Interpretation
We have documented a robust association between PGEB and the cross-province likelihood that
cadre children become business-owners. What are the possible interpretations of this finding?
Motivated by the Chinese context, we consider three broad interpretations that have different
implications on the economy. In particular, we want to explore whether the business propensity of
cadre children in bigger governments reflects different policy priorities of provincial governments,
differences in human capital or differences in specific links with government that are useful for the
conduct of business.


The Policy Priority Hypothesis. The correlations between PGEB and measures of private sector
development in Table 2 suggest that the private sector is lagging behind in provinces with high
PGEB. It is therefore possible that such provinces are trying to catch up and therefore have high
policy priority in private sector development. If such policy push compels cadre families to focus


                                                  16
their efforts onto business careers, the policy priorities of provincial government could explain the
cross province pattern we uncover. Regression (6) in Table 5 above casts doubt on this explanation,
since one would expect the effect of the level of private sector development to have independent
explanatory power on the business-ownership of cadre children. Nonetheless, this is an important
alternative hypothesis that it is worth examining directly. To do so, we collected further text data on
annual government reports for the years 2005-2012, where policy priorities are explicitly spelled
out. Appendix Figure C.7 demonstrates that PGEB is negatively correlated with the frequency of
private economy mentions (relative to state economy mentions) in provincial government reports.
This is very interesting as it dispels the notion that these provinces are trying to catch up in private
sector development.


The Human Capital Hypothesis.              One of the hypothesis in the literature on entrepreneurship
is that the transmission of formal (i.e. education) and informal (i.e. attitudes) human capital
within the family may explain the intergenerational persistence of entrepreneurship.        In the case
of China, this could explain the link between cadre parents and business-owner children because
in the pre-reform era talented individuals would be overwhelmingly attracted by government jobs.
These talented parents would transmit human capital to children, who then would become business
owners. To explain the cross-province pattern, however, one would additionally need some reason
why this would happen at a higher rate in provinces with high PGEB. To check whether this is
the case, we replace the dependent variable in equation (2) with the educational outcomes of an
individual. Indeed, we find that cadre children are more likely to have college education, which
confirms the insight that talented individuals were attracted by government jobs in the planned
economy. However, no evidence suggests that such a correlation varies with PGEB (column (1) of
Table 6). In column (2), we further consider having college-educated parents and its interaction
with PGEB. Again, we find that the impact of CadreP arenti × P GEBp,t on college education
achievement is close to zero.
     To further check whether human capital explains our main finding on CadreP arenti ×
P GEBp,t , we include college parents and its interaction with P GEBp,t as additional controls. As
shown in column (3), our finding on CadreP arenti × P GEBp,t still holds. Hence, the cross-
province pattern is not a consequence of cadre parents being a proxy for educational status. Thus,
the assumption that cadre children differ in human capital is reasonable, and we find supporting
evidence in the data. However, it appears difficult to use this assumption to account for the

See e.g. Sørensen (2007) and Lindquist et al (2015) among others


                                                       17
cross-province finding because one needs the difference in college education to be correlated with
PGEB.
     Of course, there may be other forms of human capital and transmissible characteristics that
can play a role and we cannot fully reject their existence. However, recall that in Table C.6 we
find that other characteristics and attitudes that may be transmissible within the family, such as risk
attitudes or social skills, cannot explain the cross-province pattern either.


The Political Connections Hypothesis.        The final explanation points to specific advantages that
have to do with the cadre status of family members. It is conceivable that direct access to cadres in
the family bestows advantages for business that are unrelated to raw talent, and that such advantages
are larger when the government intervenes more in the economy and is a larger source of business
for private enterprises. These can be multi-faceted. For instance, cadre children may obtain better
and earlier information about business opportunities generated by the government; they may access
capital more easily; their bids to public tenders may be selected more often; and their business may
be more likely to be subsidized. Note that these advantages may not necessarily reflect corruption.
For example, because of their informal knowledge of the preferences of cadres, their bids to public
tenders or requests for subsidies may be written in such a way that are objectively more attractive for
the government. However, these advantages point to a fundamental inequality in business prospects
that favors those with such inside knowledge and links, and such advantages would obviously be
proportional to the importance of government as a souce of business for private entreprises.
     An attractive feature of this hypothesis is that it can also explain the fact children of en-
trepreneurs have a lower propensity of becoming business owners in provinces where the govern-
ment looms large in the business environment (recall Figure C.1 and Table 4). If cadre children have
a specific advantage in these environments, and these environments are not particularly nurturing to
private business, it makes sense that the crowded out category are those who thrive in laissez-faire
environments: the descendants of private entrepreneurs.
     Several pieces of evidence support this interpretation. First, recall that in Appendix Table B.2,
discussed in Section 2, we show that higher PGEB is associated with a higher percentage of firms
acknowledging receipt of government subsidies, as well as higher levels of subsidy. Firms seeking
these subsidies need to be incorporated, and would benefit both from specific government-related
knowledge useful to successfully applying for those subsidies as well as from favorable treatment of
their applications due to the influence of networks that extend within government. This is consistent
with the fact that (1) the patterns we uncover are only present for incorporated business owners,


                                                  18
and (2) those with cadre parents are more often business owners in places where government
intervention is higher.
     Second, not only cadre children have a higher propensity of business-ownership in higher
PGEB provinces, they also seem to be doing better. While CGSS does not report information
about the business of respondents, it reports income from job, which we use as a crude proxy. This
information allows to investigate the following question: Do cadre-children business owners earn
more relative to other business owners in higher PGEB provinces? To investigate this question, we
employ the following specifications:
ln Incomei,p,t = 1 CadreP arenti + 2 BusinessOwneri + 3 CadreP arenti × BusinessOwneri
               + 4 CadreP arenti × P GEBp,t + 5 BusinessOwneri × P GEBp,t
               + 6 CadreP arenti × BusinessOwneri × P GEBp,t + P rovp × Y eart + i,p,t ,
                                                                                                (3)
     In columns (1) and (2) of Table 7, we show that the income reported by business owners
who have cadre parents is not different from the income reported by other business owners, on
average across China. However, columns (3) and (4) yield a striking result: the gap in income
between business owners who are cadre children and those who are not is very strongly increasing
in PGEB. That is, in provinces with strong government role in the business environment, business
owners who have cadres in the family do significantly better than those who do not. This, coupled
with the fact that more cadre children become business owners in high PGEB provinces, cannot
be explained by a uniformly more difficult business environment in such provinces. Instead, under
the assumption that income reported by business owners proxies the degree of success of their
businesses, it suggests that cadre children have an easier time setting up a successful business in
these contexts. This would be naturally explained by a specific advantage of cadre children in
capturing the private business generated by the government.
     Third, we can provide direct evidence that PGEB is correlated with the attitude of business
owners towards the government. The CGSS survey data in 2005 includes a subjective evaluation
of the determinants of career success. Panel B of summary statistics in Table 1 lists the four
determinants of career success covered by the survey: connections with political power, hard work,
luck, and ambition. Each respondent rates each factor as: essential, very important, important,
not very important, not important at all, or hard to say. For each factor, we code the answer
"essential" as 1 and the rest as 0. For example, luck is regarded by the average respondent to be
a less essential determinant of success than the rest. We proceed to examine how PGEB affects
business owners' perception on what determines career success. Because business owners with

                                                19
and without cadre background compete in the same business environment, we do not expect their
perception on determinants of business success to differ by parental background. Thus, we focus
on understanding how business owners' perception varies by PGEB, which proxies how free the
business environment is.
     Column (1) of Table 8 shows that on average, business owners are 9 percentage points more
likely to see political connections as a key determinant in career success. When PGEB increases
by one standard deviation, this effect doubles, as reported in column (2). For the other three
determinants in columns (3)-(8), neither the correlation of being a business owner nor its interacted
effect with PGEB are positive and significant. These results suggest that connections with the
government are essential elements for the successful conduct of business, and that their relative
importance strongly increases with the degree of involvement of the government in the economy.
Furthermore, this seems to be well recognized by business owners.



5    Conclusion
While there exists an extensive literature on the determinants of entrepreneurship, few studies
have paid attention to the interaction of individual characteristics and government policies. In this
study, we document for the first time that those with cadre parents have higher odds of becoming
business owners, compared to the general population. More importantly, we also show that the
effect of parental background, cadre and entrepreneur, on children's business-ownership changes
significantly with government's involvement in the economy.
     We contribute to the literature on parental determinants of entrepreneurship by demonstrating
that the economic context matters for intergenerational transmission. Not only government inter-
vention weakens it, but it also fosters the influence of contacts with government, and with it the
number of children of government cadres who become business owners. This suggests that the
current debate on the relative importance of different channels of intergenerational transmission
needs to acknowledge that the contribution of each factor is likely to be highly contingent on
institutional context. We also show in a novel context that disaggregating entrepreneurship into
its different components of necessity and opportunity is a useful analytical tool: the importance
of cadre parents and government intervention is circumscribed to incorporated businesses and it
does not affect self-employment, which mostly captures necessity entrepreneurship in the context
of China.
     Finally, we have shown that institutional context is important enough to shape the entire set of


                                                 20
people who engage in business. We hope that further research can elucidate the welfare implications
of this phenomenon. In particular, access to the performance, characteristics and sector of the
business created by those who are descendants of cadres would provide more information on the
selection process that yields the patterns we have uncovered.



References
[1] Alesina, Alberto, Silvia Ardagna, Roherto Perotti, and Fabio Schiantarelli (2002), "Fiscal Policy, Profits, and
       Investment," American Economic Review, Vol. 92: 571-589.
[2] Baumol, William J (1990), "Entrepreneurship: Productive, Unproductive, and Destructive," Journal of Political
       Economy, Vol. 98(5): 893-921
[3] Baumol, William J., Robert E. Litan, and Carl J. Schramm (2007), Good Capitalism, Bad Capitalism, and the
       Economics of Growth and Prosperity. Yale University Press.
[4] Djankov, Simeon, Yingyi Qian, Gerard Roland, and Ekaterina Zhuravskaya (2006), "Who are China's En-
       trepreneurs?," American Economic Review Vol. 96: 348-352.
[5] Dunn, Thomas and Douglas Holtz-Eakin (2000), "Financial Capital, Human Capital, and the Transition to Self-
       Employment: Evidence from Intergenerational Links," Journal of Labor Economics, 18(2): 282-305.
[6] Faccio, Mara (2006), "Politically Connected Firms," American Economic Review Vol. 96: 369-386.
[7] Ferchen, Matthew (2012), "Informality in China and Latin America: Comparisons and Interactions," in Setting
       the Agenda: Asia and Latin America in the 21st Century.
[8] Fisman, Raymond (2001), "Estimating the Value of Political Connections," American Economic Review, Vol. 91:
       1095-1102.
[9] Huang, Yasheng (2008), Capitalism with Chinese Characteristics: Entrepreneurship and the State. Cambridge
       University Press.
[10] Khwaja, Asim Ijaz and Atif Mian (2005), "Do Lenders Favor Politically Connected Firms? Rent Provision in an
       Emerging Financial Market," Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 120: 1371-1411.
[11] Levine, Ross, and Yona Rubinstein (2017), "Smart and Illicit: Who Becomes and Entrepreneur and do they Earn
       More?," Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 132: 963-1018
[12] Li, Hongbin, Lingsheng Meng, Qian Wang and Li-An Zhou (2008), "Political connections, Financing and Firm
       Performance: Evidence from Chinese Private Firms," Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 87: 283-299.
[13]
       Lindquistetal2015 Lindquist, Matthew, Joeri Sol, and Mirjam Van Praag (2015), "Why Do Entrepreneurial Parents
       Have Entrepreneurial Children?" Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 33: 269-296.
[14] Lucas (1978) "On the Size Distribution of Business Firms," The Bell Journal of Economics: 508-523.
[15] Parker, Simon (2018), The Economics of Entrepreneurship. Cambridge University Press.
[16] Schoar, Antoinette (2010) "The Divide between Subsistence and Transformational Entrepreneurship," Innovation
       Policy and the Economy, 10(1): 57-81.
[17] Sørensen, Jesper (2007), "Closure and Exposure: Mechanisms in the Intergenerational Transmission of Self-
       employment," Research in the Sociology of Organizations, 25: 83-124.


                                                         21
[18] Schumpeter, Joseph A (1911) [1961] The Theory of Economic Development: An Inquiry into Profits, Capital,
    Credit, Interest, and the Business Cycle. New York: OUP
[19] Wang, Xiaolu, Fan Gang, and Yu Jingwen (2016), Marketization Index of Chinaâs Provinces: NERI Report 2016.
    Social Sciences Academic Press.
[20] Zingales, Luigi (2012), A Capitalism for the People: Recapturing the Lost Genius of American Prosperity. Basic
    books.




                                                        22
Figure 1: Descriptive Patterns ­ Different Outcomes vs. PGEB

                (a) Prob. Being a Business Owner




              (b) Diff b/w Cadre Children and Others




                              23
                     Descriptive Patterns ­ Different Outcomes vs. PGEB (Figure 1 continued)

                                             (c) Diff b/w Entrepreneur Children and Others




Notes: Figure (a): the share of business owners is lower in provinces with higher PGEB (provincial government expenditure on business). Figure
(b): the difference between cadre children and non-cadre children increases with PGEB. Figure (c): the difference between entrepreneur children
and commoner children decreases with PGEB. Outliers are excluded in these figures.




                                                                     24
                                                   Table 1: Summary Statistics


                                                                                Cadre parent=1          Cadre parent=0
               Variable                                                              Mean (std.)          Mean (std.)

                A. CGSS 2005-2012, N=22,801
               Entrepreneur (Business owner/Self-employed)                        0.119 (0.324)          0.132 (0.338)
               Business owner                                                     0.026 (0.158)          0.021(0.143)
               Self-employed                                                      0.094 (0.291)          0.111 (0.314)
               College                                                            0.411 (0.492)          0.224 (0.417)
               College education of parents                                       0.197 (0.398)          0.028 (0.164)
               Female                                                             0.496 (0.500)          0.506 (0.500)
               Married                                                            0.904 (0.294)          0.934 (0.249)
               Ethnic Minorities                                                  0.074 (0.262)          0.056 (0.231)

                B. Key Determinants in Career Success, from CGSS 2005, N=4,690
               Connection with powerful officials             0.226 (0.418) 0.253 (0.435)
               Hard work                                      0.321 (0.467) 0.325 (0.468)
               Luck                                           0.079 (0.270) 0.109 (0.312)
               Ambition                                       0.341 (0.474) 0.350 (0.477)

                C. Family and Provincial Characteristics 2005-2012
               Cadre parents                                                                0.192 (0.394)
               Entrepreneur parents                                                         0.050 (0.219)
               PGEB: Provincial government expenditure
                                                                                            0.029 (0.020)
               on business-related activities over GDP
               Provincial government other expenditure
                                                                                            0.151 (0.067)
               over GDP

Notes: This table presents the summary statistics for the main variables. CGSS covers households with both urban and rural Hukou. We focus on
the urban ones because cadre parents and business owners are of little relevance for individuals with rural Hukou.




                                                                    25
                                                          Table 2: Correlations b/w PGEB and Other Measures of Institutions


                                                                       Overall             Govt­market           Private        Product market          Factor market         Intermediary
                                                         PGEB
                                                                     marketization         relationship         economy          development            development            service-law
               PGEB                                        1.00
               Overall marketization                      -0.59             1.00
26




               Govt­market relationship                   -0.72             0.85                 1.00
               Private economy                            -0.50             0.87                 0.74              1.00
               Product market development                 -0.64             0.66                 0.66              0.65                1.00
               Factor market development                  -0.36             0.81                 0.54              0.59                0.33                   1.00
               Intermediary service and law               -0.39             0.89                 0.66              0.65                0.39                   0.73                  1.00

     Notes: This table shows the correlations between PGEB (Provincial Government Expenditure on Business-related activities) and other measures of institutions. The data come from province-year measures
     on PGEB and other measures of institutions.
                         Table 3A: Parent Background and Child Occupations: OLS Estimates


                                                   (1)              (2)              (3)             (4)             (5)              (6)
                                               Government worker                   Business owner                   Self-employed
       Dependent variable
                                                (0/1, mean 0.217)                 (0/1, mean 0.022)               (0/1, mean 0.107)

       Cadre parent                           0.144***         0.115***          0.006**          0.003          -0.009*         -0.011**
                                               (0.009)          (0.009)          (0.003)         (0.003)         (0.005)          (0.005)
       Entrepreneur parent                     -0.006           -0.006          0.016***         0.014**        0.063***         0.057***
                                               (0.012)          (0.011)          (0.006)         (0.006)         (0.013)          (0.013)

       Province FE×Year FE                          Y               Y                 Y              Y                Y               Y
       Individual Characteristics                                   Y                                Y                                Y
       Observations                             22,801           22,801           22,801          22,801          22,801           22,801
       R-squared                                0.057             0.139            0.015           0.022           0.039            0.067



      Table 3B: Relative Risk Ratios in Diff. Occupations by Parental Background ­ Multinomial Logit

                                                                                       (1)              (2)               (3)
                   Reference group: being a firm employee
                   Being a government worker
                   Cadre parent                                                   2.327***         2.056***         2.043***
                                                                                   (0.122)          (0.120)          (0.104)
                   Entrepreneur parent                                              1.116            1.047            1.047
                                                                                   (0.095)          (0.093)          (0.092)

                   Being a business owner
                   Cadre parent                                                   1.656***         1.406***         1.413***
                                                                                   (0.187)          (0.162)          (0.167)
                   Entrepreneur parent                                            2.225***         1.912***         1.750***
                                                                                   (0.379)          (0.315)          (0.300)

                   Being self-employed
                   Cadre parent                                                    1.120*            1.058            1.080
                                                                                   (0.075)          (0.070)          (0.073)
                   Entrepreneur parent                                            1.921***         1.763***         1.579***
                                                                                   (0.186)          (0.169)          (0.015)

                   Individual characteristics                                                           Y               Y
                   Province FE*Year FE                                                                                  Y
                   Observations                                                     22,801           22,801           22,801


Notes: In Table 3A, the comparison group is all other occupations. In Table 3B, the reference group is being a firm employee. Individual
characteristics include: age, gender, marital status, ethnic minority status and college education. Standard errors are clustered at the province-year
level. Significance level: *p <0.1, **p <0.05, ***p <0.01.

                                                                          27
                                                 Table 4: The Impact of Cadre Parent×PGEB in Determining Business Ownership


                                                                                  (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)           (6)                (7)
                                                                                                               Business owner                                           Self-employed
                    Dependent variable
                                                                                                               (mean=0.022)                                             (mean=0.107)

                    Cadre parent×PGEB (sd)                                      0.004*         0.004*         0.005**                                     0.007**             0.002
                                                                               (0.002)         (0.002)        (0.002)                                     (0.003)            (0.007)
                    Cadre parent                                              0.006**           0.003          0.003          0.003          0.003          0.003           -0.011**
                                                                               (0.003)         (0.003)        (0.003)        (0.003)        (0.003)       (0.003)            (0.005)
                    Entrepreneur parent×PGEB (sd)                              -0.008*        -0.008**        -0.008*                                      -0.006             0.017
                                                                               (0.004)         (0.004)        (0.004)                                     (0.008)            (0.011)
                    Entrepreneur parent                                       0.016***        0.014**         0.014**       0.014**        0.013**        0.014**           0.057***
                                                                               (0.006)         (0.006)        (0.006)       (0.006)        (0.006)        (0.006)            (0.012)
                    Cadre parent×GDP per capita (sd)
28




                                                                                                                             -0.001                        -0.001
                                                                                                                            (0.002)                       (0.002)
                    Entre. parent×GDP per capita (sd)                                                                        -0.006                        -0.006
                                                                                                                            (0.005)                       (0.004)
                    Cadre parent×Other expend (sd)                                                                                           0.003         -0.002
                                                                                                                                            (0.003)       (0.004)
                    Entrepreneur parent×Other expend (sd)                                                                                    -0.007        -0.003
                                                                                                                                            (0.005)       (0.010)
                    Province FE×Year FE                                            Y               Y              Y             Y              Y              Y                 Y
                    Individual characteristics                                                     Y              Y             Y              Y              Y                 Y
                    PGEB×Individual characteristics                                                               Y             Y              Y              Y                 Y
                    Observations                                               22,801          22,801          22,801        22,801         22,801         22,801            22,801
                    R-squared                                                   0.015           0.023           0.023         0.023          0.023          0.023             0.068

     Notes: This table shows that the advantage in becoming a business owner (1) increases with PGEB for those with cadre parents and (2) decreases with PGEB for those with entrepreneur parents. Individual
     characteristics include: age, gender, marital status, ethnic minority status, and college education. Standard errors are clustered at the province-year level. Significance level: *p <0.1, **p <0.05,
     ***p <0.01.
                                             Table 5: PGEB vs. Other Measures of Institutions in Determining Business Ownership
                                                                   Dependent variable: Business owner


                                                      (1)          (2)         (3)           (4)          (5)         (6)         (7)          (8)          (9)         (10)        (11)         (12)


     Cadre parent×PGEB (sd)                                     0.005**                  0.007***                   0.004*                  0.005**                  0.005**                  0.005**
                                                                (0.002)                   (0.002)                   (0.002)                 (0.002)                  (0.002)                  (0.002)
     Cadre parent×Marketization (sd)                -0.004       -0.002
                                                    (0.003)     (0.003)
     Cadre parent×Gov­mkt (sd)                                               -0.002        0.002
                                                                             (0.003)      (0.003)
     Cadre parent×Private economy (sd)                                                                 -0.005*       -0.002
                                                                                                       (0.002)      (0.003)
     Cadre parent×Product market (sd)                                                                                            -0.003      -0.000
29




                                                                                                                                (0.003)     (0.003)
     Cadre parent×Factor market (sd)                                                                                                                     -0.004*      -0.003
                                                                                                                                                         (0.002)      (0.002)
     Cadre parent×Intermediary (sd)                                                                                                                                                -0.002       -0.001
                                                                                                                                                                                  (0.002)      (0.002)
     Cadre Parent                                    0.018       0.009        0.012       -0.010        0.016*       0.009       0.021       0.002       0.012*        0.010        0.006       0.003
                                                    (0.011)     (0.011)      (0.014)      (0.014)       (0.008)     (0.009)     (0.020)     (0.019)      (0.007)      (0.006)     (0.005)      (0.005)
     Province FE×Year FE                               Y           Y            Y            Y             Y           Y           Y           Y            Y            Y            Y           Y
     Individual characteristics                        Y           Y            Y            Y             Y           Y           Y           Y            Y            Y            Y           Y
     Individual char.×Market index                     Y           Y            Y            Y             Y           Y           Y           Y            Y            Y            Y           Y
     Individual char×PGEB                                          Y                         Y                         Y                       Y                         Y                        Y
     Observations                                   22,801      22,801       22,801       22,801        22,801      22,801      22,801      22,801       22,801       22,801       22,801      22,801
     R-squared                                       0.022       0.022        0.022        0.023        0.022        0.023      0.022        0.023        0.022        0.023        0.022       0.023

     Notes: This table shows that PGEB provides a useful and likely more precise proxy for government intervention in the economy. Individual characteristics include: age, gender, marital status, ethnic
     minority status, and college education. Standard errors are clustered at the province-year level. Significance level: *p <0.1, **p <0.05, ***p <0.01.
                                            Table 6: The Human Capital Hypothesis


                                                                              (1)              (2)                 (3)
                Dependent variable                                                  College                Business owner

                Cadre parent×PGEB (sd)                                       -0.002         0.000                0.005*
                                                                            (0.006)        (0.006)              (0.003)
                Cadre Parent                                               0.130***       0.092***               0.000
                                                                            (0.008)        (0.008)              (0.003)
                Entrepreneur parent×PGEB (sd)                                 0.002         0.001               -0.008*
                                                                            (0.015)        (0.014)              (0.004)
                Entrepreneur Parent                                         0.014**       0.040***             0.042***
                                                                            (0.006)        (0.014)              (0.014)
                College parent×PGEB (sd)                                                   -0.015                0.005
                                                                                           (0.016)              (0.009)
                College Parent                                                            0.245***             0.017***
                                                                                           (0.013)              (0.006)

                Province FE×Year FE                                            Y               Y                    Y
                PGEB×Individual char.(exclud.college)                          Y               Y                    Y
                Individual char. (exclud.college)                              Y               Y                    Y
                College, PGEB×College                                                                               Y
                Observations                                                22,801          22,801               22,801
                R-squared                                                    0.207           0.222                0.024

Notes: This table shows that it is difficult to use human capital to explain the interactive role of Cadre Parent and PGEB, because one needs the
difference in human capital to differ by PGEB. The individual characteristics include age, gender, ethnic minority status, and marriage status.
Standard errors are clustered at the province-year level. Significance level: *p <0.1, **p <0.05, ***p <0.01.




                                                                      30
                                                            Table 7: The Gap in Reported Income between Business Owners
                                                                           Dependent variable: ln Income


                                                                                                             (1)             (2)             (3)              (4)


                                          Cadre parent×Business owner×PGEB (sd)                                                          0.246***         0.245**
                                                                                                                                          (0.082)         (0.102)
                                          Cadre parent                                                  0.221***         0.109***        0.221***        0.110***
                                                                                                         (0.016)          (0.014)         (0.016)         (0.014)
                                          Business owner                                                0.779***         0.690***        0.775***        0.686***
                                                                                                         (0.057)          (0.057)         (0.057)         (0.056)
                                          Business owner×Cadre parent                                    -0.081           -0.049           -0.063          -0.032
31




                                                                                                         (0.143)          (0.141)         (0.138)         (0.135)
                                          Cadre parent×PGEB (sd)                                                                           0.000           0.002
                                                                                                                                          (0.015)         (0.012)
                                          Business owner×PGEB (sd)                                                                         -0.020          -0.022
                                                                                                                                          (0.033)         (0.030)
                                          Province FE×Year FE                                                Y                Y              Y               Y
                                          Individual characteristics                                                          Y                              Y
                                          Individual char.×Businessowner×PGEB                                                                                Y
                                          Observations                                                    14,269          14,269           14,269         14,269
                                          R-squared                                                        0.350           0.469            0.350          0.471

     Notes: This table shows that the gap in reported income between business owners who are cadre children and those who are not is significantly increasing in PGEB. The individual characteristics include
     age, gender, ethnic minority status, marriage status, and college education. Standard errors are clustered at the province-year level. Significance level: *p <0.1, **p <0.05, ***p <0.01.
                                                            Table 8: Self-evaluations of the Key Determinants in Career Success


                                                                   (1)             (2)            (3)                (4)                (5)               (6)               (7)             (8)
                   Dependent variable                          Power (mean=0.25)               Hard work (mean=0.32)                 Ambition (mean=0.35)                Luck (mean=0.10)

                   Business owner                              0.091**        0.126***         0.072*              0.054              0.010             0.002            -0.005          -0.017
                                                               (0.040)         (0.034)         (0.041)            (0.042)            (0.045)           (0.039)           (0.018)         (0.016)
                   Business owner×PGEB (sd)                                   0.111**                              -0.060                              -0.025                            -0.039
32




                                                                               (0.047)                            (0.068)                              (0.059)                           (0.023)

                   Province FE                                     Y               Y              Y                  Y                  Y                 Y                 Y               Y
                   Individual characteristics                      Y               Y              Y                  Y                  Y                 Y                 Y               Y
                   Observations                                  4,690           4,690          4,690              4,690              4,690             4,690             4,690           4,690
                   R-squared                                     0.100           0.101          0.067              0.067              0.073             0.073             0.034           0.035

     Notes: The dependent variable is a dummy variable if a respondent considers the factor listed in the first row as an "essential" determinant in career success. This table shows that business owners appreciate
     power more, especially in provinces with high PGEB. The individual characteristics include age, gender, ethnic minority status, marriage status, and college education. Standard errors are clustered at the
     province-year level. Significance level: *p <0.1, **p <0.05, ***p <0.01.
Online Appendix

Table of Contents
   A CGSS vs. Census Data                                                                     A-2


   B Understanding PGEB                                                                       A-2

      B.1 Defining PGEB . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-2

      B.2 PGEB and Firm Subsidy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-3

      B.3 PGEB pre-post the Fiscal Stimulus 2008 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-4

      B.4 The Variation in PGEB . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-6


   C Additional Results                                                                       A-7

      C.1 Additional Descriptive Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-7

      C.2 Further Evidence from the Stimulus in 2008 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-7

      C.3 Results by Parental Ranks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-10

      C.4 Excluding Infrastructure Expenditure from PGEB . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-10

      C.5 Excluding Migrants and Excluding Data in 2005-07 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-12

      C.6 Additional Evidence from the China Family Panel Studies (CFPS) . . . . . . . . A-13

      C.7 PGEB and Government Policy Priority . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-15




                                                A-1
A     CGSS vs. Census Data
To check the representativeness of CGSS, we report the mean and standard deviation of the key
characteristics in CGSS and census, focusing on the urban population. As shown in Table A, CGSS
sample is close to being a representative sample of the population. Specifically, the demographic
characteristics are comparable between the survey and the census 2010. Because census 2010 does
not provide occupations, we turn to the quasi-census 2005 for comparisons. The differences, even
though not large, may reflect changes in occupations over time.

                                     Table A: CGSS vs. Census

                                   CGSS 2005-12   Census 2010     Quasi-census 2005
               College                 0.259           0.281
                                      (0.438)         (0.449)
               Female                  0.504           0.495
                                      (0.500)         (0.500)
               Married                 0.928           0.883
                                      (0.258)         (0.321)
               Ethnic minorities       0.060           0.054
                                      (0.237)         (0.226)
               Government job          0.217                            0.253
                                      (0.412)                          (0.435)
               Business owner          0.022                            0.013
                                      (0.146)                          (0.111)
               Self-employed           0.107                            0.147
                                      (0.310)                          (0.354)




B     Understanding PGEB

B.1    Defining PGEB
We define PGEB as expenditure on infrastructure and MCF (Manufacturing/Commerce/Finance).
All the categories are from China Statistic Yearbooks. In 2007, there is only one broad category
of MCF expenditure, which incorporates the related categories in 2005. In later years, the broad
definition is divided into more categories again, although with different names. For each category,
we refer to the documents from the Ministry of Finance for its definition and sub-categories to
make sure our definition is consistent and comparable over years. Our results hold if we exclude
infrastructure expenditure from our definition of PGEB, see Appendix Table C.4 for discussion. In


                                                A-2
addition, our main results are also robust to excluding data in 2005 and 2007, as shown in Appendix
Table C.5.
      We summarize the categories by year in the following table:

                                     Table B.1: Definition of PGEB

 Year         PGEB                                               Non-business expenditure

 2005         Infrastructure                                     All other categories
              Funds to support firms for                         (related to public administration, defense,
              technology innovation and reform                   education, health, and social security)
              Policy-related subsidies to firms
              Sea exploration and subsidies to
              FDI and joint-venture firms for land-use
              Liquidity funds
              Aid to undeveloped regions (fiscal transfer to
              promote economic development and infrastructure)

 2007         Transportation                                     All other categories
              Manufacturing/Commerce/Finance-related             (related to public administration, defense,
              (MCF expend.)                                      education, health, and social security)

                                                                 The same above + Earthquake relief
 2008-2013    Transportation; Detailed MCF expend.
                                                                 and reconstruction (shock in 2008)




B.2     PGEB and Firm Subsidy
Does PGEB reflect government involvement in business? As a check, we examine the correlation
between our measure of PGEB and subsidy received by private firms. Specifically, using data
from the second National Economic Census (NEC), we find that a one standard deviation increase
in PGEB (0.02) is associated with a 0.6 percentage point increased probability of subsidy receipt
(column (1) in Table B.2), a very large effect compared to the mean probability (1.3 percentage
points). This relationship is robust to introducing firm-level controls (column (2)) and also true at
the intensive margin (column (3)).




                                                     A-3
                          Table B.2: Correlations between PGEB and Firm Subsidies in 2008

                                                      (1)              (2)                      (3)
                        Subsidy                       0/1              0/1          ln(Sub), subsidy recipients

                        PGEB                      0.304**           0.315**                     19.113**
                                                  (0.148)           (0.150)                      (6.958)
                        ln #Employee                               0.004***                     0.139***
                                                                    (0.001)                      (0.027)
                        ln Asset                                   0.002***                     0.517***
                                                                    (0.000)                      (0.029)
                        GDP per capita                              0.001**                    -0.139***
                                                                    (0.001)                      (0.033)

                        Industry FE                    Y              Y                             Y
                        Ownership FE                                  Y                             Y
                        Observations             3,298,048        3,227,381                      42,292
                        R-squared                  0.098            0.102                         0.345

Notes: Standard errors are clustered at the province level. Significance level: *p <0.1, **p <0.05, ***p <0.01.



B.3       PGEB pre-post the Fiscal Stimulus 2008
In November 2008, as a response to the global financial crisis and the slow-down domestic economy,
the Chinese central government announced a fiscal stimulus plan of 4 trillion RMB. Except for the
expenditures used in the reconstruction works in the regions destroyed by the 8-magnitude Sichuan
earthquake in 2008, 75% of the package went to business-related expenditure.                                      As shown in Panel
(a) of Figure B.3, the average PGEB was about 2.4 percent (of provincial GDP) prior to the stimulus
package and increased to 4.8 percent post the stimulus package. In contrast, Panel (b) shows that
the increase in the other fiscal expenditure was modest and statistically insignificant.

For the breakdown of the stimulus package, announced by the National Development and Reform Commission, see:
http://www.eeo.com.cn/ens/finance_investment/2009/03/07/131626.shtml.




                                                                     A-4
Figure B.3: Expenditures pre-post the Stimulus Package

                       (a) PGEB




                 (b) Other expenditures




                         A-5
B.4   The Variation in PGEB

           Figure B.4: PGEB vs. SOEs Share and GDP Per Capita across Provinces

                                 (a) PGEB vs. SOEs Share




                               (b) PGEB vs. GDP Per Capita




                                          A-6
PGEB vs. SOEs Share & Economic Development.               Another fact illustrating that PGEB is a
slow-moving provincial characteristics is that 55% of the cross-provincial variation in PGEB in
2007 is explained by the share of State Owned Enterprises (SOEs) in manufacturing in 1985,
presented in Figure B.4(a).
      Government involvement in business is negatively correlated with GDP per capita. However,
as shown Figure B.4(b) for the cross-province correlation between the average logged GDP per
capita and average PGEB in our study period. The R-squared is 0.22, implying that 22% of the
variation in PGEB can be explained by regional development. As shown, provinces of similar
development levels can have different degree of government involvement. For instance, our data
confirms the difference in government involvement between Shanghai and Zhejiang mentioned in
Huang (2008).



C      Additional Results

C.1     Additional Descriptive Results
The patterns in Figure 1 hold if we focus on non-cadre and non-entrepreneur children as the
comparison group, as shown in Figure C.1.


C.2     Further Evidence from the Stimulus in 2008
Since PGEB is slow-moving, the pre-stimulus PGEB is a good predictor of the post-stimulus ex-
penditure. Specifically, if we regress the post-stimulus PGEB on pre-stimulus PGEB, we obtain
a coefficient of 1.869 (with a standard error of 0.173) and a R-squared of 0.82. Essentially, this
national-level stimulus spending is proportional at provincial level, which provides us useful varia-
tion in PGEB. Thus, this policy shock provides us an opportunity to investigate the heterogeneous
effect across provinces with the different pre-stimulus level of PGEB.
      We divide the provinces into two groups by the median PGEB in the benchmark year of 2005,
and examine whether the same policy shock has different impacts across the two groups using a




                                                A-7
Figure C.1: Descriptive Patterns ­ Different Outcomes vs. PGEB

 (a) Diff b/w Cadre Children and Others (Excl. Entrepreneur Children)




(b) Diff b/w Entrepreneur Children and Others (Excl. Cadre Children)




                                A-8
triple difference design as follows:
Businessi,p,t = 3 CadreP arenti,p,t × HighP rovp × P ost08t + 2 CadreP arenti,p,t × HighP rovp
                              +1 CadreP arenti,p,t × P ost08t + 0 CadreP arenti,p,t
                              +3 Xi,p,t × HighP rovp × P ost08t + 2 Xi,p,t × HighP rovp
                              +1 Xi,p,t × P ost08t + 0 Xi,p,t + P rovp × Y eart + i,p,t,
where P ost08t is a dummy variable that is 1 for the three waves of the CGSS data in 2009, 2011
and 2012, 0 for the two waves in 2005 and 2007. HighP rovp indicates whether PGEB was above
median in 2005. We also allow for a flexible effect of Xi,p,t by interacting it with P ost08t and
HighP rovp .
       If our earlier hypothesis is correct, we expect to see a positive 3 because a surge in such fiscal
spending encourages people from a cadre family to start a business more in provinces with a higher
benchmark PGEB. This is indeed the case, as reported in Table C.2.

                                            Table C.2: Results from the Stimulus Shock

                                                                              (1)           (2)           (3)             (4)             (5)

                                                                                                                     Age<=35          Age>35

     Cadre parent×High benchmark×Post 2008                                 0.019*        0.019*        0.021*         0.059**            0.009
                                                                           (0.011)       (0.012)       (0.012)         (0.03)          (0.012)
     Cadre parent                                                           0.004         0.001         0.001           0.033          -0.011*
                                                                           (0.008)       (0.008)       (0.008)        (0.021)          (0.007)
     Cadre parent×High benchmark                                           -0.008        -0.009        -0.009          -0.033           -0.000
                                                                           (0.010)       (0.010)       (0.010)        (0.027)          (0.011)
     Cadre parent×Post 2008                                                -0.002        -0.003        -0.002        -0.054**           0.015*
                                                                           (0.009)       (0.009)       (0.009)        (0.023)          (0.008)

     Province FE×Year FE                                                      Y              Y             Y               Y               Y
     Individual characteristics                                                              Y             Y               Y               Y
     Individual char.×High benchmark×Post 2008                                                             Y               Y               Y
     (including all pairwise interactions)
     Observations                                                          22,801        22,801        22,801           5,046          17,755
     R-squared                                                              0.014         0.022         0.023           0.046           0.025

Notes: The individual characteristics include age, gender, ethnic minority status, marriage status, and college education. Standard errors are clustered
at the province-year level. Significance level: *p <0.1, **p <0.05, ***p <0.01.


       Compared with the provinces with lower benchmark PGEB, the effect of cadre parents on
the probability of being a business owner increases by 1.9 percentage point more after 2008 in
the provinces with higher benchmark PGEB, close to the mean probability (0.022). Furthermore,

                                                                         A-9
this effect is driven by the younger cohort (younger than 35 years old) who are more likely to take
advantage of this huge but only one-time shock to change their career. For them, the effect on the
probability of being a business owner increases by 5.9 percentage points. In contrast, there is little
impact on those aged 35 above.
       Thus, the over-time variation in PGEB exhibits the same pattern as the cross-sectional variation.
Since the variation we are exploring stems from a national shock which is likely to be exogenous to
any specific provincial characteristics, these results provide further support for our main finding.


C.3      Results by Parental Ranks
There exists heterogeneity among cadres ­ highly-ranked officials are more powerful than govern-
ment workers with no ranks. Here, we separate cadre parents by their official ranks (only available in
the surveys during 2009-2012) into three groups, using 1 to indicate non-cadre parents. Within the
cadre parents, Rank=2 indicates those working in government offices but having no official ranks;
Rank=3 indicates those with ranks but ranked below deputy-division-head level; and Rank=4 indi-
cates those ranked at deputy-division-head level and above. To put this into perspective, a Standing
Committee member of a county-level Party Committee is ranked at the deputy-division-head level.
       While we do not have enough power for each group, we find the impact of CadreP arenti ×
P GEBp,t increases with ranks, as reported in Appendix Table C.3. Columns (1)-(2) replace the
cadre parent dummy with the 1-4 ranks and confirm the positive interaction effect of parental rank
and PGEB on children's business ownership. Column (3) reports the results rank by rank. While
the estimates are noisy due to the limited power of the survey data, they confirm that the impacts
increase with ranks.


C.4      Excluding Infrastructure Expenditure from PGEB
Our main finding holds if we exclude infrastructure expenditure from PGEB, as reported in Table
C.4.




                                                  A-10
                                           Table C.3: Results by Parental Official Ranks

                                                                                    (1)             (2)            (3)

                            Parent rank × PGEB (sd)                             0.004**         0.003*
                                                                                (0.002)         (0.002)
                            Parent rank                                          0.003           0.003
                                                                                (0.002)         (0.002)
                            Parent rank (=2)×PGEB (sd)                                                          0.001
                                                                                                               (0.004)
                            Parent rank (=3)×PGEB (sd)                                                          0.006
                                                                                                               (0.006)
                            Parent rank (=4)×PGEB (sd)                                                          0.015
                                                                                                               (0.015)
                            Parent rank (=2)                                                                    0.007
                                                                                                               (0.005)
                            Parent rank (=3)                                                                    0.006
                                                                                                               (0.007)
                            Parent rank (=4)                                                                    0.007
                                                                                                               (0.013)
                            Entrepreneur parent×PGEB (sd)                                       -0.008*        -0.008*
                                                                                                (0.004)        (0.004)
                            Entrepreneur parent                                                 0.017**        0.017**
                                                                                                (0.036)        (0.036)

                            Province FE×Year FE                                    Y                Y              Y
                            Individual Characteristics                             Y                Y              Y
                            Individual Characteristics×PGEB                        Y                Y              Y
                            Observations                                         14,366          14,366         14,366
                            R-squared                                            0.021            0.022          0.022

Notes: The individual characteristics include age, gender, ethnic minority status, marriage status, and college education. Standard errors are clustered
at the province-year level. Significance level: *p <0.1, **p <0.05, ***p <0.01.




                                                                        A-11
                                Table C.4: Excluding Infrastructure expenditure from PGEB

                                                                                        (1)              (2)             (3)


                     Cadre parent×MCF (sd)                                          0.004*           0.004*          0.005**
                                                                                    (0.002)          (0.002)          (0.002)
                     Cadre parent                                                   0.006**           0.002            0.002
                                                                                    (0.003)          (0.003)          (0.003)
                     Entrepreneur parent×MCF (sd)                                  -0.010**         -0.010**         -0.009**
                                                                                    (0.005)          (0.005)          (0.005)
                     Entrepreneur parent                                           0.016***         0.014**          0.014**
                                                                                    (0.006)          (0.006)          (0.006)

                     Province FE×Year FE                                                Y                Y               Y
                     Individual characteristics                                                          Y               Y
                     Individual characteristics×MCF expend.                                                              Y
                     Observations                                                    22,801           22,801          22,801
                     R-squared                                                       0.015             0.023           0.023

Notes: The individual characteristics include age, gender, ethnic minority status, marriage status, and college education. Standard errors are clustered
at the province-year level. Significance level: *p <0.1, **p <0.05, ***p <0.01.



C.5        Excluding Migrants and Excluding Data in 2005-07
Our main finding is robust excluding migrants (columns (1)-(2) of Table C.5). It is also robust
to using data during 2009-2012, where the PGEB categories remain exactly the same and we can
control for county fixed effects (column (3)).




                                                                        A-12
                                Table C.5: Excluding Migrants and Excluding Data in 05-07

                                                                                    (1)             (2)            (3)
                            Cadre parent×PGEB (sd)                              0.005*          0.005**        0.006**
                                                                                (0.002)         (0.002)        (0.002)
                            Cadre parent                                         0.002           0.002          0.003
                                                                                (0.003)         (0.003)        (0.003)
                            Entrepreneur parent×PGEB (sd)                      -0.008**         -0.007*         -0.007
                                                                                (0.004)         (0.004)        (0.004)
                            Entrepreneur parent                                0.012**          0.012**        0.013*
                                                                                (0.006)         (0.006)        (0.007)

                            Province FE×Year FE                                      Y               Y             Y
                            Individual characteristics                               Y               Y             Y
                            Individual characteristics×PGEB                                          Y             Y
                            County FF, 09-12 only                                                                  Y
                            Observations                                         22,086          22,086         14,505
                            R-squared                                             0.022           0.022          0.033

Notes: The individual characteristics include age, gender, ethnic minority status, marriage status, and college education. Standard errors are clustered
at the province-year level. Significance level: *p <0.1, **p <0.05, ***p <0.01.



C.6        Additional Evidence from the China Family Panel Studies (CFPS)
Replicating CGSS. Can our main result be replicated using other surveys? Here, we employ
data from the 2012 wave of the CFPS. The CFPS is a nationally representative, biennial general
social survey, launched and conducted in 2010 by the Institute of Social Science Survey (ISSS) of
Peking University. It is a panel data over individuals or households. Four waves of the data (2010,
2012, 2014, 2016) have been released to public use. This table uses the individual adult survey in
2012, the first wave that records the occupation of the respondent's parents when the respondent
was 14 years old, which is the same as in the CGSS. As in the CGSS, the analysis is restricted to
urban respondents in 25 provinces. Since the CFPS is panel data over individuals, the parents' past
occupation is fixed across waves, we only employ one wave of the data to corroborate our finding
using multiple-wave CGSS data.
       Different from CGSS, however, we cannot separate business owners and self-employed using
CFPS. Hence, we look at how the probability of becoming an entrepreneur varies by parental
background and local context. To compare with CGSS, we normalize the dependent variables by
their means. As shown in columns (1)-(4) of Table C.6, the estimated magnitude is close to our
main results from the CGSS data: In our main results, one standard deviation increase in PGEB is
associated with 25 percent increase in the mean probability of being business owners. In CFPS, one

                                                                        A-13
standard deviation increase in PGEB is associated with 20 percent increase in the mean probability
of being entrepreneurs.

                                            Table C.6: I. Additional Results from CFPS

                                              (1)          (2)                   (3)         (4)          (5)       (6)             (7)        (8)
Data                                         CGSS        CGSS                   CFPS        CFPS         CFPS      CFPS            CFPS       CFPS
Year                                       2005-2012 2009-2012                  2012        2012         2012      2012            2012       2012
Dependent variable                          Business owner/Mean                                       Entrepreneur/Mean


Cadre parent×PGEB (sd)                       0.256**         0.245**          0.221**      0.203**
                                             (0.106)         (0.110)          (0.100)      (0.093)
Cadre parent                                  0.075           0.077            -0.184       -0.099
                                             (0.120)         (0.132)          (0.151)      (0.123)
Risk-love×PGEB (sd)                                                                                       -0.077       -0.097
                                                                                                         (0.132)      (0.152)
Risk-love                                                                                               0.352***      0.213*
                                                                                                         (0.112)      (0.111)
Social skill×PGEB (sd)                                                                                                             -0.015      -0.011
                                                                                                                                  (0.131)     (0.138)
Social skill                                                                                                                       0.096       0.110
                                                                                                                                  (0.105)     (0.107)

Province FE×Year FE                              Y               Y
County FE                                                        Y                Y            Y            Y            Y           Y          Y
Individual Characteristics                                                                     Y                         Y                      Y
Individual Characteristics×PGEB                                                                Y                         Y                      Y
Observations                                  22,801          15,015            6,224        6,224        2,065        2,065       4,768      4,768
R-squared                                      0.022           0.032            0.071        0.088        0.106        0.131       0.075      0.094

Notes: The individual characteristics include age, gender, ethnic minority status, marriage status, and college education. Standard errors are clustered
at the province-year level. Significance level: *p <0.1, **p <0.05, ***p <0.01.



Risk Attitudes and Social Skills.                        One advantage of the CPFS is that it contains data on other
personal characteristics of respondents, such as risk attitudes and social skills. The question on
risk attitudes is asked for individuals with some financial investments. The question is "in your
investment portfolio, what type of risks are you willing to take?" The options are (a) "high risk,
high return", (b) "moderate risk, steady return", (c) "low risk, low return" and (d) "no risk at all".
We define risk-loving if one answers (a) and (b). The results below are robust to using (a) only to
define risk-loving. The question on social skills is asked in the family questionnaire. The question
is "please self-evaluate how well you get along with people", and the answer ranges from 0-10. We
use a dummy indicating being above 5 as higher social skills. The results below are robust to using
the value as an alternative definition.
       We conduct two sets of analysis. First, we check the correlations between cadre parents and
these personal traits and find a very weak correlation, suggesting that cadre children do not differ


                                                                        A-14
dramatically in these traits. This indicates that it is not likely that the first pattern we uncover is due
to cadre parent being a proxy for these other skills/characteristics.

                    Table C.6: II. Correlations between Cadre Parents and Other Traits

                                           Cadre parent    Risk-love    Social skill
                           Cadre parent         1.00
                           Risk-love           0.003          1.00
                           Social skill        0.024         -0.031        1.00



      Second, we include these additional traits in our analysis. In columns (5)-(6) of Table C.6(I) we
show that while a risk-loving attitude is associated with entrepreneurship, it displays no interaction
with PGEB. In columns (7) and (8) we show that there is no association between the measure of
social skills and entrepreneurship.
      Thus, although these individual characteristics can be correlated with entrepreneurship, it is
difficult for them to explain the cross-province patterns in our main results.


C.7       PGEB and Government Policy Priority
To examine how PGEB correlates with government policy priority, we collect text data on annual
government reports for the years 2005-2012, where policy priorities are explicitly spelled out. We
find that PGEB is negatively correlated with the frequency of private economy mentions (relative
to state economy mentions) in government reports (Figure C.7).              This finding is interesting as it
dispels the notion that these provinces are trying to catch up in the development of their private
sector.
The Chinese words are minying for private economy and guoyou for state economy.




                                                    A-15
Figure C.7: PGEB vs. ln(Word freq: "private")­ln(Word freq: "state-owned")




                                  A-16
