                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     LESSONS FROM DENMARK ABOUT INEQUALITY AND SOCIAL MOBILITY

                                     James J. Heckman
                                     Rasmus Landersø

                                    Working Paper 28543
                            http://www.nber.org/papers/w28543


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   March 2021




This paper was presented as the IAB Sponsored Plenary Lecture at the joint EALE/SOLE/
AASLE World Conference in June 2020. We thank Rafeh Qureshi for highly competent
research assistance. We have drawn on our joint work with Neil Cholli, Sadegh Eshaghnia,
Miriam Gensowski, Kristian Karlson, and Rafeh Qureshi. This research was supported in
part by: The Rockwool Foundation and The American Bar Foundation. The views expressed
in this paper are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the
funders, nor of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by James J. Heckman and Rasmus Landersø. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Lessons from Denmark about Inequality and Social Mobility
James J. Heckman and Rasmus Landersø
NBER Working Paper No. 28543
March 2021
JEL No. H24,H44,J12,J18

                                         ABSTRACT

Many American policy analysts point to Denmark as a model welfare state with low levels of
income inequality and high levels of income mobility across generations. It has in place many
social policies now advocated for adoption in the U.S. Despite generous Danish social policies,
family influence on important child outcomes in Denmark is about as strong as it is in the United
States. More advantaged families are better able to access, utilize, and influence universally
available programs. Purposive sorting by levels of family advantage create neighborhood effects.
Powerful forces not easily mitigated by Danish-style welfare state programs operate in both
countries.


James J. Heckman
Center for the Economics of
Human Development
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and IZA
and also NBER
jjh@uchicago.edu

Rasmus Landersø
Rockwool Foundation Research Unit
Ny Kongensgade 6
Copenhagen 1472
Danmark
rl@rff.dk




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28543
1         Introduction
Many American policy analysts point to Denmark as a model welfare state with low levels of income

inequality and high levels of social mobility in income across generations. It has in place many social

policies now advocated for adoption in the U.S.: free college tuition, universal access to high-quality

health care, equality of per pupil expenditures across all neighborhoods, universal high-quality pre-

K, and generous childcare and maternity leave policy. In addition, there are well funded social

security, disability, and unemployment programs in Denmark. Inequality in disposable income is

much lower than in the U.S.

        Yet, despite generous social policies, family influence on many child outcomes in Denmark is

comparable to that in the U.S. Common forces are at work in both countries that are not easily

mitigated by welfare state policies. Denmark achieves lower income inequality and greater inter-

generational income mobility primarily through its tax and transfer programs and not by building

the skills of children across generations and promoting their human potential more effectively.1

        Despite the generosity of the Danish welfare state and equality in access for all citizens, substan-

tial inequality of child outcomes remains across social and economic classes. Figure 1 documents

these gaps and compares them to their U.S. counterparts. Children of college-educated women

do substantially better than children of secondary school dropouts on many dimensions in both

countries.2

        Denmark is a laboratory for understanding the origins of inequality and social immobility. In

the U.S., inequalities in the public services that are equally provided at a high level in Denmark

are major topics in discussions of social mobility. However, if equal Danish provision of services

does not eliminate inequality in many important life outcomes, the origins of inequality and social

immobility lie elsewhere. Consequently, an uncritical adoption of Danish policy initiatives may not

be effective as a way to ensure equality of opportunity.
    1
     See Landersø and Heckman (2017) and Section 2 below. Carneiro et al. (2015) find similar results for
Norway. Parenthetically, we make no statements about the fairness of the systems in the two countries.
For example, there is arguably greater social cohesion in Denmark (witness the U.S. versus the Danish
response to COVID-19) and events such as disability or unemployment have less dramatic consequences for
individuals' standard of living.
   2
     Since scales of some of the measures differ across countries, quantitative comparisons are not always
exact, but many are.
                                                                  Figure 1: Life cycle


                                                  Birth           Not admitted                                                            Sociability                                              Language
                                                  weight         to neonatal unit
     Denmark
     Mother's educ.




                                                                                                                         9
                                                                                                                                                                           70




                                                                                     .92




                                           3550
                                                                                                                         8.5




                                           3500
        College




                                                                                     .91
                                                                                                                                  8




                                           3450
                                                                                                                                                                             60




                                                                                    .9
                                                                                                                      7.5
        High school




                                                                                                                Sociability score




                                     3350 3400
                                                                       .89




                                    Birth weight, g.
                                                                                                                         7
                                                                                                                                                            50
                                                                                                                                                            Language test score




                                                                  Not hospitalized after birth




                                           3300
                                                                                                                         6.5




                                                                                     .88
        No high school




                                           3250
                                                                                                                         6
                                                                                                                                                                           40




                                                                                                                                      3      4          5                                      8     10     12   14




                                                                                     .87




                                           3200
     U.S.




2
     Mother's educ.
                                                                                                                         12




                                                                                     .92
                                                                                                                                                                           110




                                           3550
                                           3500
        College
                                                                                                                         11.5
                                                                                                                                                                                       105




                                                                                                   .9
                                                                                                                             11
                                                                                                                                                                            100




                                                                                     .88
        High school
                                                                                                                 10.5




                                     3350 3400 3450
                                                                                                                Sociability Score




                                    Birth Weight, g.
                                                                                                                                                                   95




                                           3300
                                                                                                                         10




                                                                      .86
                                                                                                                                                            PIAT Reading Comprehension Score
                                                                                                                                                                           90




                                                                  Percent Hospital Stay Twice over Median
        No high school




                                           3250
                                                                                                                         9.5




                                                                                                                                      3      4          5                                      8     10     12   14
                                                                                     .84




                                           3200
     Age                                               0                                                    0                                3-5                                                     8-14


    Note: The figure shows children's life course outcomes by their mother's education for Denmark and the U.S. Scale differences for some dimensions
    impair full comparability across countries. However, the overall pattern with differences in all outcomes across the life persist in both countries.
    Birth weight is the same scale and outcome ­ levels are lower in the US but gaps top-bottom are the same in the two countries. Data on admission
    to neonatal units differ in definition and can thus not be compared 1:1. Test scores are also not the same, so we can only compare patterns. The
    data are described in Web Appendix C.
   This paper reports three major findings from our ongoing joint research on Danish and American

inequality and social mobility.3 (1) Intergenerational educational mobility is about the same in both

countries for the most recent cohorts. Transmission of skills across generations is equally strong in

both countries, despite stark differences in income inequality and offered public services.

   (2) The traditional literature on the intergenerational transmission of economic status compares

snapshots of lifetime incomes of parents and children.4 This approach gives only a limited picture

of the transmission of lifetime well-being across generations. Using Danish register data on lifecycle

income, we find that intergenerational elasticities of income (IGE) of lifetime well-being are much

higher than those estimated using incomes measured over a small window of ages. Accounting

for uncertainty and credit market restrictions increases estimated dependence across generations.

Well-being is much more tightly linked across generations in Denmark than conventional snapshot

measures of lifetime income indicate.

   (3) We expand the analysis of family influence beyond the traditional analysis of IGEs of income

to include choices of neighborhood, peers, and schools as parental investments in their children. We

present compelling evidence of purposive sorting by parents in making neighborhood choices. Our

evidence calls into question the assumptions underlying the recent neighborhood influence literature

­ that timing of residential choice is random with respect to the lifetime gains for children.5

   Public policy should be better informed about the role of the family and markets in shaping

child outcomes and in complementing or undermining public policy. The family influence in shap-

ing the child is universally accepted.6 Families operate through multiple channels. (i) Through

direct parental interactions with children in stimulating child learning, personality, and behaviors.

This comes from direct engagement and by setting examples for children to emulate, including

supporting, supplementing, and advising schooling and other activities in which children engage.

(ii) Through choice of neighborhoods and localities which influence the quality of schooling and the

quality of peers. (iii) Through guidance on important lifetime decisions.
   3
     Drawing specifically on (1) Karlson and Landersø (2021), (2) Eshaghnia et al. (2021), and (3) Cholli
(2021); Gensowski et al. (2021) which we supplement with additional figures documenting sorting.
   4
     See, e.g., Corak, 2013; Lee and Solon, 2009; Mazumder, 2008.
   5
     See, e.g., Chetty and Hendren (2018); Chetty et al. (2020).
   6
     In the Republic, Plato recognized the power of family influence and recommended state orphanages as
a vehicle for promoting equality. The evidence on the adverse impact on child development from separating
parents and children is overwhelming. See, e.g., Nelson III. et al. (2019).


                                                   3
      However, public policy and social analysts often ignore these fundamental points and neglect

the central role of family influence and family response to policy. Effective public policy has to

recognize the "Matthew Effect" that declares

                                  "to those who have more is given."

                                              --Matthew 25:29 RSV

      More advantaged families are better able to access, utilize, and influence universally available

programs. Universal provision of public services does not necessarily mitigate advantages, and

indeed may exacerbate inequality.7 Targeted strategies are generally more effective, although they

are often rejected as politically unpalatable.8

      These forces are especially important in understanding neighborhood effects on child develop-

ment which have received considerable attention in the recent literature in economics.9 Families

sort by education and affluence. Such sorting has been increasing over the past decades in both

Denmark and the U.S. Sorting, coupled with the Matthew Effect, creates neighborhood effects as

outcomes of social processes. Put differently, the neighborhood effects reported in the recent liter-

ature are likely consequences of the families that sort to them and the synergies so produced. We

document the powerful role of Matthew effects in promoting social immobility.

      A crucial identifying assumption in the recent literature on neighborhood effects is that the

timing of the choice of neighborhood is random across the age of children in families. We document

purposive early selection of quality neighborhoods for children that is more pronounced for more

educated and affluent parents. This point is important because the data from public records

available in the U.S. (and other countries) and used in recent influential studies is limited in its

information on many important, previously established determinants of family influence, such as

family marital arrangements, parental criminal histories, parental education, ability, parenting

styles, and other characteristics.10 Findings of powerful neighborhood effects in such limited data

may just as well be a consequence of the poor quality of the data on family influence, and the

sorting of families by socioeconomic status. Neighborhood is a proxy for family characteristics.
  7
     For discussion, see Ceci and Papierno (2005). Walters (2018) is a recent example.
  8
     See Elango et al. (2016) and our discussion below.
   9
     See Chetty et al. (2017), Chetty (2021), and Pinto (2021).
  10
     See, e.g., Cunha et al. (2006), Almond and Currie (2011), and Heckman and Mosso (2014).

                                                   4
Therefore, it remains a question whether there exists some intrinsic property of neighborhoods per

se that can be eliminated by relocating residents.

   Our paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents a brief overview of the evolution of the

Danish welfare state and illustrates its divergence from the U.S. counterpart. The section then

shows how intergenerational mobility in educational attainment declined when Denmark moved

toward universality in education policies and away from targeting the least advantaged groups even

though policies such as free college tuition, universal daycare, and support for public education

were rolled out during the same period. For the most recent cohorts operating under universality,

educational mobility is similar in the two countries, and associations between test scores and family

background are also strikingly similar.

   Section 3 adds a new perspective to the discussion of intergenerational mobility of income,

which, to date, has focused on the association between child and parent income measured over a

narrow set of years and not actual lifetime well-being. We show that intergenerational lifetime

well-being is more closely linked than currently used indicators suggest.

   Section 4 shows the purposive sorting of parents across neighborhoods. It documents the

similarity of sorting patterns in the U.S. and Denmark. We show the powerful role of parental

influence in shaping public expenditure even when equality is mandated. We apply our analysis of

the Danish data to interpret the evidence on the validity of recent studies based on limited U.S.

data on the power of neighborhoods. Danish data are much richer and allow us to examine in

greater detail assumptions used to analyze U.S. data. We demonstrate the strong sorting patterns

of families in picking neighborhoods. This analysis sends a clear message about the failure of

identifying assumptions invoked in U.S. studies. Estimated neighborhood effects proxy family

characteristics and family actions, not some mysterious property of "zip code" or place. Accounting

for these characteristics greatly weakens estimates of neighborhood effects and illustrates the power

of family rather than place.




                                                 5
2        Welfare state targeting and educational mobility across

         the 20th century
The foundation of the Danish welfare state was laid during the late 19th century when reforms

relating to old-age support, poverty relief, and health insurance were introduced. Nevertheless,

around 1900 Danish welfare policies were not fundamentally different from those in the rest of

Northern Europe, including Germany and the U.K., and were by no means more generous.11 While

social security was expanded throughout the 20th century, it was not until the 1960s and 1970s

that most of the policies that Denmark is known for today were implemented.12 For example,

universal health care (1970), universal childcare (1960s),13 and universal old-age pensions (1960)

are all funded by income taxes. Prior to that time, policies were insurance-based but with coverage

increasingly expanded (particularly from the mid-1930s onward) by, e.g., mandatory participation.14

A similar change also took place for education policies where, for example, expenses for primary

and lower secondary education increased substantially while child-to-teacher ratios decreased.15

       This evolution and divergence from other countries is illustrated by Fig. 2, which shows public
  11
      They were, however, far more generous than national policies in the U.S.
  12
      The Social-Democrats (who were in government for most of the period from the early 1920s to the early
1980s and the leading party behind the welfare expansion) initially favored increased means tested support
for low-income groups, but during the late 1940s and 1950s gradually changed the focus towards universal
policies. The evolution of the Danish welfare state during the period considered in this section is described
in detail in Andersen et al. (2012) for years 1933­1956, Andersen et al. (2012) for years 1956­1973, and
Andersen et al. (2013) for years 1973­1993.
   13
      Here, access to child care became universal. However, usage was far from universal. The fraction of 0-6
year olds enrolled in daycare were: 6.4% in 1958, 7.3% in 1965, 27.4% in 1975, 52.8% in 1985, 65.0% in 1995,
76.6% in 2000 Statistics Denmark (2001).
   14
      The background was the strong economic growth during the decades following WWII. The Danish
GDP per capita was almost 40% lower than the U.S. in both 1920 and 1950, compared to a difference
of approximately 20% in 1972. Moreover, the post WWII years in Denmark were characterized by rapid
changes in occupational structure, production, and technology, dubbed the second industrial revolution--
several decades after what is known as the second industrial revolution in e.g., the U.S. This also included
the mechanization of agriculture, which Fig. A.1 (in https://cehd.uchicago.edu/Denmark_inequality)
illustrates by showing the number of workhorses and tractors in Denmark and the U.S. across the first two
thirds of the 20th century.
   15
      Fig. A.2 illustrates the changes following a reform on public schools in 1958 on Danish schools' teaching
resources (from Karlson and Landersø, 2021). Fig. A.2a and b shows pre- and post-reform trends in total
expenditures, indexed to the 1957/1958 school year. Fig. A.2c shows the number of school-age children
per teacher (in municipal schools) in Denmark from 1949 through 1963. Furthermore, in tandem with the
changes in primary and lower secondary schools, the number of academic high schools also increased: 70
high schools in 1954, 92 in 1967, 125 in 1975, and 156 in 1985.


                                                      6
spending and transfer payments across all levels of government as a fraction of GPD for Denmark

and the U.S. from 1950­2000. Following a gradual increase after WWII, the fraction for Denmark

increased from around 20% in 1950 to almost 50% by 1980. In contrast, public spending and

transfer payments as a fraction of GPD in the U.S. were around 15% in 1950 (around 6 percentage

points lower than Denmark) but less than 30% in 1980.

Figure 2: Public spending and transfer payments, as percentage of GDP, Denmark and
U.S.




Source: U.S. is based on Federal Budget of the United States, from 1948-2000. Denmark is based on
Statistics Denmark (2001).
Note: The figure shows public expenditures and transfer payments (excl. defense and interest payments) as
percentage of GPD for Denmark and the U.S.

       How did the expansion of the welfare state affect inequality in Denmark? Inequality in after-tax

income is lower over the period 1970­2010 in Denmark compared to that of the U.S. (Atkinson

and Sogaard, 2016). Moreover, policies such as the introduction of universal childcare have been

shown to increase the education of children from disadvantaged families.16 Thus, a link between

the Danish welfare state and equality of opportunity and greater social mobility seems plausible.
  16
       See, e.g., Havnes and Mogstad (2011, 2015) for Norway.


                                                      7
       Fig. 3a shows estimates from regressing children's years of schooling on parents' years of school-

ing for cohorts born from 1911-1986 in Denmark and the U.S. (Karlson and Landersø, 2021). While

educational mobility appears to be relatively stable in the U.S. across the 20th century with esti-

mates around 0.417 , the Danish counterpart varies dramatically. Early in the 20th century, educa-

tional mobility was much lower in Denmark than in the U.S. with estimates around 0.55. However,

for cohorts born during the early 1940s onward, educational mobility increases rapidly (estimates

decrease) reaching a level of around 0.3 for cohorts born during the mid-1960s. Public spending

and transfer payments in Denmark relative to those in the U.S., thus, follow a similar trend as

the relative difference between the mobility estimates shown in Fig. 3a for cohorts born until the

mid-1960s.

       For cohorts born in the 1970s and 1980s in Denmark, however, educational mobility declined.

Fig. 3b focuses on Denmark and zooms in on the changes in educational mobility for each cohorts

born from 1956­1987. The zenith of mobility was experienced for cohorts born in the early and

mid-1960s. Cohorts born from the mid-1970s onward experience rapidly declining mobility. In

consequence, for the cohorts born in the mid-1980s, estimated educational mobility in Denmark is

similar to that in the U.S. with estimates around 0.45, and this convergence is in stark contrast to

welfare expenditure in the two countries.18

       While welfare policies may have diverged during the latest decades, the two countries have

converged in terms of educational levels. In Appendix A19 we show that the average years of

schooling of children (parents) for cohorts born from 1955­1986 have increased from around 11.5

years (9.5 years) to around 14 years (13 years), whereas educational levels in the U.S. reported

have been almost constant. As examined in depth in Karlson and Landersø (2021), the increasing

educational mobility in Denmark for cohorts born from the mid-1940s to the mid-1960s stem from a

substantial expansion of lower secondary schooling (following major schooling reforms) particular for

children from rural areas. Only around 60% of children born around 1940 in Denmark completed

lower secondary schooling, compared to almost 100% of the corresponding cohorts in the U.S.
  17
      See Cameron and Heckman (1998).
  18
      Fig. A.3a shows a similar conclusion is reached if we instead consider, for example, upward mobility
(fraction with higher education than their parents).
   19
      See Fig. A.4.



                                                     8
(Goldin and Katz, 2008). However, following a strong pattern of convergence, this gap was closed

within 15-20 years.

       Turning to the other tail of the education distribution, college completion rates remained far

lower in Denmark (and almost constant at 10-15% across the first two-thirds of the 20th century)

than in the U.S for almost the entire century. Convergence is initiated for cohorts born from

around 1970 onwards, where Denmark is characterized by rapidly increasing college and university

completion rates.20 While there is equal access to public services, universal child care (rolled

out first for cohorts born in the late 1960s), no tuition costs for education, and generous education

support,21 it is predominantly children from well-educated families that drive the college expansion.

Comparing the 1960 and 1985 cohorts, college completion was around 10% and 20%, respectively,

of children whose fathers have less than high school. For children whose fathers have a high school

degree as their highest level of education, the corresponding college completion rates are around 15%

and 30% respectively. Finally, for children whose fathers have a college degree, college completion

rates have increased from 30% to 60%, showing Matthew Effects at work. Fig. 4a begs the question:

why do education gaps remain in Denmark?

       Fig. 4b shows cognitive test score ranks for the all males born in 1958 and 1988 in Denmark

by their parents' income percentiles,22 along with cognitive test score ranks across parents' income

percentiles for children from the CNLSY data. The figure illustrates two points: First, no striking

differences appear when comparing the association between children's test scores and parents'

income percentiles in Denmark and the U.S. Second, the association between children's cognitive

test scores and parents' income is strikingly similar for Danish cohorts born 30 years apart.23

Although the 1988 cohort is born after the rapid welfare state expansion previously described and

the 1958 cohort is born just before the expansion took off, the associations between test scores and
  20
      Fig. A.5 illustrates the differences in college completion for high school graduates between the two coun-
tries. The differences between selection into college exactly mirror the differences in estimated educational
mobility.
   21
      First introduced in 1970 (and initially means-tested in parental income), and substantially expanded in
1988 (an expansion studied in Nielsen et al., 2010).
   22
      The cognitive test at conscription has remained the same during the entire period.
   23
      Fig. A.6 illustrates an indirect consequence of persistent skill gaps and differences in educational at-
tainment for use of public services. The figure shows total public education support received by children
by parental income percentiles and year of birth. As education levels have increased, so have transfers of
education support -- but mainly to children from affluent families.



                                                       9
parents' resources are practically identical. Family influence retains its tight grip.

       In the Appendix to this paper we illustrate skill gaps and how early in life they appear. Language

test scores across parental education at ages 8 and 14 in Denmark and the U.S. for children born

in the early 2000s are virtually identical.24 Taking children whose parents have a college degree,

for example, approximately 30% are in the top-quintile while only around 10% are in the bottom-

quintile in both Denmark and the U.S.25 Furthermore the correlation between Danish children's

GPA and their parents' years of schooling remains sizeable and has, if anything, been increasing

during the latest two decades.26

       Equality in access to services is not the same as equality of opportunity. While the notion of

a close link between the Danish welfare state and social mobility at first appears to be supported,

it holds only for selected cohorts. The longitudinal focus in this section tells a different story.

Even though the Danish welfare state expanded dramatically (while that in the U.S. did not)

with policies such as universal daycare, tuition-free college education, and generous educational

support, the same fundamental inequalities in education and skill formation and intergenerational

dependencies are observed in both countries.
  24
     See Table A.1.
  25
     In addition, children in the top-quintile at age 8 are more likely to move down in the test score distribution
between ages 8 and 16 if they have low-educated parents, while children in the bottom-quintile at age 8 are
more likely to move up in the test score distribution between age 8 and 16 if they have highly-educated
parents
  26
     See Fig. A.7.




                                                        10
                 Figure 3: Educational mobility by year of birth and country


a) Children's years of schooling regressed on parents' years of schooling, Denmark and the
                                                      U.S., year of birth 1911-1986

                          .6  .5
                      Estimate
                    .4    .3




                                   11-21           32-36           42-46         52-56        62-66       72-76       82-85
                                           22-31           37-41           47-51        57-61       67-71       77-81
                                                                              Year of birth

                                                   Denmark: estimate                    90% confidence interval
                                                   U.S.: estimate                       90% confidence interval



        b) Educational mobility, zooming in on year of birth 1956-1987 for Denmark




Source: Karlson and Landersø (2021).
Note: Fig. a) shows educational mobility by birth year for Denmark and the U.S. estimated as the t 's in:
  C             P                  C      P
Ei,t = t + t Ei,t  + ui,t , where Ei,t , Ei,t are years of schooling of children and parents in cohort bin t.
Fig. b) shows regression coefficients for a child years of schooling on parents' average years of schooling,
and the correlation coefficients between parents' average years of schooling and child years of schooling, by
child birth years 1956­1987, for Denmark. Danish estimates are based on survey and register data, and
U.S. estimates are based on the General Social Surveys (GSS). The data are described in Web Appendix C.

                                                                               11
                        Figure 4: College completion and cognitive test scores, by parental background, year of birth, and country


                             a) College completion by parents' education                            b) Cognitive test scores by parents' income rank




            1
            .8  .6
         Fraction
        .4  .2
            0




12
                     57-61         62-66       67-71           72-76        77-81           82-86
                                                   Year of birth

                                    Less than HS, Denmark              Less than HS, U.S.
                                    High school, Denmark               High school, U.S.
                                    College, Denmark                   College, U.S.




     Source: Fig. a) Landersø and Heckman (2017) (Web Appendix Figure A.30e) and extends it with the U.S. counterpart (based on GSS data).
     Source: Fig. b) Karlson and Landersø (2021).
     Note: Fig. a) shows the fraction of each cohort that completes college (15 years of schooling or above). Highest education of parents: No high
     school/dropout: less than 12 years of schooling; High school: 12-14.9 years of schooling; College: 15 years of schooling or above. Fig. b) shows ranks
     of cognitive test scores (Denmark: taken at conscription at age 18 , U.S. PIAT test scores at age 14) by their parents' income rank (total gross
     income excluding public transfers). The correlation between cognitive test scores and years of schooling is 0.466 for the 1958 cohort in Denmark,
     0.435 for the 1988 cohort in Denmark, and 0.459 for CNlSY sample.
3     Intergenerational Transmission of Well-being
Conventional measures of intergenerational income mobility compare the income of the father (or

the parents) and the income of the eldest son (or the income of the family of the eldest son, or the

average family income across children at comparable ages) to measure intergenerational mobility in

welfare (see, e.g., Corak, 2013; Lee and Solon, 2009; Mazumder, 2008). Such estimates are intended

to compare lifetime well-being across generations.

    Using synthetic cohort data, Mincer (1974) shows that labor earnings measured in the mid-30s

provide a rough and ready measure of the annuity value of lifetime earnings. Thus, if interest

focuses on the IGE of earnings, this approach may be valid. Earnings are the major component of

income for most people so this practice may yield a good approximation for the intergenerational

IGEs of lifetime income.

    However, the traditional approach gives an incomplete account of intergenerational mobility.

There are sizable intergenerational differences in educational attainment, income trajectories, tim-

ing of family formation (age of marriage, cohabitation and childbearing), family size, timing of

childbearing, and divorce dynamics. As presented in the previous section, later generations in

Denmark, on average, acquire more formal education. This means that they are more likely to

have low (or zero) income at young ages when in college, compensated with a higher (and steeper)

income profile later when entering the labor market after completing college (or graduate school).

Comparing snapshots of incomes at the same age window across generations at a relatively early

stage of the life cycle (which is usually done in empirical studies due to data limitations) gives

a distorted picture of intergenerational persistence. In addition to the difference in educational

attainments across generations, there are also differences in terms of the timing of family formation

and family size.

    Eshaghnia et al. (2021) address these issues. They construct life-time measures of IGE, which

take into account intergenerational differences in life-cycle dynamics. The measures they propose

paint a different picture of income and welfare mobility compared to traditional measures in the

literature. Lifetime measures better reflect long-term intergenerational mobility in society. The

perception of intergenerational dependence changes when we take life-cycle differences across gen-


                                                 13
erations into account.

       Eshaghnia et al. estimate a variety of lifetime welfare IGEs for father-son pairs and family-

children pairs using different measures of lifetime well-being. The IGEs range from traditional

measures based on wage income in a narrow age interval to consumption-based measures, mea-

sures of discounted lifetime income, and measures based on value functions that account for: (a)

uncertainty and income smoothing based on welfare state taxes and transfers; (b) imperfect credit

markets; and (c) returns to financial markets. Figure 5 reports estimates from their paper for both

family-based and individual (father-son) measures.

       In the figure, wage income is measured as taxable salary excluding self-employment income.27

Disposable income is "income with transfers" combined with calculated rental value of individual's

homes for homeowners minus tax payments. Consumption 28 is imputed total household expendi-

tures from the relationship between Danish Expenditure Survey and Danish register data using

equivalence scales for consumption to adjust for household composition.29 Permanent income is

obtained by annuitizing the sum of individuals' future expected income given current characteris-

tics discounted to the present (Expected PDV)30 and net assets, annuitized by a constant discount

rate.31 Value function is the monetized value utility of the optimal consumption choices over the

life cycle. See Eshaghnia et al. (2021) for discussion of each of these measures and estimates based

on them.

       A clear pattern emerges. Family-based IGEs are larger than individual-based IGEs. This is,

in part, due to the operation of assortative matching. Measures based on long-term measures

of income flows are higher than the narrow snapshot measures. The permanent income IGE,

for example, is twice as high at family level (four times as high at the individual level) as the

conventional disposable income IGE. While there remains an open question about corresponding

estimates for other countries, Fig. 5 nevertheless shows that the traditional approach followed by a

large literature across several decades only provides a limited picture of the transmission of lifetime

well-being across generations, and for Denmark, greatly underestimates its magnitude.
  27
     This income definition is the one used for the Danish estimate reported in Corak (2013).
  28
     We impute consumption following Browning and Leth-Petersen (2003).
  29
     This measure captures long-run income. See Friedman (1957).
  30
     We explain the measure and the formula used in Appendix B
  31
     r = 0.04.


                                                    14
               Figure 5: IGE Estimates (Ages 30-35 of Parents and Children)




Source: Eshaghnia et al. (2021).
Note: Precise definitions of the concepts of income and consumption are given in Appendix B. Sample of
children restricted to 1981-82 cohort of native Danes. The IGE is the slope coefficient from the log-log
regression of child measure on father (family) measure: log (y f ) =  +   log (y p ) where y c denotes the
average (over 30-35) of child measure, and y c denotes the average of father (family) measure when the child
was 0 to 17 years old. Family incomes are the sum of mother's and father's income.




                                                    15
4        Sorting
Increasing sorting in neighborhoods by family status is a well documented trend (Logan et al.,

2018; Reardon et al., 2018; Reardon and Owens, 2014). Similarities of families who live in the

same neighborhood can be measured in many different ways. Fig. 6a, reprinted from Reardon

and Bischoff (2011), presents estimated income segregation across households' income percentiles

(where 0 is no segregation and 1 is full segregation).32 The figure shows that in the U.S., segregation

is high at both ends of the income distribution and is increasing over time. As shown in Fig. 6b,

comparable patterns are at work in Denmark where segregation is also highest in the tails and

increasing over time.33



4.1        Evidence of positive sorting across the childhood

While Fig. 6 illustrates sorting in Denmark, the figure only gives a snapshot of the underlying

decision making. Sorting is a dynamic process across childhood.

       As is obvious to any parent, family residential decisions are generally made early in the lives

of children. Figures 7a and b examine the mothers' neighborhood of residence in the years leading

up to the birth of her first child and through the life of the child until age 15, classified by the

mothers' final education level. Fig. 7a shows the average household income in the parish of residence

(relative to average household income in Denmark). The figure documents a strong sorting pattern

into different areas that is initiated even before the first child is born when average income levels in

areas of residence diverge. When the firstborn reaches school age, the average household incomes

in parishes of mothers with a university degree is around 30% above that of the country-average.34

       Figure 7b shows that geographical mobility declines rapidly after children enter school, and
  32
      Reardon and Bischoff (2011) use a Theil (1971) index to form a scale that ranges from 0-1 across income
percentiles.
   33
      Figure A.8 extends this finding by considering segregation for different income types in Denmark. It
shows that segregation decreases if after-tax and transfer income is used -- particularly in the middle of
the income distribution. In other words, neighborhoods in Denmark appear similar when considering the
disposable income of residents, but this relates to the redistribution of income and not necessarily the absence
of sorting.
   34
      Parishes correspond approximately to a small census-tract in the U.S. Figure A.9 replicates Figure 7
using more granular neighborhood definitions while considering both neighborhood crime and income. The
figure shows that the narrower the area definition, the stronger the sorting.


                                                      16
         Figure 6: Income Segregation Patterns in the U.S. and Denmark, by year


                                        a) U.S. neighborhoods




                                         b) Denmark, schools




Source: Fig. a) Reardon and Bischoff (2011).
Source: Fig. b) own calculations.
Note: Fig. b) shows the similar statistic as in Reardon and Bischoff (2011) for parents in school catchment
areas in Denmark using income W/o transfers. While shapes and trends within each country are
comparable, levels in the U.S. and Denmark are not directly comparable i) as segregation levels are
sensitive to variation in the area definition, and ii) as the statistic is plotted as a function of income
percentiles where underlying income distributions differ between the U.S. and Denmark. The data used are
described in Web Appendix C.                            17
the decline becomes stronger as mother's level of education increases. Figure 7c shows average

income differences between the origin and destination areas (conditional on moving). In the years

leading up to the first child's birth, sorting into affluent areas become increasingly prevalent for

highly educated mothers. However, as also seen for the fraction that moves each year, upward

neighborhood mobility slows substantially once the child reaches school age (age 7).35

       Taken together, Figs. 6 and 7 document substantial sorting in Denmark, and that the intensity

of the positive sorting between the characteristics of parents and the area of destination varies

over children's ages. This creates more socially stratified communities where Matthew Effects can

operate at strength.

       One good example of this phenomenon is the quality of schoolteachers by clusters of parental

characteristics. In Denmark, teacher salaries by neighborhood are mandated to be equal. That is

a force for uniform quality of schools across neighborhoods. However, uniform quality is not the

actual outcome in Denmark.

       The rich Danish data facilitates a test for equality of schooling inputs. Gensowski et al. (2021)

use information on all teachers employed in Danish public schools36 to construct a measure of

school quality by weighting average characteristics of teachers working at a given school (their

scholastic test scores) by how well they predict that the children at the school do well in compulsory

(externally scored) tests. Figure 8 shows the rank of school quality for each school in Denmark

against the average test scores of children in the school in Denmark and their parents' average years

of schooling. There is a strong positive association between the characteristics of parents, on the

one hand, and the characteristics of teachers on the other, despite equality in wages.




  35
     Figure A.10 extends the previous results and consider sorting into neighborhoods nested within larger
areas. The figure replicates Figures 7, but considers neighborhood levels (of income and crime) defined by
150 household blocks relative to the municipality, parish, and 600 household blocks that the 150 household
blocks are nested in (instead of relative to the entire country). While the sorting patterns become weaker
they remain -- even when we consider sorting into 150 household blocks nested within 600 household blocks.
  36
     Such as age, tenure, year of graduation, high school GPA, high school GPA in language subjects, teacher
college GPA, and unemployment spells.


                                                    18
                  Figure 7: Average income in area of residence and moving pattern, by time to/from birth of first child


                                        a) Average income in area of residence relative to country average




                            b) Fraction that move each year                            c) Average income, destination-origin




19
     Source: Own calculations.
     Note: Figure a) shows average income level in the parish (around 2,000 in Denmark) of residence by years to/from the birth of the first child and
     mother's education level. The figure is computed for the mothers of cohorts born 1994­1997, and income is measured as gross income excluding
     public transfers. Figure b) show the fraction that move to a new parish. Figures c) shows the difference between average household gross income
     excluding transfers between the origin and destination area. The figure is computed for the mothers of cohorts born 1994­1997. The data used are
     described in Web Appendix C.
    The positive sorting between teacher's and parent's characteristics in Danish public schools illus-

trates that formal equality in teacher salaries does not guarantee equality of opportunity. It shows

a Matthew Effect at work where the best services are provided to those from affluent backgrounds.

Teachers in affluent neighborhoods are arguably paid more through a non-wage mechanism: by

having access to quality students.

                                                 Figure 8: Parents' years of schooling, by estimated school quality
          School by year average parents' years of schooling
           10     11      12     13     14      15     16




                                                               0         .2            .4              .6            .8            1
                                                                                         School quality

                                                                   School by year observations              Local polynomial fit



Source: Gensowski et al. (2021).
Note: The figure shows parents' years of schooling plotted against the estimated school quality measure
from teachers' observable characteristics. The figure also shows a local polynomial smoothing of the
relationship between parents' years of schooling and estimated school quality. The figure is based on data
for all children/parents/teachers and public schools in 2010-2016.




4.2     Is Zip Code Destiny?

The preceding analysis raises the question: do neighborhood effects capture more than just peer

effects and the impact of public goods such as schools due to the characteristics of the neighbors?

Are estimated neighborhood effects just artifacts of sorting?

                                                                                           20
       An influential literature studies within-country variation in intergenerational income mobility

(see e.g., Chetty and Hendren, 2018; Chetty et al., 2020; Deutscher and Mazumder, 2019; Eriksen

and Munk, 2020; Guell et al., 2018, for recent examples). This literature claims to find that there

are powerful neighborhood effects, but it does not identify their source. It leaves open the question

of whether these differences are due to some attribute of the place or the characteristics of people

in the place arising from sorting. To resolve this issue, we now present results where we estimate

area-specific intergenerational income mobility coefficients.37 The baseline neighborhood mobility

model is
                                          c        IGE p
                                        Yin = n +  n  Yin + in                                         (1)

                                                     c , Y p are child's and parents' log- income
where n  N indexes areas, defined as parishes, and Yin    in

without transfers.

       Fig. 9a plots the distributions of the parish-level estimates of ^n with and without the addition

of family controls. The additional set of controls is statistically significant. The mean (across

neighborhood) IGE declines from 0.310 to 0.108. Accounting for family variables missing in the

American datasets reduces the IGE by 2/3, indicating much less of a pure "neighborhood" effect.

Cholli (2021) tests the hypotheses both at parish and municipality level: H0 : n = n for all

n, n  N, n = n , and fail to reject H0 in 99% and 96% of tests, respectively. Following the

literature reporting neighborhood effects, the estimates of n vary greatly across n (as in e.g.,

Chetty et al., 2018), but the estimates are not precisely determined. This is true both at the

parish and municipal level. These results are consistent with a recent analysis of a Seattle study

by Mogstad et al. (2020) who investigate claims of strong neighborhood effects in test scores in

Bergman et al. (2019). Accounting for sampling error, they do not reject the hypothesis that n

are the same across all neighborhoods.

       At the same time the estimates of n in Denmark are not zero, however.38 Fig. 9b shows

how inclusion of individual family variables, here exemplified by parents' education, parents' crime,
  37
      While our focus here is mainly area defined as parishes, similar arguments apply to other definitions
whether commuting zone or census block. Similarly, we focus on the IGE, but similar concerns also apply
to e.g., rank-rank estimates.
   38
      Number of municipalities: 273: average sample size: approximately 2,000 children per municipality;
significant ^n at 5%-level: 99.6%. Number of parishes: 1,921: average sample size: approximately 250
children per parish; significant ^n at 5%-level: 62.7%. Cholli (2021).


                                                    21
and mother's labor force participation, reduces estimated values. For each family variable, the

distribution of the estimated n is shifted towards zero. Family is a major determinant of n



4.3       Neighborhood Effects as Statistical Artifacts

Estimated neighborhood effects may be a consequence of the misspecification of the ln Y C - ln Y P

relationship. Two sources of misspecification are plausible. The first likely misspecification is

from the omission of crucial family background variables that predict child outcomes, and that are

grouped due to the social sorting processes previously described. The second is for the functional

form of the estimating equation. While the log-linear specification of the IGE equation is traditional,

Landersø and Heckman (2017) show that the relationship between Y C and Y P is fundamentally

nonlinear in Denmark. We consider each explanation singly in the order presented. Both may be

at work.

       Continuing from the previous subsection, the first source of estimated neighborhood effects

as artifacts emerges when crucial family influence variables known to be important determinants

of child outcomes like parental education, parenting style, criminal histories, ability, and the like

are omitted when estimating the ln Y C - ln Y P relationship.39 Parents sort on these variables.40

The evidence for such sorting is strong in Denmark, as previously discussed. If these variables are

clustered through social sorting processes, estimated neighborhood effects will be stand-ins for the
                                         C be written as
omitted variables.41 Specifically, let Yi,n


                                    C               P
                               ln Yi,n = n + n ln Yi,n + i,n Xi,n + Ui,n                                (2)


where U are unobserved variables and where Xi,n is a vector of parental influence variables for family

i in neighborhood n. Suppose that the X are clustered in neighborhoods n = 1, . . . , N and let Di,n
                                                                                         N
be a dummy indicator variable indicating membership in neighborhood n, where             n=1 Di,n   = 1 for
  39
    See, e.g., Todd and Wolpin (2005), Cunha et al. (2006), and Currie and Almond (2011).
  40
    For evidence in the U.S., see Logan et al. (2018); Reardon and Bischoff (2011); Reardon et al. (2018);
Reardon and Owens (2014).
 41
    Theil (1958).




                                                   22
                                          Figure 9: Empirical distribution of ^IGE
                                                                               n



                           a) Distribution of ^IGE with and without family controls
                                               n



                           3
                           2
                 Density
                           1
                           0




                               -1                -.5                0                   .5                  1             1.5
                                                                             Estimate

                                                                  No controls                   Controls



     b) Illustration of how the distribution of ^n changes using selected family controls
                           3
                           2
                 Density
                           1
                           0




                                    -.6    -.4     -.2      0           .2       .4      .6        .8        1      1.2   1.4
                                                                             Estimate

                                                         No family controls                   Cntrl. education
                                                         Cntrl. crime                         Cntrl. mother's LFP




Source: Cholli (2021).
Note: The figure shows distributions of IGE estimates for parishes in Denmark (around 2,000 in Denmark;
roughly the size of small U.S. Census tracts). Figure a) shows the densities for Income W/o transfers with
and without controlling for family characteristics in each neighborhood: parents' age, child gender,
household assets, mother's labor supple, parents' education, household size, marital status, parents'
hospitalizations, parents' crime. Figure b) illustrates the impact of individual family variables.

                                                                             23
all i. Suppose that we omit Xi,n but we fit a neighborhood model


                                           C                    P        P
                                      ln Yi,n =  + n Di,n + n Yi,n + n Yi,n Dn + i,n                                (3)


omitting Xi,n . Invoking the standard omitted variable bias analysis of Theil (1958), if the X are

stratified by n, in general neighborhood effects will be estimated even when n = 0 and n = 0 so

that, in truth, there are none. Fig. 10 shows some evidence on sorting on the basis of parenting

variables in Denmark.

          Figure 10: Differences in X across average income in parish of residence


                             .3




                             .2
                  Fraction




                             .1




                             0
                                  0            .2            .4            .6               .8               1
                                                     Rank of average income in parish

                                       Mother smoked during pregnancy    Child receives music lessons, age 7
                                       Child was unplanned               Child attends religous activites, age 11




Source: Own calculations.
Note: The figure shows information about mothers and children across the rank of average income of all
parents in the parish of residence at age 7. Mother smoked during pregnancy is based on register data
information of all births in 2010. The remaining outcomes are from the Danish Longitudinal Study of
Children. All associations between average income in parish of residence and outcomes are significant with
p < 0.001. The data are described in Web Appendix C.


   The data analyzed by Chetty and Hendren (2018); Chetty et al. (2020) and others emulating

their work omit many important variables known to predict child outcomes. Reported neighborhood

effects may well be artifacts of inadequate data that lack the variables shown to be important in a

large body of literature on family influence.


                                                                  24
   The second source of estimated neighborhood effects as artifacts emerges from the nonlinearity

in the relationship between Y C and Y P as illustrated in Fig. 11a, which plots the estimated IGE

against family income in Denmark. If parental income is clustered due to sorting, running a linear

regression of ln Y C on ln Y P when Fig. 11a characterizes the data can generate the estimated

neighborhood effects. Suppose, for example, that parental income is perfectly stratified as shown

in Fig. 11b. Neighborhood effects would appear to be present strictly as a consequence of forcing

a linear IGE relationship onto data generated by a nonlinear one in the presence of sorting on Y P .




                                                25
Figure 11: Slopes of Non-linear ln Y C - ln Y P Curve as a Function of Y P , Danish Cohorts
1972­1984


                                a) Slope of ln Y C - ln Y P relationship


                     .5
                     .4
                     .3
                   IGE
                     .2
                     .1
                     0




                          $20,000      $40,000       $60,000        $80,000     $100,000
                                                      P
                                                    Yi parents' income



                               b) IGEs for the case of perfect sorting
                     .5
                     .4
                     .3
                   IGE
                     .2
                     .1
                     0




                          [ n=1 ][ n=2 ][ n=3 ][ n=4 ][ n=5 ][ n=6 ][ n=7 ][ n=8 ][ n=9 ]
                                                                                        [ n=10 ]
                                                      Parents' income




Source: Own calculations.
Note: The figure replicates and expands Figure 1a from Landersø and Heckman (2017), (who consider
cohorts born 1973-1975) using cohorts born 1972-1984 instead. Figure a) shows nonlinear-IGE estimates
from local linear regressions of log-child income W/o transfers on log-parent income W/o transfers. Child
income is measured as the average between age 31 and 35. Parental income is measured as the average of
both parents' income when the child was aged 8­14. Figure b) illustrates how sorting on parental income
Y P may generate perceived neighborhood effects. The dashed vertical lines mark division of neighborhoods
if perfectly stratified on Y P . The data are described in Web Appendix C.
                                                        26
5     Summary
This paper compares social mobility and inequality in U.S. and Denmark. Without doubt, after

taxes and transfers, Denmark has a more equal income distribution and greater intergenerational

social mobility in terms of income. This is a consequence of its tax and transfer policies and not

because of its skill formation policies.

    Despite many generous social policies and equality of access for all Danes, family influence on

many child outcomes in Denmark is comparable to that in the U.S. Common forces are at work in

both countries that are not easily mitigated -- not even by Denmark's generous welfare policies.

Therefore, uncritical adoption of Danish policy initiatives is unlikely to be effective in the U.S. as

a vehicle for creating equality of opportunity.

    Denmark is a laboratory for understanding the origins of inequality and social immobility

because its generous provision of social services does not eliminate inequality in many important

life outcomes across generations. Thus, the origins of inequality and social mobility lie elsewhere.

Families shape child outcomes and affect the utilization of programs even when these are universally

available.

    Our analysis encourages a critical examination of conventional wisdom from earlier studies of

inequality and social mobility. It raises several important questions for future research. While

our understanding of intergenerational mobility has long been defined by regressions of the log of

children's income on the log of parents' income (or more recently ranks of income) measured in

their 30s, lifetime measures that better reflect long-term intergenerational mobility in society are

higher than the narrow snapshot measures.

    The persistence of inequality in human capital formation and education in Denmark suggests

that it will be fruitful to pursue a much deeper understanding of how parents affect child devel-

opment, including both direct interactions and purposive sorting in making neighborhood choices

(and thereby influencing school quality among others aspects of neighborhood). Estimated neigh-

borhood effects for child outcomes and social mobility may arise simply as consequences of sorting

effects. Our finding that sorting is a dynamic process across childhood not only questions the

interpretation of earlier work, it also begs further analyses of the factors determining how, when,


                                                  27
and under which conditions families decide where to live, and how these decisions shape children's

lives.




                                               28
References
Almond, D. and J. Currie (2011). Killing me softly: The fetal origins hypothesis. Journal of
  Economic Perspectives 25 (3), 153­172.

Andersen, L. S., J. Christensen, N. F. Christiansen, S. Kolstrup, J. H. Petersen, and K. Petersen
  (2012). Bind 3 - Velfaerdsstaten i stobeskeen. Dansk Velfaerdshistorie. Syddansk Universitets-
  forlag.

Andersen, L. S., J. Christensen, N. F. Christiansen, S. Kolstrup, J. H. Petersen, K. Petersen, and
  H. V. Jonsson (2012). Bind 4 - Velfaerdsstatens storhedstid. Dansk Velfaerdshistorie. Syddansk
  Universitetsforlag.

Andersen, L. S., J. Christensen, N. F. Christiansen, S. Kolstrup, J. H. Petersen, K. Petersen, and
  H. V. Jonsson (2013). Bind 5 - Velfaerdsstaten i tidehverv. Dansk Velfaerdshistorie. Syddansk
  Universitetsforlag.

Atkinson, A. B. and J. E. Sogaard (2016). The long-run history of income inequality in denmark.
  The Scandinavian Journal of Economics 118 (2), 264­291.

Bergman, P., R. Chetty, S. DeLuca, N. Hendren, L. F. Katz, and C. Palmer (2019, August). Creat-
  ing moves to opportunity: Experimental evidence on barriers to neighborhood choice. Working
  Paper 26164, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Browning, M. and S. Leth-Petersen (2003). Imputing consumption from income and wealth infor-
  mation. The Economic Journal 113 (488), 282­301.

Cameron, S. V. and J. J. Heckman (1998, April). Life cycle schooling and dynamic selection bias:
  Models and evidence for five cohorts of American males. Journal of Political Economy 106 (2),
  262­333.

Carneiro, P. M., I. Lopez Garcia, K. G. Salvanes, and E. Tominey (2015). Intergenerational mobility
  and the timing of parental income. NHH Dept. of Economics Discussion Paper (23).

Ceci, S. J. and P. B. Papierno (2005). The rhetoric and reality of gap closing: When the" have-nots"
  gain but the" haves" gain even more. American Psychologist 60 (2), 149.

Chetty, R. (2021). Improving equality of opportunity: New insights from big data. Contemporary
  Economic Policy 39 (1), 7­41.

Chetty, R., J. N. Friedman, N. Hendren, M. R. Jones, and S. R. Porter (2018). The opportunity
  atlas: Mapping the childhood roots of social mobility. Technical Report 25147, NBER Working
  Paper.

Chetty, R., D. Gusky, M. Hell, N. Hendren, R. Manduca, and J. Narang (2017). The fading
  american dream: Trends in absolute income mobility since 1940. American Economic Journal,
  Economic Policy 356, 398­406.

Chetty, R. and N. Hendren (2018, 02). The Impacts of Neighborhoods on Intergenerational Mobility
  I: Childhood Exposure Effects*. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 133 (3), 1107­1162.



                                                29
Chetty, R., N. Hendren, M. R. Jones, and S. Porter (2020). Race and economic opportunity in
  the united states: An intergenerational perspective. Quarterly Journal of Economics 135 (2),
  711­783.

Cholli, N. (2021). Understanding the heterogeneity of intergenerational mobility across neighbor-
  hoods. Technical report, Unpublished Working Paper.

Corak, M. (2013, Summer). Income inequality, equality of opportunity, and intergenerational
  mobility. Journal of Economic Perspectives 27 (3), 79­102.

Cunha, F., J. J. Heckman, L. J. Lochner, and D. V. Masterov (2006). Interpreting the evidence on
  life cycle skill formation. In E. A. Hanushek and F. Welch (Eds.), Handbook of the Economics
  of Education, Chapter 12, pp. 697­812. Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Currie, J. and D. Almond (2011). Human capital development before age five. In O. C. Ashenfelter
  and D. Card (Eds.), Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 4B, Chapter 15, pp. 1315­1486.
  Amsterdam: Elsevier Science B. V.

Deutscher, N. and B. Mazumder (2019). Intergenerational mobility across australia and the stability
  of regional estimates. Labour Economics 66.

Elango, S., , J. L. García, J. J. Heckman, and A. Hojman (2016). Early childhood education.
  In R. A. Moffitt (Ed.), Economics of Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the United States,
  Volume 2, Chapter 4, pp. 235­297. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Eriksen, J. and M. D. Munk (2020). The geography of intergenerational mobility -- danish evidence.
  Economics Letters 189.

Eshaghnia, S., J. J. Heckman, R. Landersø, and R. Qureshi (2021). The transmission of lifetime
  wellbeing across generations. Unpublished manuscript.

Friedman, M. (1957). A Theory of the Consumption Function. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
  Press.

Gensowski, M., R. Landersø, D. Bleses, P. Dale, A. Højen, and L. Justice (2021). Public and
  parental investments, and children's skill formation. Technical report, Rockwool Foundation
  Working Paper.

Goldin, C. and L. F. Katz (2008). The Race between Education and Technology. Cambridge, MA:
  Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.

Guell, M., M. Pellizzari, G. Pica, and J. V. R. Mora (2018). Correlating social mobility and
  economic outcomes. The Economic Journal 126 (612), 353­403.

Havnes, T. and M. Mogstad (2011, May). No child left behind: Subsidized child care and children's
  long-run outcomes. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 3 (2), 97­129.

Havnes, T. and M. Mogstad (2015, July). Is universal child care leveling the playing field? Journal
  of Public Economics 127, 100­114.

Heckman, J. J. and S. Mosso (2014, August). The economics of human development and social
  mobility. Annual Review of Economics 6 (1), 689­733.

                                                30
Karlson, K. B. and R. Landersø (2021). The making and unmaking of opportunity: Educational
  mobility in 20th century-denmark. Technical report, IZA discussion paper 14135.

Landersø, R. and J. J. Heckman (2017). The scandinavian fantasy: The sources of intergenerational
  mobility in denmark and the u.s. Scandinavian Journal of Economics 119 (1), 178­230.

Lee, C.-I. and G. Solon (2009). Trends in intergenerational income mobility. The Review of
  Economics and Statistics 91 (4), 766­772.

Logan, J. R., A. Foster, J. Ke, and F. Li (2018). The uptick in income segregation: Real trend or
  random sampling variation? American Journal of Sociology 124 (1), 185­222.

Mazumder, B. (2008). Does education improve health? a reexamination of the evidence from
 compulsory schooling laws. Economic Perspectives 32 (2), 2­16.

Mincer, J. (1974). Schooling, Experience, and Earnings. New York: Columbia University Press for
  National Bureau of Economic Research.

Mogstad, M., J. P. Romano, and A. Shaik (2020). Inference for ranks with applications to mobil-
 ity across neighborhoods and academic achievement across countries. Technical report, NBER
 working paper.

Nelson III., C. A., C. H. Zeanah, and N. A. Fox (2019). How early experience shapes human
  development: The case of psychosocial deprivation. Neural Plasticity .

Nielsen, H. S., T. Sorensen, and C. Taber (2010). Estimating the effect of student aid on college
  enrollment: Evidence from a government grant policy reform. American Economic Journal,
  Economic Policy 2 (2), 185­215.

Pinto, R. (2021). Noncompliance as a rational choice: A framework that exploits compromises in
  social experiments to identify causal effects. Unpublished.

Reardon, S. F. and K. Bischoff (2011). More unequal and more separate: Growth in the residential
  segregation of families by income, 1970­2009. Report, US2010.

Reardon, S. F., K. Bischoff, A. Owens, and J. B. Townsend (2018). Has income segregation really
  increased? bias and bias correction in sample-based segregation estimates. Demography 55 (6),
  2129­2160.

Reardon, S. F. and A. Owens (2014). 60 years after brown: Trends and consequences of school
  segregation. Annual Review of Sociology 40 (1), 199­218.

Statistics Denmark (2001). 50-year review. Technical report.

Theil, H. (1958). Economic Forecasts and Policy. Number 15 in Contributions to Economic Anal-
  ysis. Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Company.

Theil, H. (1971). Principles of Econometrics. New York: Wiley.

Todd, P. E. and K. I. Wolpin (2005). The production of cognitive achievement in children: Home,
  school and racial test score gaps. Working paper, Penn Institute for Economic Research, De-
  partment of Economics, University of Pennsylvania.

                                               31
Walters, C. R. (2018). The demand for effective charter schools. Journal of Political Econ-
 omy 126 (6), 2179­2223.




                                            32
