                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES


              TAX EVASION AT THE TOP OF THE INCOME DISTRIBUTION:
                            THEORY AND EVIDENCE

                                          John Guyton
                                        Patrick Langetieg
                                          Daniel Reck
                                           Max Risch
                                        Gabriel Zucman

                                      Working Paper 28542
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28542


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2021

Corresponding Author: Daniel Reck, d.h.reck@lse.ac.uk. We thank Gerald Auten, Brian Galle,
Bhanu Gupta, Tom Hertz, Xavier Jaravel, Drew Johns, Barry Johnson, Camille Landais, Katie
Lim, Emily Lin, Larry May, Alicia Miller, Erik Ogilvie, Annette Portz, Mary-Helen Risler,
Peter Rose, Emmanuel Saez, Brenda Schafer, Clifford Scherwinski, Joel Slemrod, Matt
Smith, Johannes Spinnewijn, David Splinter, Alex Turk, and Alex Yuskavage for helpful
discussion, support, and comments on preliminary versions of this work. Jeanne Bomare and
Baptiste Roux provided excellent research assistance. All remaining errors are our own.
Financial support from the Washington Center for Equitable Growth, the Stone foundation,
Arnold Ventures, and the Economic and Social Research Council is gratefully acknowledged.
The views expressed here are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
official view of the Internal Revenue Service or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
This project was conducted through the Joint Statistical Research Program of the Statistics of
Income Division of the IRS. All data work for this project involving confidential
taxpayer information was done at IRS facilities, on IRS computers, by IRS employees,
and at no time was confidential taxpayer data ever outside of the IRS computing
environment. Reck and Risch are IRS employees under an agreement made possible by
the Intragovernmental Personnel Act of 1970 (5 U.S.C. 3371-3376).

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not
been peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that
accompanies official NBER publications.

© 2021 by John Guyton, Patrick Langetieg, Daniel Reck, Max Risch, and Gabriel Zucman.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Tax Evasion at the Top of the Income Distribution: Theory and Evidence
John Guyton, Patrick Langetieg, Daniel Reck, Max Risch, and Gabriel Zucman
NBER Working Paper No. 28542
March 2021
JEL No. D31,H26

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper studies tax evasion at the top of the U.S. income distribution using IRS micro-data
from (i) random audits, (ii) targeted enforcement activities, and (iii) operational audits. Drawing
on this unique combination of data, we demonstrate empirically that random audits underestimate
tax evasion at the top of the income distribution. Specifically, random audits do not capture most
tax evasion through offshore accounts and pass-through businesses, both of which are
quantitatively important at the top. We provide a theoretical explanation for this phenomenon,
and we construct new estimates of the size and distribution of tax noncompliance in the United
States. In our model, individuals can adopt a technology that would better conceal evasion at
some fixed cost. Risk preferences and relatively high audit rates at the top drive the adoption of
such sophisticated evasion technologies by high-income individuals. Consequently, random
audits, which do not detect most sophisticated evasion, underestimate top tax evasion. After
correcting for this bias, we find that unreported income as a fraction of true income rises from 7%
in the bottom 50% to more than 20% in the top 1%, of which 6 percentage points correspond to
undetected sophisticated evasion. Accounting for tax evasion increases the top 1% fiscal income
share significantly.

John Guyton                                      Max Risch
Internal Revenue Service                         Tepper School of Business
Research, Applied Analytics, and Statistics      Carnegie Mellon University
77 K Street, NE                                  4765 Forbes Ave.
Washington, DC 20002                             Pittsburgh, PA 15213
john.guyton@irs.gov                              United States
                                                 mwrisch@andrew.cmu.edu
Patrick Langetieg
Internal Revenue Service                         Gabriel Zucman
Research, Applied Analytics, and Statistics      Department of Economics
77 K Street, NE                                  University of California, Berkeley
Washington, DC 20002                             530 Evans Hall, #3880
Patrick.T.Langetieg@irs.gov                      Berkeley, CA 94720
                                                 and NBER
Daniel Reck                                      zucman@berkeley.edu
London School of Economics
Department of Economics
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
United Kingdom
d.h.reck@lse.ac.uk
1    Introduction

How much do high-income individuals evade in taxes? And what are the main forms of tax noncompliance

of the top of the income distribution? Because taxable income and tax liabilities are highly concentrated at

the top of the income distribution, understanding noncompliance by high-income taxpayers is critical for

the analysis of tax evasion, for tax enforcement, and for the conduct of tax policy.

    A key difficulty in studying tax evasion by the wealthy is the complexity of the forms of tax evasion at

the top, which can involve legal and financial intermediaries, sometimes in countries with a great deal of

secrecy. This complexity means that one single data source is unlikely to uncover all forms of noncompli-

ance at the top. In this paper, we attempt to overcome this limitation in the U.S. context by combining a

wide array of sources of micro data, including (i) random audit data, (ii) the universe of operational audits

conducted by the IRS, and (iii) targeted enforcement activities (e.g., on offshore bank accounts). Drawing on

this unique combination of data, we show that random audits underestimate tax evasion at the top-end of

the income distribution. We provide a theoretical explanation for this fact, and we propose a methodology

to improve the estimation of the size and distribution of tax noncompliance in the United States.

    The starting point of our analysis is the IRS random audit program, known as the National Research Pro-

gram. Random audits are commonly used to study and measure the extent of tax evasion. Researchers use

random audits to test theories of tax evasion (Kleven et al., 2011), and tax authorities use them to estimate

the overall extent of tax evasion and target audits (IRS, 2019). The academic notion of the random audit as

the gold standard for understanding tax evasion comes from the traditional appeal of random sampling,

combined with the classic deterrence model of tax evasion (Allingham and Sandmo, 1972), an implicit as-

sumption of which is that audits lead to the detection of all tax evasion. In the real world, however, random

audits do not detect all forms of tax evasion. Random audits are well designed to detect common forms

of tax evasion, such as unreported self-employment income, overstated deductions, and the abuse of tax

credits. But, we argue, these audits may not detect sophisticated evasion strategies, because doing so can

require much more information, resources and specialized staff than available to tax authorities for their

random audit programs.

    Our first contribution is to document and quantify the limits of random audits when it comes to detect-

ing top-end evasion in the United States. We find that detected evasion declines sharply at the very top

of the income distribution, with only a trivial amount of evasion detected in the top 0.01%. Our analysis

uncovers two key limitations of random audits which can account for much of this drop-off: tax evasion

through foreign intermediaries (e.g., undeclared foreign bank accounts) and tax evasion via pass-through

businesses (e.g., partnerships). First, we find that offshore tax evasion goes almost entirely undetected in



                                                      2
random audits.1 To establish this result, we analyze the sample of U.S. taxpayers who disclosed hidden

offshore assets in the context of specific enforcement initiatives conducted in 2009­2012. A number of these

taxpayers had been randomly audited just before this crackdown on offshore evasion. In over 90% of these

audits, the audit had not uncovered any foreign asset reporting requirement, despite the fact that these

taxpayers did own foreign assets. Second, we find that tax evasion occurring in pass-through businesses

(whose ownership is often highly concentrated) is substantially under-detected in individual random au-

dits. Examiners usually do not verify the degree to which pass-through businesses have duly reported their

income, especially for the most complex businesses. Thus, while the income of taxpayers in the bottom 99%

of the income distribution is comprehensively examined, up to 35% of the income earned at the top is not

comprehensively examined in the context of random audits.

    Our second contribution is to propose improved estimates of how much income (relative to true income)

the various groups of the population under-report--and to investigate the consequences of this under-

reporting for the measurement of inequality. We do so by starting from evasion estimated in random audits

and proposing a correction for sophisticated evasion that goes undetected in these audits. Although our

corrected series feature only slightly more evasion on aggregate than in the standard IRS methodology, our

proposed adjustments have large effects at the top of the income distribution. Our adjustments increase un-

reported income by a factor of 1.1 on aggregate, but by a factor of 1.3 for the top 1% and 1.8 for the top 0.1%.

After these adjustments, we find that under-reported income as a fraction of true income rises from about

7% in the bottom 50% of the income distribution to 21% in the top 1%. Out of this 21%, 6 percentage points

correspond to sophisticated evasion that goes undetected in random audits. We also show that accounting

for under-reported income increases the top 1% fiscal income share significantly. In our preferred estimates,

the top 1% income share rises from 20.3% before audit to 21.8% on average over 2006­2013. The result that

accounting for tax evasion increases inequality is robust to a wide range of robustness tests and sensitivity

analysis (for instance, it is robust to assuming zero offshore tax evasion).

    Our third contribution is to explain why general-purpose random audits are not uniformly able to detect

noncompliance across the income distribution. We present a model in which high-income taxpayers adopt

sophisticated evasion strategies. We show that introducing this element in the canonical Allingham and

Sandmo (1972) tax evasion model changes our understanding of tax evasion by high-income persons.

    The model allows a taxpayer to adopt some costly form of tax evasion that is unlikely to be discovered

on audit at some cost. We show that adoption of such an evasion technology is likely to be concentrated

at the top of the income distribution for two reasons. First, high-income taxpayers have a greater demand
   1 Our data cover the period prior to the collection of third-party reported information on foreign bank accounts, which started in

2014; we analyze how our results can inform knowledge about post-2014 evasion in Section 4.




                                                                 3
for sophisticated evasion strategies that reduce the probability of detection if (i) the desired rate of evasion

does not become trivial at large incomes, and (ii) the cost of adopting becomes a trivial share of income at

large incomes. This is true even holding the probability of audit by income fixed. Second, overall audit rates

and scrutiny of tax returns are substantially higher at the top than at the bottom of the distribution, making

evasion that is less likely to be detected and corrected on audit more attractive at the top. We can also re-

interpret the model to think about situations where the outcome of an audit, if it occurs, is uncertain. With

this interpretation, for the same reasons as before, we show that high-income people are then more likely

to adopt positions in the "gray area" between legal avoidance and evasion. From the point of view of the

tax authority, we show theoretically that high resource costs of pursuing sophisticated forms of tax evasion,

such as protracted litigation or more sophisticated audits of a complex network of closely-held businesses,

can pose practical limits on the extent to which the tax authority can pursue these types of tax evasion by

high-income people. This is especially the case when resource constraints are exogenous and not changed

when sophisticated evasion becomes more prevalent.

   These findings have implications for the academic literature, for policymakers, and for the public debate

over income taxes at the top. Academically, our findings show that the existing framework for thinking

about tax evasion has limitations when it comes to top-end tax evasion. The increasingly conventional wis-

dom is that taxpayers seldom evade taxes supported by third-party information (Kleven et al., 2011; Car-

rillo et al., 2017; Slemrod et al., 2017; IRS, 2019), and that deterring evasion where taxes are not supported

by third-party information requires increasing the audit rate, or the penalty rate, or, arguably, increasing

tax morale (Luttmer and Singhal, 2014). This characterization works well for the middle and bottom of the

income distribution. However, it misses the importance of the concealment of evasion (even from auditors)

at the top, and the adoption of aggressive interpretations of tax law for sheltering purposes. From a govern-

ment revenue perspective, the top of the income distribution is the sub-population where understanding

the extent of tax evasion is the most important, due to the high and increasing concentration of income in

the United States (Piketty and Saez, 2003; Piketty et al., 2018).

   From a policy perspective, our results highlight that there is substantial evasion at the top which requires

administrative resources to detect and deter. We estimate that 36% of federal income taxes unpaid are owed

by the top 1% and that collecting all unpaid federal income tax from this group would increase federal

revenues by about $175 billion annually. There has been much discussion in the United States about the

fact that the audit rate at the top of the income distribution has declined. Our results suggest that such low

audit rates are not optimal. As standard audit procedures can be limited in their ability to detect some forms

of evasion by high-income taxpayers, additional tools should also be mobilized to effectively combat high-

income tax evasion. These tools include facilitating whistle-blowing that can uncover sophisticated evasion


                                                        4
(which helped the United States start to make progress on detection of offshore wealth) and specialized audit

strategies like those pursued by the IRS's Global High Wealth program and other specialized enforcement

programs.2 Additionally, our results suggest that data beyond conventional random audits may be useful

for risk assessment, audit selection, and the allocation of resources to alternative types of enforcement. The

IRS currently does many of these things to some degree, but resource constraints limit its capacity to do so

(see, e.g., TIGTA, 2015). Our results suggest that investing in improved tools and increasing resources to

support tax administration at the top of the distribution could generate substantial tax revenue (a point also

made by, e.g., Sarin and Summers, 2020).

    The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 studies the distribution of noncompliance in

random audit data. Section 3 provides direct evidence that some forms of evasion are (i) highly concen-

trated at the top of the income distribution, (ii) effectively invisible in random audits, and (iii) quantitatively

important for the measurement of income at the top. In Section 4 we present our new estimates of the distri-

bution of noncompliance and we investigate their implications for the measurement of inequality. Section 5

presents our theory of why some noncompliance goes undetected, and Section 6 concludes.



2     The Distribution of Noncompliance in Random Audits

The National Research Program (NRP) random audits are the main data source used to study the extent

and nature of individual tax evasion in the United States (see, e.g., Andreoni et al., 1998; Johns and Slemrod,

2010; IRS, 2016, 2019; DeBacker et al., 2020).3 NRP auditors assess compliance across the entire individual tax

return--the Form 1040--based on information from the schedules of the Form 1040, third-party information

reports, the taxpayer's own records, and measures of risk comparing all this information to information on

the broader filing population.4 The most commonly cited statistics from random audit studies are estimates

of the income under-reporting gap--the amount of income under-reported, expressed as a fraction of true

income5 --and of the tax gap--the amount of tax that is legally owed but not paid, expressed as a fraction of
    2 See https://www.irs.gov/irm/part4/irm_04-052-001 for information on the Global High Wealth program; see also Kambas

et al. (2021).
    3 Further background on the NRP is in the Internal Revenue Manuals here: https://www.irs.gov/irm/part4/irm_04-022-001.

We use the term evasion in this paper to refer to unintentional and intentional noncompliance with tax obligations. We do not attempt
to distinguish between intentional evasion and unintentional noncompliance and acknowledge that the boundary between these is
fuzzy.
    4 We use the terms "NRP audits" and "NRP auditors" in this paper to refer to audits conducted as part of the National Research

Program. The procedures followed in these audits are standard audit procedures for audits of individual taxpayers conducted by
the Small Business and Self-Employed operating division of the IRS. Our operational audit data used below also incorporate audits of
individuals conducted by auditors in the Large Business and International division, which includes more specialized programs. Earlier
IRS random audit studies under the Taxpayer Compliance Measurement Program (TCMP) consisted of line-by-line examinations of
the individual tax return. The NRP aims to provide a similarly comprehensive measure of compliance at a reduced administrative cost
and burden on the taxpayer. See Brown and Mazur (2003) for more on the TCMP and how the NRP uses revised procedures to achieve
similar objectives.
    5 Tax Gap studies (IRS, 2016, 2019; Johns and Slemrod, 2010) often estimate a similar quantity called the Net Misreporting Percentage,

income under-reporting divided by the absolute value of true income, which can differ from what we estimate for components of



                                                                    5
the amount of tax legally owed. It has long been acknowledged that in the context of a random audit, some

noncompliance may go undetected. The IRS uses a methodology, known as detection-controlled estimation

(DCE), to estimate undetected noncompliance. Official IRS estimates (presented in, e.g., IRS, 2016, 2019) of

the aggregate tax gap use the DCE methodology, as do existing estimates of the distribution of unreported

income and evaded income taxes (Johns and Slemrod, 2010).

      In this section, we start by describing evasion detected in NRP random audits without any correction

for undetected noncompliance (in particular, before DCE correction), and then show results including the

DCE correction.6 All our analyses pool data from the NRP random audits conducted in tax years 2006­

2013. The NRP uses a stratified random sample which over-samples top earners to ensure good coverage

at the top. The pooled sample we use includes 105,167 audited taxpayers, of which 12,003 in the top 1% of

the reported income distribution. We use the NRP weights throughout our analysis to compute statistics

that are representative of the full population of individual income tax filers. Our sample is large enough

to obtain precise estimates for groups as small as the top 0.01% (although splitting this very top group by

other characteristics tends to leave us with too little statistical power for informative analysis).


2.1     The Distribution of Detected Evasion

To begin with, we take the NRP random audit data at face value (i.e., before DCE correction) and estimate

income under-reported as a fraction of audit-corrected income and tax evaded as a fraction of tax due,

within income groups defined based on audit-corrected income.7

      On aggregate, NRP audits find that 4.0% of true income is under-reported and 7.7% of taxes owed are

not paid, before any correction for undetected evasion.8 Note that these numbers are significantly smaller

than the official IRS (2016, 2019) estimates of noncompliance, in which 14% of aggregate true income is

found unreported and 20% of individual income taxes owed are found unpaid (see Section 2.2), because the

official estimates factor in the DCE adjustment described below.

      Figure 1a shows that the detected income under-reporting gap hovers around 4% to 5% through most
income that can be negative. We use a different term here partly because we never use absolute values of negative components of
income.
   6 Recent work by DeBacker et al. (2020) performs similar analysis to our work here (in Section 2.1), without DCE. Our results in

Section 2.1 are similar to theirs, but because of our subsequent results, our interpretation of these patterns is very different. Specifically,
we argue that the low detected evasion at the top is a consequence of the fact that evasion at the top is less likely to be detected in a
random audit, not that high-income taxpayers are much more compliant.
   7 Unless otherwise noted, all our analyses in this paper rank taxpayers by their estimated true income (with different measures

of "true income" depending on the method used to estimate unreported income). Ranking taxpayers by reported income leads to
downward-biased estimates of the income under-reporting gap and tax gap at the top, because taxpayers with high reported income
are selected on high compliance (they declare high incomes).
   8 These numbers are for the entire population and include taxpayers who were found over-reporting income. Taxpayers who under-

reported income under-reported 4.5% of aggregate true income, while taxpayers who over-reported income over-reported the equiv-
alent of 0.5% of aggregate true income. The majority of over-reported income is in the bottom half of the exam-corrected income
distribution; the implications of over-reporting for aggregate tax liabilities and for noncompliance at the top are negligible. Unless
otherwise noted, our computations in this paper include all taxpayers, including those found over-reporting income.



                                                                      6
 F IGURE 1: U NREPORTED I NCOME D ETECTED IN R ANDOM A UDIT D ATA B EFORE DCE C ORRECTION

                               (a) Unreported Income (% of True Income)




                                  (b) Decomposition by Type of Income




Notes: This figure shows the pattern of income under-reporting uncovered in NRP random audit data for 2006-2013,
without any correction for undetected evasion (in particular before DCE correction). Tax units are ranked by their exam-
corrected market income (defined as total income reported on form 1040 minus Social Security benefits, unemployment
insurance benefits, alimony, and state refunds). We observe that detected unreported income decreases sharply within
the top 1% of the income distribution. Misreporting of Schedule C income comprises the bulk of evasion detected in
NRP random audits. We also observe that by contrast, very little evasion is detected for partnership and S-corporation
business income and financial capital income, which are important sources of income at the top.
                                                           7
of the income distribution and falls sharply within the top 0.1% to less than 1% in the top 0.01%. Figure 1b

decomposes unreported income by type of income, and Appendix Table A1 reports the composition of

under-reported income in the full population and in the top 1%. We observe that by far the largest com-

ponent of detected under-reporting involves corrections to Sole Proprietor income, on Schedule C of the

individual income tax return. Under-reporting in this category comprises about 50% of all evasion detected

in the NRP. The next-largest category involves corrections to Form 1040 Line 21 income ("Other income"),

which mostly reflect disallowed net-operating loss carryforwards and carrybacks. Adjustments to other in-

come on line 21 are relatively uncommon but they can be large when they occur. The individuals with the

largest adjustments in this category usually had negative reported income due to business losses in other

years, but once those losses are disallowed, their audit-corrected income falls in the top 1% of the income

distribution.

    Appendix Figure A1 shows tax evaded as a fraction of tax due. The patterns are consistent with those

seen in Figure 1a. At the very top, the detected tax gap is negligible. At the bottom of the distribution,

taxes evaded appear large as a fraction of taxes owed. This is in part a mechanical consequence of the fact

that refundable tax credits reduce taxes owed to close to zero (sometimes less than zero) for low-income

taxpayers: by definition, groups with close to zero "net" taxes owed are bound to have very high under-

reporting rates relative to taxes owed.9

    Three remarks are in order. First, the NRP detects little evasion on wages, interest, dividends, and capital

gains. A natural explanation for this fact is that these forms of income are subject to substantial third-

party reporting (IRS, 2016; Kleven et al., 2011).10 However, interest, dividends, and capital gains accruing

to offshore accounts only started being subject to information reporting with the implementation of the

Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act (FATCA) in 2014, after our period of study. Thus, the low evasion

rates on financial capital income recorded in the 2006­2013 NRP may, in part, be due to the fact that some

evasion on offshore capital income went undetected.

    Second, there is an asymmetry in the estimated rates of detected evasion across different types of busi-

ness income. The estimated detected income under-reporting rate for sole proprietor income, which is

supported by relatively little third-party information, is about 37% overall and 24% for the top 1%.11 By
   9 An arguably preferable way to study the tax gap is to treat the refundable portion of tax credits as government transfers (instead

of negative taxes) and exclude them from the tax gap measure. Figure A2 shows that excluding tax credits from both reported and
corrected taxes reduces the tax gap at the bottom by about 7 percentage points. A fuller analysis would include all taxes (or at least all
federal taxes) in the analysis, including most importantly payroll taxes. Because of the relatively low rate of evasion on payroll taxes
(IRS, 2019), this would reduce the ratios of taxes evaded to taxes owed shown in Figure A1 in the bottom and middle of the distribution
significantly. We leave this task to future research.
  10 Capital gains were subject to some information reporting throughout our period of study; a reform added the requirement that

brokers report not just sale price but also cost basis starting in tax year 2011.
  11 See Slemrod et al. (2017) for more information on the limited third-party reporting for sole proprietor income. In official Tax Gap

statistics the estimate under-reporting rate for sole proprietor income is 56% (IRS, 2019). The difference is attributable to the DCE
adjustment.



                                                                    8
contrast, the estimated detected under-reporting rate for pass-through business income (i.e., partnerships

and S-corporations business income) is 4.6% overall and just 2.0% for the top 1%. Pass-through business

income is common at the top of the income distribution, and like sole proprietorship income, is supported

by relatively little third-party information. As we shall see, sole proprietor income is subject to extensive ex-

amination in the context of the NRP, while the examination of pass-through business income faces practical

limits described below.

      Third, we estimate that detected evasion among those with very high incomes is extremely low in the

NRP. In the top group we consider, the top 0.01% (by exam-corrected income), we estimate that just 0.6%

of true income is under-reported. This is a direct consequence of the fact that the NRP uncovers little

noncompliance on interest, dividends, pass-through business income, and capital gains--the key sources of

income in the top 0.01%.


2.2     The Distribution of Evasion with the DCE Methodology

The IRS tax gap estimates attempt to account for the fact that some evasion may go undetected in the

context of NRP random audits by employing a technique called Detection Controlled Estimation (DCE),

under which detected evasion is scaled up to account for undetected evasion. DCE methodology is based on

Feinstein (1991). The detection process is modeled by positing that, conditional on evasion occurring, only

a fraction is detected depending on the characteristics of the return examined (presence of self-employment

income, schedules filed, etc.) and of the examiner (experience, age, etc.). Feinstein (1991) estimates such a

model by maximum likelihood and finds that about a third of tax evasion goes detected (i.e., if all examiners

were as perceptive as the examiners who uncover the most evasion, three times more evasion would be

detected). To adjust for unreported income that examiners were unable to detect, the IRS applies DCE to

the returns subject to audit. Separate multipliers were applied for low-visibility and high-visibility income

and for taxpayers with reported total positive income above and below $100,000.12 The same approach is

followed by Johns and Slemrod (2010) to study the distribution of noncompliance in 2001.

      Figure 2 shows the distribution of noncompliance after applying the DCE methodology in 2006­2013.

A number of results are worth noting. First, the DCE adjustment roughly triples estimated detected non-

compliance. After DCE correction, we estimate that 14.0% of true income was under-reported on average

over the 2006­2013 period, and 20.0% of individual income taxes owed were not paid. These numbers are

essentially identical to the estimates of the tax gap reported in IRS (2019, Figure 1) for the years 2011-2013.13
  12 Total positive income is the sum of all positive amounts of the various components of income reported on an individual tax return,

and thus excludes losses. Johns and Slemrod (2010) provide more details on DCE methodology as used in the 2001 wave of the NRP.
DCE methods have been slightly revised in more recent tax gap studies (IRS, 2019), although the basic approach remains the same.
  13 The gross tax gap for tax filers is estimated in IRS (2019) at $283 billion per year, which is 20.2% of the estimated true individual




                                                                    9
Second, the DCE adjustment for the most part reverses the decreasing profile of raw detected tax evasion

by income group seen in Figure 1. Income under-reported now rises from about 7% of DCE-corrected in-

come at the bottom of the distribution to over 20% in the lower half of the top 1%. A key reason for this

rising profile is re-ranking when audited taxpayers are ranked by their DCE-corrected income, as shown by

Appendix Figure A3. For example, the DCE adjustment barely increases the very small amount of evasion

detected among taxpayers in the top 0.01% by exam-corrected income. Because DCE adjustment increases

the estimated amount of under-reported income for taxpayers initially below the top income bins, some of

these taxpayers move to the top bins after DCE adjustments. Third, and despite this re-ranking, even with

DCE a steep drop-off in estimated evasion remains at the very top. This drop-off is especially apparent

when we split the top 0.5% into finer groups in Figure 2b. Estimated under-reported income falls from 24%

of true income between the 99th and 99.5th percentile to less than 10% in the top 0.01%.

    The top panel of Figure 2 also compares our estimates of the distribution of noncompliance to those of

Johns and Slemrod (2010), which factor in the same DCE methodology as the one we use in this paper. The

difference between our work and Johns and Slemrod (2010) is that we use more recent waves of the NRP.14

We also have larger sample sizes: 105,167 audited taxpayers in our sample, as opposed to 36,699 in the 2001

NRP used by Johns and Slemrod (2010). Overall, we find a similar distribution of under-reported income

and taxes evaded. In both cases, 25%­30% of unreported income is earned by the top 1% of the true income

distribution. However, under-reported income is higher on aggregate in our series (14% of true income)

than in the 2001 NRP (11%). At the bottom of the distribution we also find lower ratios of taxes evaded to

taxes owed than Johns and Slemrod (2010).15


2.3    Limits of the DCE Methodology: A Direct Test

Although Detection Controlled Estimation is a valuable procedure to account for undetected evasion, it

also has limitations. Most importantly for our purposes in this paper, DCE deals with the possibility of

differential undetected evasion across the income distribution only coarsely. The DCE adjustment is applied

separately for low- vs. high-visibility income and for taxpayers with reported total positive income above

vs. below $100,000. The underlying assumption is that within a visibility × income bin, undetected evasion

is proportional to detected evasion. However, wealthier taxpayers may be more likely to use sophisticated
income tax liability of $1,398 billion. An additional $31 billion gross tax gap is estimated for non-filers, based not on NRP data but on
the Administrative Data Method; see IRS (2019, p. 15).
  14 As already noted, the DCE methodology has been slightly refined between the 2001 NRP used by Johns and Slemrod (2010) and

the 2006­2013 waves of the NRP we use in this paper. However to maximize comparability, in this paper we perform the same DCE
procedure as Johns and Slemrod (2010). The updated DCE methods, described in IRS (2019), are similar to the methods we employ;
both are based on Feinstein (1991).
  15 See Appendix Figure A4. One reason for this difference is that we include self-employment tax in our measure of taxes paid, while

Johns and Slemrod (2010) do not. Self-employment taxes (15.3% of self-employment income up to the Social Security cap) are large at
the bottom of the distribution relative to federal income taxes paid. See also footnote 9.


                                                                   10
        F IGURE 2: U NREPORTED I NCOME IN R ANDOM A UDIT D ATA A FTER DCE C ORRECTION

                              (a) Unreported Income (% of True Income)




                         (b) Decomposition by Type of Income (2006­2013)




Note: This figure shows the distribution of under-reported income in the 2006-2013 NRP data with the DCE adjustment.
In the top panel we compare our estimates to those in Johns and Slemrod (2010), which are based on the 2001 NRP data
and use the same DCE adjustment. Because the top group reported in Johns and Slemrod (2010) is the top 0.5%, we
proceed similarly in that panel. In the bottom panel, we show smaller groups at the top (as in Figure 1). Taxpayers
are ranked by Adjusted Gross Income (AGI) in Johns and Slemrod (2010) and market income in our series (defined
as total income reported on form 1040 minus Social Security benefits, unemployment insurance benefits, alimony, and
state refunds), both after DCE adjustment. The difference between these definitions of income is negligible for under-
reporting gaps at the top.                                11
forms of evasion. Thus, undetected evasion may be larger (relative to detected evasion) at the top. Wealthier

individuals also have more complex tax returns, making it harder for auditors to uncover all noncompliance.

    Based on what we know about the information available to auditors and the audit process, there are

at least two reasons to believe that the ratio of undetected to detected evasion may rise with income. First,

interest, dividends, and capital gains accruing to offshore accounts (which according to available evidence is

highly concentrated, e.g., Alstadsaeter et al., 2019) were subject to limited information reporting during our

sample period. Second, if a wealthy taxpayer owns a network of private business interests, the auditor faces

a considerable challenge in trying to assess the compliance of every single entity in the network. Upon initial

review, the auditor checks whether the income allocated to the individual taxpayer by these businesses is

accurately reported on the individual tax return, and whether the taxpayer has an active or passive role in

the businesses. Internal procedures, the materiality of risk, and the available tools and resources guide the

extent to which the broader network is examined. We discuss this further in Section 3.2.

    We now provide a simple and direct test of the hypothesis that random audits may miss some top-end

evasion, even after the DCE adjustment. We compare the amount of evasion estimated at the top in random

audits with the amount found in operational audits. Operational audits include all audits other than random

audits: correspondence audits, conventional in-person audits, sophisticated audits of high-income/high-

wealth individuals, and a variety of other specialized audit programs. Because the IRS prioritizes audits

of taxpayers who, based on a variety of factors, it expects to be noncompliant, operational audits are not

conducted at random. Because only a fraction of the population is subject to an operational audit in a given

year, total evasion in raw operational audit data should always be lower than the population-weighted NRP

estimates of total evasion. Appendix Figure A7 depicts the fraction of tax units subject to an operational

audit by fiscal year for the top 1%, the top 0.1% and the top 0.01% of reported AGI over time. In 2010 for

instance, 10% of tax units in the top 0.01% were audited. Consistent with publicly available data, audit rates

increased from the beginning of our sample period until about 2013 and then fell due to budget cuts.16

    Figure 3 contrasts unpaid taxes found in operational audits to the tax gap estimated in the NRP. We focus

on fiscal year 2010 because this was the year with the highest total assessed tax in our operational audit data,

but data from other years tell a similar story.17 Because in operational audit data we only observe reported

income in the year of the audit (not corrected income), we rank tax units by reported income in Figure 3. We

stress an important caveat: when ranking by reported income, it is not possible to make inferences about

the true level of tax evasion at the top. Ranked by reported income, top earners by construction tend to have

low evasion (since they are selected on high declared income). Figure 3 is thus not informative about the
  16 Publicly available data on audit rates come from the IRS Data Book, an annual publication available online at https://www.irs.

gov/statistics/soi-tax-stats-irs-data-book.
  17 Appendix Figure A8 describes the data plotted in Figure 3 for operational audits of the top 0.01% by fiscal year.




                                                                12
tax gap in the (true) top 0.01%. We only use Figure 3 to compare operational and random audits.

    Focusing first on NRP estimates before DCE adjustment, we observe in Figure 3 that although only

10% of taxpayers in the top 0.01% were audited in 2010, assessed noncompliance in operational audits is

already much higher than the no-DCE NRP estimate for the entire top 0.01%. In fiscal year 2010, operational

auditors assessed $1.5 billion (in 2012 dollars) in additional taxes owed for the top 0.01% by reported income.

Assuming that all un-audited taxpayers evaded zero taxes, this implies that the top 0.01% by reported

income evaded at least 1.7% of taxes owed.18 This lower bound for the amount of evasion in the top 0.01%

is far larger than the NRP estimate, which is less than 0.1%.19 In the next two bins--P99.9 to P99.95 and

P99.95 to P99.99--the assessed tax gap in operational audits is nearly as large as the population-wide NRP

estimate before DCE, despite the fact that less than 10% of taxpayers in these groups were subject to an

operational audit. This finding supports the notion that some evasion at the top end is missed by the NRP.

    Figure 3 shows that the same observation about the top 0.01% is true of the DCE-adjusted NRP too.20

When ranking by reported income, there is less evasion in the top 0.01% in the DCE-corrected NRP data

than in operational audits. In effect, the DCE correction adds little evasion to detected evasion in the top

0.01% by reported income. The majority of evasion attributed to the top 0.01% in Figure 2b comes from

individuals initially reporting income below the top 0.01% threshold who are re-ranked into the top 0.01%

after DCE adjustment (see Figure A3). The DCE methodology itself barely increases noncompliance for the

top 0.01% by reported income, which remains below the noncompliance found in operational audits.

    In summary, random audits face two main issues. One is that examiners vary in their propensity to

detect evasion. The DCE methodology was designed to address this issue. Second, the available tools,

procedures, and resources place limits on the extent to which some types of noncompliance at the top can

be identified by any examiner conducting a random audit--a limitation inherent in any feasible random

audit program. This issue introduces the possibility that even after DCE correction, estimated evasion may

be underestimated at the top-end. A direct comparison with operational audit data supports this hypothesis.

Until recently, however, there was little direct evidence about the nature and the size of the noncompliance

that may go undetected in random audits, making it hard to quantify this issue--a task we now pursue.
  18 Total   reported tax due is about $90 billion (2012 dollars) in this bin.
  19 Ranking    by exam-corrected income the corresponding figure is 0.4% of tax owed, which is still well below the operational audit
figure.
   20 We note that the difference between the NRP tax gap with DCE and the operational audit tax gap in Figure 3 may not be statistically

significant, due to sampling variation in the NRP. However, a statistically significant difference is not necessary for the substantive point
we make here, which is that enough evasion is detected in operational audits to imply that the NRP point estimate is inferior to the
true tax gap at the top of the income distribution.




                                                                     13
  F IGURE 3: TAX G AP IN O PERATIONAL A UDITS VS . (P OPULATION -W EIGHTED ) R ANDOM A UDITS

                                     Taxes assessed (% of taxes owed)




Notes: This figure compares tax evasion detected in operational audit data to population estimated noncompliance in
the NRP, focusing on the top 10% of the distribution. Unlike in other figures, we rank individuals by reported income.
We plot total tax evaded as a fraction of total tax due in each bin from operational audits in 2010 and compare this to
NRP exam corrections with and without DCE. Even with DCE, random audits uncover a very small amount of evasion
in the top 0.01% by reported income. Operational audits uncover more evasion than the NRP point estimate in the top
0.01%, even though the operational audit estimate only accounts for evasion by audited taxpayers (about 10% of top
0.01% returns were audited in 2010).




                                                          14
3       What Random Audits Miss: Evidence

In this section, we provide a first empirical demonstration that two forms of evasion--the concealment of

offshore wealth and tax evasion via pass-through businesses--are (i) highly concentrated at the top of the

income distribution, (ii) effectively invisible in random audit data (including after DCE correction), and (iii)

quantitatively important for the measurement of the tax gap at the top. For each of these types of evasion,

we explain the practical limits faced by random audits, and we show that accounting for these limits implies

a large upward adjustment to estimates of noncompliance at the top of the income distribution. To clearly

characterize what is detected in random audit data and what is often not detected, in this section we focus

on how undetected evasion modifies raw (i.e., non-DCE-corrected) NRP evasion. We proceed separately for

offshore and pass-through business evasion. In section 4, we will combine offshore evasion, pass-through

evasion, and the DCE adjustment to construct our preferred estimate of the level and distribution of federal

income tax noncompliance in the United States.


3.1     Offshore Evasion

We start by showing that evasion conducted through offshore financial accounts is highly concentrated at

the top of the income distribution and almost never detected by NRP auditors in the period preceding

increased transparency in offshore reporting and enforcement. Our benchmark year in this sub-section is

2007, i.e., the year preceding the start of a series of initiatives to fight offshore tax evasion. We take the pooled

2006­2013 NRP data as representative of the year 2007, and, leveraging the retrospective information created

by the post-2007 crackdown, ask how accounting for offshore evasion modifies the level and distribution of

detected evasion in 2007. We also discuss how these results can inform knowledge about top-end evasion

post-crackdown.


3.1.1    Background and Data on Offshore Evasion

In 2008­2009, the IRS and the U.S. Justice Department began an ambitious crackdown on offshore tax eva-

sion, described in more detail in Johannesen et al. (2020). Key steps in this process included the establish-

ment, starting in 2008, of Offshore Voluntary Disclosure (OVD) programs whereby taxpayers could disclose

prior noncompliance and pay penalties but avoid potential criminal prosecution, the passage in 2010 of the

Foreign Accounts Tax Compliance Act, and the implementation of FATCA third-party reporting for offshore

accounts in 2014. Johannesen et al. (2020) find that enforcement caused a large increase in reporting of off-

shore wealth and the associated financial income by U.S. taxpayers. We build on these findings to construct

two datasets of individuals that are very likely to have been evading taxes on income from their offshore


                                                         15
assets prior to the crackdown. The underlying data here are the same data used in Johannesen et al. (2020),

slightly updated to include additional years of the OVD program.

    The first dataset of likely evaders are participants in the Offshore Voluntary Disclosure Program. We

gathered data on all participants in OVD Programs from 2009 to 2015 and matched 50,020 OVD partici-

pants21 to their individual tax returns. We refer to this sample as the OVDP participant sample.

    The second dataset of likely evaders we use consists of individuals reporting that they own offshore

assets by filing a Foreign Bank Account Report (FBAR) for the first time between 2009 and 2011. U.S. per-

sons that are the beneficial owners of more than $10,000 in offshore financial wealth have been required

to disclose this wealth to the government since the 1970s by filing an FBAR. We use only those first-time

FBAR filers with U.S. addresses, disclosing an account in a tax haven.22 Johannesen et al. (2020) found com-

pelling evidence that the large majority of these taxpayers had been evading U.S. tax on these assets prior

to disclosing them in response to enforcement. We match 31,752 such taxpayers to their individual income

tax returns. We note that this sample may contain individuals who had an offshore account for legitimate

reasons and were unaware of their FBAR filing obligation prior to increased enforcement, but we find it less

plausible that individuals at the very top of the income distribution with accounts in havens were unaware

of these obligations. We refer to this sample as the first-time FBAR filer sample.

    For both sets of taxpayers, we then use data from their income tax returns to rank them in the income

distribution. Specifically, we use income data for the tax year after these individuals' disclosure of their off-

shore wealth, as the results in Johannesen et al. (2020) suggest that this is the year in which individuals start

to comply with their tax reporting obligations on such wealth and associated income. We rank individuals

by adjusted gross income (AGI) for simplicity, but we show that one obtains similar results with alternative

rankings.

    For the first-time FBAR filer sample, we also use data on the amount of offshore wealth disclosed on

their FBARs. These particular FBAR filers, those with U.S. addresses newly disclosing tax haven accounts,

disclosed $124 billion in wealth between 2009 and 2011. For comparison, total reported FBAR wealth was

about $290 billion for a given year in the same period, suggesting that a sizable share of the overall wealth

reported on FBARs in this period came from newly disclosures of wealth in tax havens from filers with U.S.

addresses. However, estimates of total wealth concealed in tax havens are higher. As we discuss below,

our preferred estimate of this amount (form Alstadaeter et al., 2018) is just over $1 trillion, suggesting that
  21 This 50,020 figure does not include approximately 6,000 program participants who we could not match to their individual tax

returns. About two-thirds of these were businesses participating in the OVD program. The rest did not file a tax return in the year we
wished to analyze, either because their participation in OVDP was too recent or for some other reason.
  22 We use the same list of tax havens as Johannesen et al. (2020), which is the OECD (2000) list of uncooperative tax havens plus

Switzerland, Hong Kong, Singapore, and Luxembourg. We note that this is not an official definition used by the IRS, which has no
official list of countries it considers a tax haven.




                                                                 16
roughly 11 percent of all offshore wealth in tax havens is disclosed by individuals in our first-time FBAR

filer sample. All of this is consistent with the results of Johannesen et al. (2020).


3.1.2   Empirical Analysis of Offshore Evasion

We first show that NRP audits very seldom detected offshore evasion in the time period we study. As both

of our offshore disclosure samples and the NRP stratified random audit sample contain disproportionately

many observations of high-income individuals, it turns out that there is enough overlap between them for

a simple, direct statistical analysis. Specifically, 378 first-time FBAR filers and 135 OVDP participants were

selected for NRP audits between 2006 and their disclosure of an offshore account. In Figure 4a, we show

that the auditor discovered that the individual had offshore wealth and should have been filing an FBAR in

only 7 percent of these cases. It is likely that the vast majority of these taxpayers had offshore wealth in the

period immediately preceding their disclosure--offshore wealth that they should have disclosed in the year

they were audited.23 This finding suggests that NRP random audits seldom detected concealed offshore

wealth.

    Figure 4b depicts the fraction of the overall population in a particular range of income that are present

in one of these samples of likely evaders, accounting for the overlap between samples in the total (as OVDP

participants were required to file any delinquent FBARs as part of participating in the program). We find

a very steep profile, with those at the very top of the income distribution being significantly more likely to

appear in the samples of likely evaders, even within the top 0.1%. The profile is slightly less steep for OVDP

participants than for other first-time FBAR filers. Altogether, almost 7% of taxpayers in the top 0.01% of the

income distribution (999 taxpayers) were part of one of these samples of likely evaders.24

    In Figure 4c, we turn to the distribution of wealth by rank in the income distribution. For this analy-

sis we used only the first-time FBAR filer sample, where we have an arguably good measure of offshore

wealth from the FBAR itself. We calculate the share of all wealth reported on FBARs in this sample that is

attributable to taxpayers at different parts of the income distribution. For contrast, we use estimates from
  23 Churn in the population of owners of offshore accounts could imply that some of the individuals disclosing offshore wealth in

our data did not own an offshore account when they were audited under the NRP, but this possibility seems unlikely to affect our key
takeaways. In a given year, about 30% of all FBAR filers do not file in the subsequent year; turnover is smaller for large accounts in tax
havens. Even if we supposed that only 70% of our overlap sample actually owned an offshore account when they were audited under
the NRP, we would conclude that the auditor only detected offshore wealth in 0.07/0.7 = 10% of cases. In other words, the overall
detection rate is so low that no realistic amount of churn will imply a high detection rate. Relatedly, in most of the 7% of cases where
the auditor did indicate that the individual had an FBAR filing requirement, they found that the individual had complied with their filing
requirement, suggesting that no noncompliance was found even in many of these cases. Fewer than 10 individuals in this sample were
actually found to be non-compliant with respect to their FBAR filing obligation.
  24 Appendix Figure A5 shows that our choice of income definition matters little for these estimates. We plot the fraction of the

population in the first-time FBAR filer sample by rank in the income distribution for various definitions of income. We start with
Adjusted Gross Income from the tax return, as in Figure 4b. As we observe some individuals with large business losses holding
substantial offshore wealth, we also rank individuals by total positive income, which replaces the income components of AGI that can
be negative--net capital losses and business losses--by zero when they are negative. Finally, we rank people by realized financial
capital income, defined as the sum of interest, dividends, and realized capital gains and losses. The overall profile is very similar for
the three different income concepts, though it is steepest for financial capital income, followed by positive income.


                                                                   17
                          F IGURE 4: F INDINGS FROM D ATA ON O FFSHORE E VASION

   (a) Do NRP audits detect offshore evasion?                             (b) Share Disclosing by Income Rank




                                     (c) Distribution of Offshore Wealth




Note: This figure summarizes the main findings from data on the OVDP participant and first-time FBAR filer samples
of likely evaders with respect to offshore wealth. Panel (a) shows that for both samples, individuals within the sample
that happened to be audited in the NRP were virtually never discovered (see also footnote 23). These individuals
nevertheless disclosed an offshore account in a later year. Panel (b) plots the fraction of the full population in each
sample by bin of adjusted gross income (in the tax year after disclosure of the offshore account), accounting for overlap
between the samples. We observe the steep profile of the probability of disclosing a previously hidden account by
income rank. The main difference between the profiles from the two samples appears to be the presence of many more
individuals in the top 0.01 % of the income distribution in the first-time FBAR filer sample. In total nearly 7% of people
in the top 0.01 percent of the income distribution appears in one of the two samples. Panel (c) plots wealth shares for
non-hidden wealth from Saez and Zucman (2016) updated in Saez and Zucman (2020) by bin of market income (defined
as total income reported on form 1040 minus Social Security benefits, unemployment insurance benefits, alimony, state
refunds, and other income), versus wealth reported on FBARs by the first-time FBAR filers with U.S. addresses and
accounts in tax havens (ranking by positive market income after disclosure). We observe that FBAR wealth is extremely
concentrated at the top of the income distribution.



                                                           18
the capitalization method of Saez and Zucman (2016) updated in Saez and Zucman (2020) to depict wealth

shares for non-hidden wealth.25 We observe that FBAR wealth held in havens is much more concentrated at

the top of the income distribution than non-hidden wealth, with over 20% of the wealth belonging to the top

0.01% by income, as opposed to 7% of non-hidden wealth. For reference, the total population of FBAR filers

discloses $124 billion in offshore wealth, with about $26 billion in the top 0.01% and $36 billion between the

99.9th and 99.99th percentiles. This result confirms that the findings in the previous figures were not simply

driven by the overall concentration of wealth at the top of the income distribution, but rather that concealed

offshore wealth is especially concentrated at the top.

    Further analysis suggests that even the modest amount of FBAR wealth attributed to the bottom 90%

of the income distribution may actually belong at the top of the distribution. Most of the observed FBAR

wealth in the bottom 90 percent of the income distribution is driven by a small number of extremely large

accounts, which skews the distribution of FBAR wealth in these income groups. For instance, the median

level of FBAR wealth for those in the bottom 50% of the income distribution is around $200,000 and the mean

is $2.5 million. Thus a small number of high-wealth individuals in the bottom 90% accounts for almost all

of the offshore wealth in this group. We suspect that the vast majority of the FBAR wealth attributed to

the bottom 90% of the income distribution (11% of all FBAR wealth using positive income and 17% using

AGI) should in fact be assigned to top income groups, and would be assigned to the top if we ranked by

wealth instead of income. To illustrate how much this matters, in Figure 4c we depict the impact on the

FBAR wealth shares of reassigning wealth from the bottom 90 percent to the top 10 percent of the income

distribution, in proportion with the FBAR wealth already attributed to the top 10%.

    A caveat to our analysis of offshore wealth deserves to be noted. Both of our samples contain data on

offshore wealth of voluntary disclosers of offshore wealth, those who selected to participate in the OVDP

or to engage in a likely quiet disclosure (see Johannesen et al., 2020).26 As such they cannot be regarded

as a representative sample of all owners of offshore wealth. To more fully understand the distribution of

offshore wealth, we would ideally combine these data with samples closer to a random draw from the pop-

ulation of offshore evaders. We do not have direct evidence on the direction of the selection, but data from

other countries suggests offshore wealth may be even more concentrated at the very top than we estimate.

Alstadsaeter et al. (2019) use leaked data from HSBC Switzerland and estimate that 52% of offshore wealth

in that bank was owned by taxpayers in the top 0.01 percent of the wealth distribution in Scandinavia.
  25 These series incorporate valuable suggestions made by Smith et al. (2019) and Auten and Splinter (2019). As our focus is docu-

menting the large difference between ownership shares of offshore wealth and those of domestic wealth rather than comparing the
evolution of wealth shares over time, using any alternative estimates of wealth shares would lead to similar findings.
  26 A "quiet disclosure" is when a taxpayer begins to report a previously undisclosed foreign account and the income in that account

without participating in an OVD program.




                                                                 19
                                       TABLE 1: O FFSHORE EVASION SCENARIOS

  Parameter                                     Lower-bound          Preferred         Upper-bound
                                                  scenario            scenario           scenario
  Amount of U.S. offshore wealth (in billion $)      750                1,058              1,500
  Fraction of offshore wealth concealed             85%                 95%                100%
  Rate of return on offshore wealth                4.65 %                6%                11%
  Distribution of offshore wealth                  FBAR     Average of FBAR and Nordic    Nordic
  Average Marginal Tax Rate                         20%                 25%                 30%

Note: This table summarizes the five sets of assumptions about the amount and distribution of offshore income made
in our three different scenarios discussed in Sections 3.1.3 and 3.2.4.


3.1.3   Implications of Undetected Offshore Income for the Distribution of Noncompliance

We now consider the magnitude of the adjustment to the income under-reporting gap implied by accounting

for undetected offshore evasion. Following Alstadsaeter et al. (2019), we obtain an estimate of the amount

of unreported offshore income by proceeding in four steps. Each step entails an assumption, which we list

in the middle column of Table 1. We modify these assumptions in subsequent sensitivity analysis (see the

first and third columns of Table 1) to quantify the margin of error involved in our adjustment.

    In our preferred scenario we make the following assumptions. First, we start with an estimate of aggre-

gate offshore wealth in tax havens owned by U.S. households in 2007: $1,058 billion, the equivalent of 1.7%

of total U.S. household wealth. This number is taken from Alstadaeter et al. (2018), Appendix Table A.3,

with no modification; it was obtained by Alstadaeter et al. (2018) by allocating the 2007 global amount of

offshore wealth estimated in Zucman (2013) to each country, using retrospective statistics on the ownership

of offshore bank deposits released by the Bank for International Settlements in 2016. Second, we assume

that 95% of that wealth was hidden. Some accounts were certainly properly declared in 2007, but a 95% rate

is consistent with the United States Senate (2008, 2014) reports, which found that 90%­95% of the wealth

held by American clients of a number of Swiss banks were undeclared before FATCA.

    Third, we assume a nominal taxable rate of return on this offshore wealth of 6.0%. This rate of return is

inferred from what is known about the portfolio composition of global offshore wealth around 2007 and the

rate of return on assets at that time. More precisely, Zucman (2013) estimates that in 2007, around 75% of

global offshore wealth was invested in securities (mostly equities and mutual fund shares) and 25% in bank

deposits. Our 6% taxable return is obtained by assigning the average interest rate paid by Swiss banks to

deposits, and assigning half of the S&P 500 return to securities (with the other half consisting of unrealized

capital gains).27
  27 The average interest rate paid by Swiss banks on their term deposits was 4.3% in 2006 (the U.S. Federal fund rate was in range

of 4.3% to 5.25%). The total nominal return (dividends reinvested) was 13.4% for the the S&P 500 (and 20.65% for the MSCI world).
With 25% of assets earning a 4.3% return in bank deposits and 75% earning half of a 13.4% return in securities (with the other half in
unrealized capital gains), we arrive at our taxable 6% return.



                                                                 20
    Fourth, we distribute the macro amount of offshore wealth and income as follows: We take a weighted

combination of the distribution of offshore wealth observed among self-selected U.S. filers who disclose a

haven account by filing an FBAR for the first time in 2009-2011 (depicted in Figure 4c), and the distribution

of hidden wealth estimated by Alstadsaeter et al. (2019) in Scandinavia. We put equal weight on the U.S.

disclosed offshore wealth distribution and the Alstadsaeter et al. (2019) distributions. This implies that 60%

of hidden wealth belongs to the top 0.1% highest earners and 35% to the top 0.01% (vs. more than 50% in

Scandinavia). Ideally, of course it would be preferable to base our allocation of offshore wealth only on U.S.

data. This allocation could be refined in the future using additional U.S. data where self-selection might be

more limited.

    Under these assumptions, unreported offshore income adds up to 0.7% of aggregate taxable income in

2007. As we saw in section 2.1, before any correction for undetected evasion (in particular before DCE),

the NRP finds that 4.0% of income is under-reported. Adding unreported offshore income increases this

number to 4.7%. Figure 5a shows how adding offshore income modifies the distribution of noncompliance.

Unsurprisingly, adding offshore income has no visible effect in the bottom 90% of the distribution and only a

small effect between the 90th and 99th percentile. However, although offshore evasion is small on aggregate,

accounting for it makes a significant difference at the top. It increases the ratio of under-reported income to

true income by 4 percentage points in the top 0.01%, and by 3 percentage points for the top 0.1% excluding

the top 0.01%. As a result, the sharp drop-off in the income under-reporting and tax gap by income within

the top 1% is undone by accounting for offshore evasion alone.

    To estimate federal income tax evaded as a share of tax due, we must make a fifth assumption about

the average marginal tax rate on income from offshore wealth. The average marginal tax rate should be

between the marginal tax rate on ordinary income and the preferred tax rate on long-term capital gains

and qualified dividends, which are 35% and 15% in our reference year, respectively. Reflecting our earlier

discussion about the portfolio composition of offshore wealth, we use an average marginal tax rate of 25%

in our preferred scenario.28 Appendix Figure A10 presents estimates of the amount of taxes evaded as a

fraction of taxes owed, adding evasion on offshore wealth to the raw NRP estimates before DCE correction.

In total, we estimate that $15 billion in taxes was evaded from offshore accounts, with $10.5 billion of this

total attributed to the top 0.1%, and $6.4 billion attributed to the top 0.01%.29 Accounting for offshore
  28 This rate is consistent with a scenario in which 25% of taxable offshore income is interest income, 50% is long-term capital gains

and qualified dividends, and 25% is short-term capital gains and non-qualified dividends; see footnote 27. We provide sensitivity
checks for a 20% and 30% tax rate in Section 3.2.4.
  29 Our benchmark estimate of $15 billion in revenue loss is lower than the $23 billion estimate in Zucman (2014), because Zucman

(2014) includes both federal and state taxes (and thus applies a 30% combined federal-plus-state marginal tax rate, as opposed to 25%
in our benchmark scenario that captures federal taxes only) and assumes a 7% return (vs. 6% in our benchmark scenario). Zucman
(2014) also estimates evaded estates tax (assuming 3% of offshore wealth belongs to decedents and a 40% estates tax rate), leading to
total (income plus estate, federal plus state) tax evaded on offshore wealth of $36 billion (Zucman, 2014, Table 1 p. 140).




                                                                  21
              F IGURE 5: A CCOUNTING FOR U NDETECTED O FFSHORE F INANCIAL I NCOME

                                (a) Unreported Income (% True Income)




                                           (b) Sensitivity Analysis




Note: This figure plots the estimated income under-reporting rates with and without adding offshore tax evasion. The
top panel shows our preferred scenario and the bottom panel reports our sensitivity analysis. Taxpayers are ranked by
exam-corrected market income in the NRP data, and offshore adjustments are made on the basis of positive market in-
come; this is the best available estimate of "true income" before DCE adjustments. We find that income under-reporting
rates increase significantly at the top of the income distribution when accounting for offshore evasion, reversing the
sharp drop-off in estimated evasion at the top seen in uncorrected random audit data. The point estimate for the top
0.01 percent increases by 4 percentage points in our benchmark scenario.

                                                         22
evasion increases the tax gap at the top of the distribution significantly.

    It is worth noting that accounting for offshore evasion also implies an upward revision of DCE-adjusted

estimates of under-reported income and unpaid taxes at the top, because the DCE adjustment is unlikely to

capture tax evasion via offshore financial assets. As shown by Appendix Table Table A2, very little capital

income is estimated to be under-reported in the NRP even after the DCE adjustments. Dividends, interest,

and capital gains estimated to be unreported by the top 1% (after DCE adjustment) add up to 0.38% of

aggregate income. This is much less than our benchmark estimate of unreported offshore income, 0.7% of

total income.


3.1.4   Offshore Tax Evasion: Sensitivity Analysis

We present results of our sensitivity analysis in Figure 5b. For simplicity, we focus on two scenarios: one

in which each of our assumptions is chosen (given the available evidence) to minimize the amount of off-

shore evasion at the very top, and one in which each assumption is chosen to maximize it (again given the

available evidence). These scenarios provide plausible lower and upper bounds for the size of offshore tax

evasion at the top of the income distribution. The first and third columns of Table 1 describe these alternate

assumptions.

    The lower bound of the amount of offshore wealth ($750 billion) comes from the Boston Consulting

Group's Wealth Report of 2007, which estimated that wealthy North American residents held about $37.7

trillion of wealth, 2% of which was held offshore.30 The upper-bound is based on Guttentag and Avi-Yonah

(2005), who built on the BCG Wealth Report of 2003, according to which the total holdings of high-net-worth

individuals in the world were $38 trillion, including $16.2 trillion for North America residents. "Less than

10%" of this wealth was held offshore according to the BCG; using this percentage as an upper bound as

in Guttentag and Avi-Yonah (2005) gives an approximate $ 1.5 trillion of U.S. offshore wealth. The lower-

bound of the fraction of offshore wealth which is hidden is based on United States Senate (2008, 2014) reports

investigating the practices of several Swiss banks in the U.S. In these reports, the investigation committee

find that about 90% of the wealth held by U.S. taxpayers at UBS Switzerland was undeclared, and that

between 85% and 95% of the accounts held by U.S. taxpayers at Credit Suisse were undeclared. For the

rate of return on wealth held offshore, the conservative figure corresponds to the average daily 10-year

Treasury rate for the year 2007, while the upper-bound number is the return on average equity for all U.S.

banks, averaged over the year 2007. Total income under-reporting via offshore accounts is $60.3 billion in the

preferred scenario (0.7% of true total taxable income), $28.7 billion in the lower bound scenario (0.3% of total
  30 Alstadsaeter et al. (2019, footnote 28 p. 2090) list all the available estimates of the global amount of offshore around 2007; the BCG

estimate is the second lowest one, immediately after (and close to) an OECD estimate which is not broken down by country.




                                                                    23
income), and $165 billion in the upper bound scenario (1.9% of total income). Finally, our preferred estimate

of the distribution of offshore wealth and income was a weighted combination of our FBAR distribution and

the distribution from leaks in the Nordic countries (Alstadsaeter et al., 2019). For the sensitivity analysis we

put 100% of the weight on one or the other of these.

   Two conclusions emerge from Figure 5b. First, there is some uncertainty in estimates of unreported

offshore income, which is reflected in the margin between the lower-bound and the upper-bound aggregates

above. In the upper bound scenario, under-reported income as a share of true income is 9.7 percentage

points higher than in our preferred scenario for the top 0.01%, while in the lower bound scenario is it

2.8 percentage points lower. A similar band is found for tax evaded; see Appendix Figure Figure A11

and Appendix Table A3. Second, and interestingly, even in the lower-bound scenario in which concealed

offshore income is very small on aggregate (0.3% of taxable income), accounting for offshore evasion still

has a large impact on estimated evasion at the top. It erases the downward-sloping profile of unreported

income (as a fraction of true income) seen in non-DCE corrected NRP data from the 99th percentile to the

99.99th percentile, while a drop-off remains in the top 0.01% in the lower bound scenario. In the lower

bound scenario, accounting for offshore evasion also doubles the amount of tax evasion detected in the

NRP for the top 0.01%. The striking and non-obvious result of our computations is that even under very

conservative assumptions about offshore evasion, taking this form of noncompliance into account implies

large adjustments to detected evasion at the top.

   In the Appendix, we unpack each step of the sensitivity analysis to see which assumptions matter most.

Appendix Figure A6a builds up the upper bound scenario by modifying assumptions from the preferred

scenario one by one; Figure A6b does the same thing for the lower bound scenario. We observe that the

taxable rate of return on offshore wealth, especially at the very top of the distribution, is the most important

source of uncertainty. Our own assessment is that the low rate of return used in the lower-bound scenario

(4.5%, the 10-year Treasury yield) is likely too low for individuals in the top 0.01% of the income distribution

in 2007, given that a large fraction of offshore wealth was invested in equities. However, direct evidence on

this question is limited. The next-most important assumption after the rate of return is the distribution of

offshore assets. Changing this distribution primarily affects the amount of evasion allocated to the 0.01%

versus the rest of the top 1%.

   Finally, it is worth asking how our results, which are for the year 2007 (before the increase in enforcement

effort on offshore wealth) can inform knowledge about top-end evasion post-crackdown. The available

evidence suggests that post-2007 enforcement may have substantially reduced offshore evasion (Johannesen

et al., 2020; De Simone et al., 2020). In particular, the implementation of the Foreign Account Tax Compliance

Act in 2014 has significantly increased the information available to the IRS. We will take these facts into


                                                       24
account in Section 4 when we present our preferred estimates of top-end evasion in the United States. In

any case, we view the results in this section as highly informative for the analysis of top-end evasion post-

crackdown. These results are the first empirical demonstration in the U.S. context that some forms of evasion

are highly concentrated at the top of the income distribution, effectively invisible in random audit data,

unlikely to be picked up by the DCE adjustment, and quantitatively important for the overall tax gap at

the top. In what follows we provide evidence that another (possibly rising) form of evasion shares these

properties, namely tax evasion occurring via pass-through businesses.


3.2      Evasion on Pass-Through Business Income

Pass-through businesses (S-corporations and partnerships) are not subject to the corporate income tax. In-

stead, all of the income of these businesses "flows through" to their owners' tax returns, where it is subject

to tax. Because ownership of pass-through entities is highly concentrated among the highest-income tax-

payers and the use of pass-through business structures has been on the rise since 1986 (Cooper et al., 2016),

obtaining accurate estimates of noncompliance in such structures is increasingly important. In this section

we attempt to make progress on this question by leveraging new data, focusing on the benchmark year 2007

to facilitate aggregation (in Section 4 below) with the offshore evasion results.


3.2.1    Background on Pass-Through Businesses

Administratively, pass-through businesses file returns reporting entity-level income and its components.

Then, they report the income allocated to their owners on the Schedule K-1. When the owner of a pass-

through business is active in the management or control of her business, the Schedule K-1 issued by the

business is not from an independent or unrelated third-party; in businesses where there is a single owner or

a tight network of owners, the potential scope for noncompliance is similar to sole proprietorship income.31

When the owner is passive, the business may still evade tax and as a result allocate too little income to

its owners. Confirming the flow of income, deductions, credits and other tax features of pass-through

businesses takes expertise and resources. Partnerships create a specific additional challenge to the audit

process, because partnerships can be owned by other entities, sometimes leading to complex ownership

structures involving numerous partnerships, corporations, trusts, or other intermediaries (Cooper et al.,

2016).

      In the context of NRP random audits of individuals, resource constraints and the tools available to au-

ditors limit the comprehensiveness of the examination of the income of affiliated pass-through businesses.
  31 In 2017, according to SOI tabulations of S-corporation tax returns, 66% of all S-corporations (earning 42% of all S-corporation

business income) had a single shareholder. When there is more than one owner, misreporting of pass-through income may be riskier
than misreporting of sole proprietorship income (Kleven et al., 2016).


                                                                25
First, when individuals report partnership or S-corporation income on their individual tax returns, auditors

rarely examine the tax returns of the corresponding pass-through businesses. For individuals subject to an

NRP audit and reporting pass-through business income, we observe that under-reporting is detected via an

audit of an affiliated pass-through business in only 3.8% of cases.32 This is because significant resources and

expertise are necessary to audit up through networks of pass-through returns and ensure that the correct

income (and other tax features) flow through to the relevant individual income tax returns. The IRS does

conduct audits to examine tax compliance in these situations, but they are usually handled through special-

ized audit programs that are not part of the NRP. Second, due to resource constraints there is no recurring

random audit program of pass-through businesses. The most recent random audit program for partner-

ships was conducted in 1982. A small-scale pilot random audit program of S-corporations was conducted

for tax years 2003-2004.

    This situation has a number of implications. First, individual random audit data likely underestimate

the overall amount of tax evasion occurring via pass-through entities. In Appendix Table A1, we see that

NRP audits (before DCE correction) find that only 4.6% for partnership and S-corporation income is under-

reported. This is much below the estimated 36.8% under-reporting rate for sole proprietorship income,

which is subject to direct and comprehensive examination in NRP audits. To better understand this result,

Figure 6a contrasts the probabilities that noncompliance was detected in NRP random audit for sole propri-

etorship income (Schedule C) and pass-through business income (Schedule E). About 60% of the population

of taxpayers with Schedule C income are estimated to be under-reporting their Schedule C income. By con-

trast, only 14.5% of taxpayers with pass-through business income are estimated to be under-reporting their

pass-through business income. These cases correspond to cases in which there is a mismatch between busi-

ness income reported on the Schedule K-1 and income reported on the Form 1040 or to cases in which active

business income is declared as passive, or vice-versa, not to cases where evasion is detected at the business

level. Because businesses are rarely audited in the context of the NRP, only 3.8% of taxpayers with pass-

through business income are found to be under-reporting income via an audit of the pass-through business

itself.33

    Second, because the ownership of pass-through businesses is concentrated, the bias occurs primarily

at the top of the distribution. Figure 6b shows the fraction of reported income that the various groups

of the reported income distribution earn via pass-through businesses in 2007, our benchmark year. For

the bottom 90% of the income distribution, less than 5% of income derives from pass-throughs. However,
  32 Based on conversations with experts, our understanding is that when audits of affiliated pass-through businesses do occur, the

audited pass-through entities are typically small businesses where the individual taxpayer being audited under the NRP likely has
access to the partnership books and records.
  33 Substantially more NRP related business audits occur for S-corporations than for partnerships. About 75% of the audited related

businesses are S-corporation despite the fact that more NRP participants are partnership owners than are S-corporation owners.



                                                                26
      F IGURE 6: PASS -T HROUGH B USINESS I NCOME : D ETECTED E VASION AND C ONCENTRATION

                  (a) Probability to Detect Unreported Business Income in the NRP




                      (b) Fraction of Reported Income Earned via Pass-Throughs




Note: The top panel shows the probabilities that noncompliance is detected for sole proprietorship income (schedule C) and pass-
through business income (schedule E) in 2006­2013 NRP random audits, before any DCE adjustment. Only 14.5% of taxpayers with
pass-through business income are found to be under-reporting their pass-through business income. Among these cases, only a quarter
correspond to cases in which evasion is detected at the business level. The bottom panel shows the fraction of reported market income
earned via pass-through businesses by reported market income in 2007. Income earned via pass-through businesses includes business
income (S-corporation and partnership profits), investment income (capital gains, dividends, and interest), and positive rents (lumped
with business income) flowing from pass-throughs. We estimate investment income earned by each income group via pass-throughs
as follows. First, we compute the fraction of taxable interest that, on aggregate, derives from pass-through businesses by dividing
the total amount of interest distributed by pass-throughs to individuals by the total amount of taxable interest reported on individual
income tax returns. We proceed similarly for dividends and capital gains. Investment income flowing to individuals from partnerships
is from Cooper et al. (2016); investment income flowing from S-corporations is from SOI tabulations of S-corporation tax returns, see
Saez and Zucman (2020). For rents, we assume that 50% of positive  27
                                                                    rental income derives from pass-throughs. Second, we assume that
these aggregate ratios are constant across the income distribution.
among the highest earners this fraction increases to 35%. Concretely, this means that comprehensive audits

of associated pass-through entities would be required to comprehensively examine about 35% of the income

reported by the highest-income taxpayers.

    Third, the bias affects several income categories, not only partnership and S-corporation business in-

come. As shown by Figure 6b, the income that flows to individuals from pass-throughs does not only consist

of business income, but also includes dividends, interest, rents, and capital gains. Determining compliance

for such pass-through investment income (reported on Schedule K-1) is more resource-intensive than for

investment income reported (on 1099 Forms) by third parties directly to the individual and the IRS.34


3.2.2   Methodology to Estimate Evasion on Pass-Through Business Income

To assess the magnitude of the bias in the NRP due to undetected pass-through business evasion, we adopt

the following strategy. We first make simple assumptions on the overall under-reporting rates for the var-

ious forms of pass-through income (business income, dividends, interest, capital gains). We consider a

benchmark scenario and a range of alternative assumptions, both described below. We then assume that

undetected pass-through income is distributed like reported pass-through income. For example, if the top

1% (by reported income) earns 60% of reported pass-through business income, we assume that the top 1%

(by corrected income) also earns 60% of unreported pass-through business income. One could adopt a more

sophisticated approach, especially for partnerships where the complexity of the partnership structure may

be correlated with the rate of noncompliance, possibly leading to more noncompliance at the top.35 Last,

we add pass-through evasion to the amount of under-reported income detected in NRP audits by income

bin, before DCE adjustment. To avoid any double counting with noncompliance detected in NRP audits,

we remove all pass-through-business-level evasion uncovered in the context of NRP audits.36

    In our benchmark scenario, we assume that 20% of total pass-through business income, 5% of pass-

through capital gains, and 3% of pass-through dividends and interest are under-reported. The rates as-

sumed for pass-through investment income are the rates observed in the NRP for investment income di-

rectly earned by individuals (Appendix Table A1). For business income, our benchmark assumption is mo-

tivated by the following facts. First, as shown in Appendix Table A1, random audit estimates without DCE

adjustment suggest that 37% of sole proprietorship income is under-reported. The tax gap for C-corporation
  34 A further complication is that income that should be taxed as, e.g., business income may be reported as capital gains to achieve the

lower tax rate on long-term capital gains. There is potential for legal avoidance along these lines, noncompliance and, possibly, some
gray area.
  35 Our methodology understates top-end evasion in two ways. First, if noncompliance is increasing in the complexity of the pass-

through structure and such complexity increases with income, our procedure underestimates pass-through noncompliance among the
wealthiest taxpayers. Second, our approach does not factor in any re-ranking from adding undetected pass-through business evasion
to reported income.
  36 Specifically, 57.6% of partnership and S-corporation income evasion detected in the NRP is associated with an entity pick up (i.e.,

an audit of the corresponding business). Therefore we remove 57.6% of detected partnership and S-corporation evasion.



                                                                   28
income taxes estimated by the IRS (2016) is somewhat lower, at about 18%.37 As the size and sophistication

of partnerships and S-corporations is between that of the sole proprietorships owned by top earners and that

of C-corporations, assuming an under-reporting rate for pass-through business income between these rates

seems reasonable. Second, the National Income and Product Accounts use a 20% income misreporting rate

for C- and S-corporations combined. Third, the small-scale 2003-2004 random audit study of S-corporations

found an income misreporting percentage of 12% to 16% with no corrections for undetected evasion. Last,

1982 TCMP random audits produced an estimated an income under-reporting rate of 26% for partnerships,

albeit in a different tax policy regime than today (GAO, 1995).

    For our sensitivity tests, we allow the under-reporting rate of pass-through business income to vary from

12% (the lowest uncorrected rate found in the S-corporation random audit study) to 28%. We allow the

under-reporting rate of pass-through investment income to range from 0% up to twice the benchmark rate,

i.e., up to 10% for capital gains and 6% for dividends and interest. We also implement additional robustness

checks to account for traces of evasion specific to pass-through businesses. In one variant, we randomly

disallow 20% of declared pass-through business losses, setting income to zero instead of the reported nega-

tive amount. This is motivated by the fact that a significant share of adjustments to partnership income in

operational audits consists of disallowed losses, which thus appear to be correlated with noncompliance. In

another variant, we classify part of the business income earned by circular partnerships--e.g. partnership

A is a partner in partnership B, which is a partner in partnership C, which in turn is a partner in A--as tax

evasion. Cooper et al. (2016) find that 15% of partnership business income is earned in circularly-owned

partnerships in 2011; we consider the implications of classifying two-thirds of this income (i.e., 10% of all

partnership business income) as tax evasion.


3.2.3   Implications of Pass-Through Evasion for the Distribution of Noncompliance

Figure 7a shows the results obtained with our benchmark assumptions. On aggregate, the pass-through

adjustment (1.5% of true income) is about twice as large as the offshore adjustment (0.7%). Accounting for

pass-through businesses increases under-reported income at the top of the income distribution significantly.

In NRP estimates without DCE, the fraction of true income which is under-reported falls from 4% around the

90th percentile of the (exam-corrected) income distribution to less than 1% in the top 0.01%. After adding

pass-through under-reported income, the fraction of true income which is under-reported rises from 4%

around the 90th percentile to about 8% from the 99.5th to the 99.95th percentile. It then falls back to around

4.5%- in the top 0.01%. This drop-off at the very top is due to the increasing prevalence of capital gains (as
  37 The gross corporate tax gap is estimated at $44 billion on average in tax years 2008-2010 (IRS, 2016, p. 7), a period during which

corporate income tax revenues averaged $191 billion (National Income and Product Accounts, Table 3.2 line 8), hence a tax gap of
44 / (191 + 44) = 18.8%.



                                                                  29
opposed to business income) at the very top; capital gains are assumed to have a low under-reporting rate

(5%) in our benchmark scenario. Tax evasion below the 90th percentile is not significantly affected by the

pass-through correction, because pass-through income is a negligible source of income for these groups.

   To further assess the effect of accounting for pass-through evasion, it is useful to consider the top 1% as a

whole. When including only the pass-through evasion uncovered in the NRP, the top 1% under-reports 2.3%

of its true income, before DCE adjustment--a lower rate than the average under-reporting rate of 4.0%. By

contrast, after accounting for pass-through evasion using our benchmark assumptions, the top 1% under-

reports 6.6% of its income--a higher rate than the average rate of 5.4%. In other words, the pass-through

correction alone removes the decreasing pattern of under-reporting rates found in uncorrected random

audit data.

   It is worth noting that factoring in undetected pass-through evasion also increases noncompliance at the

top relative to DCE-corrected NRP data. Although the DCE adjustment may be seen as picking up part

of this undetected unreported pass-through income, this adjustment appears quantitatively insufficient,

especially at the very top end. As we have seen, detected pass-through business income evasion in the NRP

is small (due to the practical limits faced by the audit process described above), and the DCE adjustment

is proportional to detected evasion. As shown by Appendix Table A1, only 2.0% of pass-through business

income in the top 1% is estimated to be under-reported in the NRP, which is 10 times smaller than under-

reporting in a reasonable benchmark scenario (20%). We note, however, that there is some potential overlap

between the DCE adjustment and our proposed adjustment for pass-through evasion. We will take this

overlap into account when we present our benchmark income and tax gap estimates (combining the DCE-

adjusted NRP and sophisticated evasion) in Section 4 below.


3.2.4   Pass-Through Evasion: Sensitivity Analysis

We now present the results from our sensitivity analysis. The main finding is that top-end pass-through

evasion could be significantly higher than reported in our benchmark scenario, which should be seen as

conservative.

   First, as shown by Appendix Figure A12, accounting for pass-through business losses adds about one

percentage point to the ratio of under-reported income to true income at the top. For the top 1% as a whole,

the ratio of under-reported income to true income rises from 6.6% in our benchmark scenario to 7.4% when

randomly disallowing 20% of reported pass-through losses. The effect of this correction is concentrated at

the top because of re-ranking: taxpayers whose losses are disallowed typically are in the bottom decile of

the reported income distribution, but end up in the top 1% of the corrected income distribution after their

declared losses are set to zero.


                                                      30
                   F IGURE 7: A CCOUNTING FOR PASS -T HROUGH B USINESS E VASION

                                (a) Unreported Income (% True Income)




                                          (b) Sensitivity Analysis




Note: This figure shows estimates of unreported income by income group in the raw NRP (before DCE adjustment) and
after adding estimates of pass-through business evasion. Taxpayers are ranked by exam-corrected income in NRP data,
and pass-through adjustments are made on the basis of reported market income; this is the best available estimate of
"true income" before DCE adjustments. In our benchmark scenario (top panel), we assume that 20% of pass-through
business income, 5% of pass-through capital gains, and 3% of pass-through interest and dividends are under-reported,
and that under-reported pass-through income is distributed like duly reported pass-through income. We remove all
business-level pass-through evasion detected in the NRP before adding our estimates of business-level pass-through
evasion. In the bottom panel, we report a high-end scenario in which 28% of pass-through business income, 10% of
pass-through capital gains, and 6% of pass-through dividends and interest are unreported, and a low-end scenario
in which only 12% of pass-through business income is unreported, while all pass-through investment income is duly
declared.
                                                        31
   Second, as shown by Appendix Figure A13, accounting for the income in circular partnerships adds 0.7

percentage points to the ratio of under-reported income to true income in the top 1%. Partnership income

is highly concentrated: 85% of partnership income went to the top 1% highest income-earners in 2007. The

fact that 15% of partnership income appears to end up in circular partnerships (Cooper et al., 2016), of which

we assume in Appendix Figure A13 that two-thirds is evasion, suggests that noncompliance rates at the top

end may be significantly larger than in our benchmark estimates.

   Third, our benchmark scenario assumes that 20% of pass-through business income is under-reported.

This is somewhat conservative given the limited third-party reporting involved, especially for single-owner

S-corporations and closely held partnerships. Absent third-party-reported information, tax evasion rates

tend to be high (IRS, 2019). Appendix Figure A14 investigates the effect of alternative assumptions on

pass-through business income evasion. In a high-end scenario where 28% of pass-through business income

is under-reported, under-reporting rises to 8.7% of true income for the top 1% as a whole. In a low-end

scenario where 12% of pass-through business income is under-reported, the top 1% under-reports 4.9% of

its true income, slightly more than the population average (4.8%).

   Last, Appendix Figure A15 varies the assumed under-reporting rate of pass-through investment income.

Our benchmark scenario assumes that 5% of pass-through capital gains are under-reported. There is reason

to believe that this number is on the low-end. For some assets owned by pass-through businesses--such as

real estate, business structures and equipment, and foreign securities--the IRS does not know the purchase

price of the assets, making tax evasion possible. Before the implementation of the Foreign Account Tax

Compliance Act, there was also little reporting on payments of foreign interest and dividends. It is thus

informative to consider a variant where, starting from our benchmark scenario, the under-reporting rate of

pass-through investment income is multiplied by two, keeping everything else the same. We find that the

implied under-reporting rate rises by 1 percentage point for tax units in the top 0.01%. We also consider the

opposite scenario in which all pass-through investment income is duly declared. As shown by Figure A15,

accounting for pass-through business income evasion still makes a large difference at the top compared to

the uncorrected NRP data.

   Figure 7b summarizes our sensitivity analysis by depicting two scenarios: a high-end scenario in which

28% of pass-through business income, 10% of pass-through capital gains, and 6% of pass-through dividends

and interest are unreported; and a low-end scenario in which only 12% of pass-through business income is

unreported, while all pass-through investment income is duly declared. Even in the low-end scenario,

income unreported by the top 1% is nearly twice what is detected in the NRP.




                                                     32
4     The Distribution of Noncompliance in the United States: Sophisti-

      cated vs. Less Sophisticated Evasion

In this section, we present new estimates of the distribution of noncompliance in the United States. These

estimates adjust the methodology used by the IRS in its tax gap studies (e.g. IRS, 2016, 2019) to include

the sophisticated forms of evasion that (given the tools, resources, and information constraints) can go

undetected in random audits. We provide a benchmark scenario and extensive sensitivity analysis. The

three main findings are the following. First, although our benchmark series feature only slightly more

evasion on aggregate than in the standard IRS methodology, our proposed adjustments have large effects

at the top of the income distribution. Specifically, our adjustments increase the aggregate income under-

reporting gap by a factor of 1.1, but by a factor of 1.3 for the top 1% and 1.8 for the top 0.1%. Second, in

our benchmark series, we find clear evidence that under-reported income rises with income until at least the

99.95th percentile of the true income distribution. Third, across all our specifications, we find that accounting

for unreported income increases the top 1% income share significantly in 2006­2013.


4.1    Methodology for Allocating Unreported Income

In all our scenarios, we classify evasion in two categories: sophisticated and less sophisticated. In our bench-

mark scenario, we estimate less sophisticated evasion as in the standard IRS tax gap methodology and in

Johns and Slemrod (2010). That is, less sophisticated evasion is the amount of noncompliance detected in

NRP random audits, adjusted to account for differences in experience (and other observable characteristics)

across examiners using DCE methodology (Figure 2). Next, we estimate sophisticated evasion as the sum

of offshore and pass-through evasion, using our benchmark scenario for each (Figure 5a and Figure 7a re-

spectively). We then combine sophisticated and less sophisticated evasion in the simplest manner possible,

i.e., assuming no re-ranking when adding them. We account for the potential overlap between the DCE

adjustment and our proposed adjustment for sophisticated evasion. Specifically, we remove 57.6% of the

DCE-adjusted estimate of partnership and S-corporation evasion in the NRP before adding our estimate of

pass-through evasion.38 In our benchmark scenario, the total amount of under-reported income is 15.0% on

aggregate: 1.9% from sophisticated evasion and 13.1% from less sophisticated evasion.39
  38 As we have seen (footnote 36), 57.6% of partnership and S-corporation income evasion detected in the NRP is associated with an

entity pick up (i.e., an audit of the corresponding business). Therefore, up to 57.6% of DCE-adjusted pass-through income evasion in
the NRP can be seen as capturing business-level evasion. We remove all this business-level evasion before adding our own estimate of
pass-through-business-level evasion.
  39 Total under-reported income (as a fraction of true income) for less sophisticated evasion (13.1%) is slightly lower than total DCE-

adjusted NRP evasion (14.0%) because (i) we remove 57.6% of pass-through evasion; (ii) the "true income" denominator is enlarged
by adding sophisticated evasion. Similarly, total under-reported income for sophisticated evasion (1.9%) is slightly lower than total
offshore plus pass-through evasion (2.1% as a fraction of exam-corrected, non-DCE adjusted income) because the denominator is
enlarged by the DCE adjustment.


                                                                  33
      This benchmark scenario is motivated by the following considerations. First, random audits are the most

powerful tool available to detect the less sophisticated forms of evasion. Moreover, the fact that more expe-

rienced auditors systematically detect more evasion suggests that some evasion is missing in the raw exam-

corrected data. The DCE methodology is the best methodology currently available to capture the insight

that examiners vary in their capacity to uncover noncompliance; thus the DCE-corrected NRP is a natural

starting point for allocating less sophisticated evasion. Last, as we have seen, due to the practical limits

inherent to the conduct of these audits, the NRP largely misses offshore and pass-through business evasion.

This is true even of the DCE-corrected NRP, because detected noncompliance on dividends, interest, cap-

ital gains, and pass-through business income is low, and the DCE correction is essentially proportional to

detected evasion.

      Because measuring evasion--especially undetected evasion--necessarily involves a margin of error, we

also consider a large number of robustness tests capturing the key dimensions of uncertainty. First, we

implement the high-end and low-end scenarios for offshore and pass-through evasion described in Fig-

ures 5b and Figure 7b, respectively. Second, we consider the case where sophisticated evasion on aggregate

is lower or higher than 1.9% of true income but distributed like in our benchmark series. At the low-end,

we assume that sophisticated evasion adds up to 1.4% of true income. This reflects a post-FATCA world

in which FATCA would be fully effective (so that under-reporting rates on offshore capital income would

be reduced by a factor of 4 relative to our benchmark scenario and become similar to the under-reporting

rates on onshore capital income) while other forms of sophisticated evasion would remain constant. At the

high-end, we consider a scenario in which total sophisticated evasion adds up to 2.5% of true income. This

scenario reflects the possibility that there are quantitatively significant forms of sophisticated evasion other

than pass-through and offshore evasion, such as abusive uses of trusts, charities, and tax shelters used by

high-net-worth individuals. Last, in keeping with our approach so far, we also show a version of all our re-

sults without DCE adjustment. As we shall see, the finding that accounting for unreported income increases

the top 1% income share is robust to all these variations.


4.2     Main Results

We start by describing the income under-reporting results from our benchmark scenario, which are depicted

in Figure 8. In our preferred estimate (blue line), we find that income under-reporting rises sharply with

income until roughly the 99.95th percentile of the distribution of true income. Specifically, unreported in-

come is around 7% of true income in the bottom half of the distribution, rises slowly to close to 10% from

the median to the 90th percentile, and then rises sharply after the 95th percentile. It hovers between 20 and



                                                      34
25% in most of the top 1%, and then declines from 20% to just below 15% in the top two income bins we

consider (P99.95 to P99.99 and top 0.01%).

   Figure 8b decomposes our benchmark estimate of evasion into sophisticated versus less sophisticated

evasion. As one moves up the income distribution, sophisticated evasion rises while less sophisticated

evasion decreases sharply. More precisely, sophisticated evasion rises from 0% in the bottom 90% to 7% of

true income in the top 0.01%. Meanwhile unsophisticated evasion first rises with income (as opportunities

for such evasion increase, e.g., on sole proprietorship and rental income) and then falls at the very top, as

income that can be more easily detected by auditors becomes less prevalent.

   A number of additional results are worth noting. First, we compare our results to those obtained follow-

ing the standard IRS methodology (e.g. IRS, 2019; Johns and Slemrod, 2010). On aggregate, our benchmark

income under-reporting gap is only about 1.1 times larger than the gap found using the DCE-adjusted NRP

(see Appendix Table A5). However, our benchmark adjustment increases the income under-reporting gap

by a factor of 1.8 for the top 0.1%. This is because sophisticated evasion, although not large on aggregate in

our benchmark estimates, is highly concentrated, with 40% of it going to the top 0.1%. Second, in the spirit

of the analysis presented in Section 3, in Figure 8a we show how sophisticated evasion modifies the raw

(i.e., non-DCE corrected) profile of evasion detected in the NRP. A striking finding emerges. While in raw

NRP data, the highest earners under-report less income (relative to true income) than other taxpayers, after

adding sophisticated evasion the opposite is true. Under-reported income rises from 4%­5% of true income

in the bottom 95% of the income distribution to 8%­10% in the top 0.5%.

   Table 2 reports the share of total unreported income attributable to various income groups. In our bench-

mark scenario, 31.0% of all unreported income is earned by the top 1% of the true income distribution.

When disregarding sophisticated evasion (i.e., in the DCE-adjusted random audit data), unreported income

is slightly less concentrated. We also report the distribution of unreported income when discarding DCE

adjustments altogether. In that case, without sophisticated evasion, the top 1% earns 11.3% of all under-

reported income. Adding sophisticated evasion, the top 1% earns 33.9% of all unreported income (close to

our benchmark estimates).

   Appendix Figure A16 presents our benchmark tax gap estimates. We find that taxes evaded rise from

about 20% of taxes owed in the bottom 95% of the distribution to 25%­30% in most of the top 1%, before

falling back to about 15% in the top 0.01%. Taxes evaded in the top 0.1% are more than twice as large as in

DCE-adjusted random audits. That is, even the DCE methodology underestimates the true tax gap in the

top 0.1% by a factor of more than 2, according to our benchmark estimates. In our benchmark scenario, as

shown by Appendix Table A7, we estimate that 36.2% of all federal income taxes unpaid are attributable to

the top 1% (ranked by corrected income). For comparison, the top 1% (by reported income) paid 35.5% of all


                                                     35
     F IGURE 8: T HE D ISTRIBUTION OF N ONCOMPLIANCE IN THE U.S.: B ENCHMARK E STIMATES


                               (a) Unreported Income (% True Income)




                                (b) Composition of Unreported Income




Note: This figure shows estimates of under-reported income by true income groups, when combining DCE-adjusted
NRP evasion and our benchmark estimate of sophisticated evasion (offshore and pass-through business evasion) in
2007. For comparison, the top panel reports raw (i.e., before DCE adjustment) evasion detected in the NRP, and raw
evasion combined with sophisticated evasion. We rank individuals by estimated true income either before or after DCE
adjustment. For details on raw evasion detected in the NRP, NRP evasion after DCE adjustment, benchmark offshore
evasion, and benchmark pass-through evasion, see notes to 36
                                                           Figure 1, Figure 2, Figure 5 and Figure 7 respectively.
    TABLE 2: S HARES OF U NREPORTED I NCOME , 2006-2013, IN % OF T OTAL U NREPORTED I NCOME

                                 NRP                        NRP                          NRP
                                No DCE                   With DCE                      No DCE                   Our benchmark
                            No sophisticated           No sophisticated            Add sophisticated
    P0-10                         1.6                        0.8                          1.1                            0.7
    P10-20                        0.7                        0.5                          0.5                            0.5
    P20-30                        2.8                        1.1                          1.9                            1.0
    P30-40                        4.9                        1.8                          3.3                            1.6
    P40-50                        6.1                        2.3                          4.1                            2.1
    P50-60                        7.5                        3.8                          5.1                            3.4
    P60-70                        9.8                        5.3                          6.6                            4.7
    P70-80                       11.9                        8.3                          8.2                            7.5
    P80-90                       15.6                       12.9                         11.1                           11.6
    P90-95                       12.2                       12.5                          9.2                           11.4
    P95-99                       15.6                       26.2                         15.2                           24.7
    P99-99.5                      3.9                        7.4                          5.6                            7.6
    P99.5-99.9                    5.1                       10.3                         10.9                           11.7
    P99.9-P99.95                  1.1                        2.4                          3.6                            3.1
    P99.95-P99.99                 0.7                        2.5                          5.7                            4.1
    P99.99-100                    0.6                        2.0                          8.1                            4.5
    Top 1%                       11.3                       24.6                         33.9                           31.0

Note: This table reports the distribution of unreported income across income groups, for different measures of unre-
ported income. Tax units are ranked by their estimated true income (equal to reported income plus estimated unre-
ported income). The first column shows the distribution of unreported income detected in the NRP with no adjustment
for undetected evasion (in particular, without the DCE methodology). The second column shows the distribution of
unreported income in the NRP after the DCE adjustment. The third column shows the distribution of unreported in-
come detected in the NRP without DCE adjustment, but adds our benchmark estimate of sophisticated evasion. The
last column shows the distribution of unreported income in our benchmark scenario which (as described in Section 4.1)
incorporates both sophisticated evasion and the DCE adjustment.


federal income taxes on average in 2006­2013. Fully collecting the unpaid income taxes of the top 1% would

increase income tax revenue by an amount equivalent to 10.1% of the aggregate amount actually collected.

For example, it would have increased tax revenue by $173 billion in 2019 (a year when actual collection

was $1,713 billion, as reported in the National Income and Product Accounts), according to our benchmark

estimates.40

    The tax gap we estimate for the top 0.01% (close to 15% of taxes owed) is slightly smaller than the one

obtained by Alstadsaeter et al. (2019) in Scandinavia by combining random audits with estimates of unre-

ported offshore income (25% for the top 0.01% by wealth). Further down the distribution, the Scandinavian

tax gaps are much lower than in the U.S., around 5% through most of the distribution vs. around 20% in

the United States. In addition to the fact that Scandinavian data allow researchers to rank by wealth rather

than income, a few factors complicate the comparison of these estimates across countries. First, the United
  40 For the years in our sample, we estimate that closing the tax gap for the top 1% would raise about $114 billion annually in 2012

dollars (see Tables A5 and A7). About $13 billion of the difference between this and the $173 billion figure for 2019 is due to inflation,
while the rest is due to growth of top incomes.



                                                                   37
States is a leading user of DCE methodology to adjust detected noncompliance in random audits; in many

other countries with random audit programs, researchers and tax authorities use uncorrected random audit

data similar to those presented in Figure 1 above ([see, e.g., Kleven et al., 2011; Alstadsaeter et al., 2019).

Second, as already noted (footnote 9), taxes evaded as a fraction of taxes owed are mechanically high at

the bottom of the distribution in the United States when (as done in Figure A16) refundable tax credits are

subtracted from taxes owed. Removing refundable tax credits would reduce the tax gap at the bottom by

about 4 percentage points. Third, sole proprietorship income (which has high rates of noncompliance) is

larger in the United States than in Scandinavia, where a larger fraction of economic activity takes place in

the government and corporate sectors. Last, in contrast to Scandinavian countries, many large businesses

are organized as pass-through entities in the United States. Because pass-through business income is subject

to the federal income tax, our estimates of the federal income tax gap include evasion by those businesses.

To maximize international comparability, it would be desirable to estimate comprehensive distributional

tax gaps covering all taxes, including the corporate tax--in effect treating all businesses, in both the United

States and Scandinavia, as if they were pass-through businesses. We leave this important task to future

research.

      Finally, we present the results of our sensitivity analysis in Appendix Figure A17. The basic pattern of

under-reporting depicted in Figure 8b remains across all the scenarios we consider. Under-reporting rises

with income up to about the 99th percentile of the income distribution, then stabilizes at a high level (about

23% to 27% of true income) up to the 99.95th percentile. In our upper-bound scenario for sophisticated

evasion, evasion remains at that level up to the very top of the distribution; the top 0.01% under-reports

about 24% of its true income. In the other scenarios, there is a drop-off in evasion in the top 0.05%.


4.3     Implications for the Measurement of Inequality

There has been renewed interest in recent decades in the study of income and wealth distributions. Income

tax returns are a key data source for the study of inequality. However, the tax data used to study inequality

in the United States are before any correction for unreported income. How does accounting for unreported

income affect what we know about inequality?

      Table 3 reports the distribution of taxable market income on average over 2006­2013 with different treat-

ments of unreported income. The first column shows the distribution of reported income, that is, with

no adjustment for evasion. The second column shows the distribution of reported plus detected under-

reported income (i.e., with no adjustment for undetected evasion). This distribution is very similar to the

distribution of reported income, because only 4.0% of income is found to be under-reported on aggregate



                                                       38
in the raw NRP. The third column shows the distribution of reported plus DCE-adjusted under-reported

income. After DCE adjustment, we estimate that the top 1% income share rises.41 Finally, the last column

of Table 3 shows the distribution of true income in our benchmark scenario. According to our estimates, the

top 1% earns 21.8% of true income, 1.5 points more than when disregarding noncompliance.

    The result that accounting for noncompliance increases the top 1% income share is robust to alternative

assumptions about the size and distribution of undetected evasion from unadjusted random audit data.

First, in the extreme case where there is zero sophisticated evasion, we are back to the DCE-adjusted esti-

mates reported in column 3 of Table 3--i.e., the top 1% income share is 0.6 percentage point higher after

accounting for noncompliance than before. In the case where there is zero offshore evasion (only pass-

through business income evasion), the top 1% income share rises by more than 0.6 points. Second, if we

discard the DCE methodology entirely and simply add sophisticated evasion to the raw evasion uncovered

in the NRP, the top 1% income share rises from 20.3% pre-audit to 21.0% (col. 4 of Table 3).

    These results have implications for estimating the distribution of total U.S. national income, as in Piketty

et al. (2018) and Auten and Splinter (2019). For the computation of U.S. national income, the Bureau of

Economic Analysis includes income which should be reported in tax returns but is not. For wages, sole

proprietorship income, and partnership business income, the amounts of unreported income included in

national income are directly based on the DCE-adjusted NRP.42 For other income categories, the inclusion

of unreported income is implicit; for instance, aggregate rental income is higher in the National Income

and Product Accounts (NIPAs) than in tax returns in part because some rental income is unreported in

individual income tax returns.43 Since the top 1% income share is higher after allocating unreported income,

our results in this paper suggest that a proper treatment of tax evasion increases income concentration in

2006­2013. In Auten and Splinter (2019), the top 1% income share is lower by 0.8 percentage point after

the allocation of unreported income on average over 2006­2013 (and by 0.4 percentage point in 2001).44 In

Piketty et al. (2018) the top 1% income share is higher by 0.7 percentage point after including the forms of

evasion explicitly identified in the NIPAs, with no time trend.

    We note that the data in Tables 2, A5, A6, and A7 can be used to adjust for income under-reporting and
  41 This rise is consistent with the fact that the top 1% earns a larger share of unreported income (more than 25%) than its share of

reported income (about 20%).
  42 In 2013, the adjustment amounts to $76.8 billion for wages (NIPA Table 7.18 line 2) and $639.8 billion for sole proprietorship and

partnership income (NIPA Table 7.14 line 2).
  43 No explicit reconciliation between aggregate rental income in the NIPAs and in 1040s is provided by the Bureau of Economic Anal-

ysis because NIPA rental income is not estimated based on tax returns. Other conceptual differences (e.g., the treatment of depreciation)
contribute to the gap between NIPA income and income reported in tax returns; see Saez and Zucman (2020, section 3.1.1).
  44 For example, the top 1% income share before the allocation of under-reported income is 16.9% in 2013 (Auten and Splinter, 2019,

Table C1-Incomes, col. DE divided by col. DB) and 16.1% after adding unreported income (Auten and Splinter, 2019, Table C1-Incomes,
col. DM divided by col. DJ). Out of this 0.8 percentage point decline, about 0.6 percentage point comes from tax filers. An additional
0.2 percentage points come from non-filers, as Auten and Splinter (2019) allocate 15% of their total under-reported income aggregate
to non-filers, assuming this income is earned by people at the bottom of the true income distribution. We do not analyze non-filer
income in our paper, but we note that recent analysis shows that high-income non-filers drive the bulk of the non-filer tax gap in recent
years (TIGTA, 2020).


                                                                   39
                   TABLE 3: S HARES OF T RUE I NCOME , 2006-2013, IN % OF T OTAL I NCOME

                         NRP                  NRP                      NRP                       NRP
                      Before exam          After exam               After exam               After exam                 Our
                                             No DCE                 With DCE                   No DCE                benchmark
                                         No sophisticated         No sophisticated         Add sophisticated
  P0-10                     -2.6               -2.1                     -2.1                     -2.0                     -2.1
  P10-20                    1.0                1.0                      0.9                       1.0                      0.9
  P20-30                    2.1                2.1                      1.9                       2.1                      1.9
  P30-40                    3.2                 3.4                     3.0                       3.3                      3.0
  P40-50                    4.7                 4.8                     4.4                       4.7                      4.3
  P50-60                     6.4                6.5                     6.0                       6.4                      6.0
  P60-70                     8.6                8.7                      8.2                      8.5                      8.1
  P70-80                    11.7              11.6                     11.2                      11.4                     11.1
  P80-90                    16.6              16.4                     16.1                      16.1                     15.9
  P90-95                    12.0              11.8                     12.0                      11.6                     11.9
  P95-99                    16.1              16.0                     17.5                      15.9                     17.3
  P99-99.5                   4.3                4.2                      4.7                      4.3                      4.7
  P99.5-99.9                 6.7                6.5                      7.2                      6.9                      7.4
  P99.9-P99.95               2.0                1.9                      2.0                      2.0                      2.1
  P99.95-P99.99              3.2                3.0                      3.1                      3.3                      3.3
  P99.99-100                 4.2                4.1                      3.9                      4.5                      4.3
  Top 1%                    20.3              19.8                     20.9                      21.0                     21.8

Note: This table reports the distribution of true market income (defined as total income reported on form 1040 minus
Social Security benefits, unemployment insurance benefits, alimony, and state refunds) for different measures of unre-
ported income. The first column shows the distribution of reported income (i.e., with no adjustment for evasion). In
the second column, under-reported income only includes what is detected in raw random audits with no adjustment of
any kind (in particular no DCE adjustment). In the third column, under-reported income is equal to DCE-adjusted NRP
unreported income. In the fourth column, under-reported income is equal to raw NRP unreported income (with no
DCE adjustment) plus sophisticated evasion. The last column shows the distribution of true income in our benchmark
scenario combining the DCE adjustment and sophisticated evasion.


tax due in distributional macroeconomic statistics even when without data on corrected incomes. Doing so

requires carefully accounting for re-ranking, as reported incomes are negatively selected on noncompliance.

Methods for accounting for re-ranking based on NRP data, not including the sophisticated evasion we

study here, are being developed in work in progress by Auten and Langetieg (2020). Our adjustments for

sophisticated evasion specifically are straightforward to add on top of any existing method for adjusting

the distribution of income to account for mis-reported income, because our sophisticated adjustments are

done on the basis of reported incomes. In other words, one could simply add our estimated amount of

sophisticated evasion in each (reported) income bin, based for instance on Table A6, after implementing

existing methods for distributing other under-reported income.45
   45 When adding sophisticated evasion to estimates of under-reporting without DCE corrections, we recommend using the "Sophis-

ticated - after exam" column of Table A6. When adding sophisticated evasion to DCE-adjusted estimates we recommend the "Our
benchmark - DCE-corrected" column. The difference between the two derives from our modification of DCE-adjusted pass-through
business under-reporting to avoid double counting; see also the notes to Tables A5 and A6. We also note that care should be taken in
applying these adjustments in different periods. Outside our sample period of 2006-2013, our view is that a multiplicative adjustment
for sophisticated evasion rather than an additive one is preferable, to remain neutral about the dynamic evolution of under-reporting-



                                                                 40
      Accounting for tax evasion also affects the measurement of wealth inequality. Following the work of

Saez and Zucman (2016), a number of authors have estimated U.S. wealth inequality by capitalizing income

tax returns. Accounting for sophisticated tax evasion can increase estimated top wealth shares in at least

two ways. First, a large fraction of offshore wealth (foreign bank accounts, portfolios of equities and bonds

held through foreign financial institutions, holdings of foreign mutual funds, foreign real estate) is not cap-

tured in the official Federal Reserve estimates of the total amount of U.S. household wealth (Zucman, 2013).

As offshore wealth is highly concentrated, accounting for it increases top wealth shares; for instance in the

supplementary series of Saez and Zucman (2016) it increases the top 0.1% wealth share by 0.9 percentage

point in 2012 (see Saez and Zucman, 2016, p. 539 for a discussion). Second, accounting for pass-through

business evasion can also increase top wealth shares. In Smith et al. (2019), the aggregate market value of

pass-through business wealth and its distribution are obtained by capitalizing reported business income

(gross of interest paid and depreciation), sales, and assets. If pass-through businesses under-report income

to their owners (e.g., by understating sales, or by retaining income in circular partnerships), aggregate busi-

ness wealth is downward-biased. Given that business wealth is highly concentrated, factoring in business

tax evasion would increase wealth concentration.46



5      Theory

In this section, we seek to inform the interpretation of the above body of empirical results with some simple

economic theory. Our central goal is to explain why some forms of evasion, like offshore evasion and

pass-through evasion are 1) concentrated at the top of the income distribution, and 2) difficult to detect by

conventional audits. We also briefly consider some related optimal tax enforcement considerations.


5.1     Individual Evasion Decisions

Setup. As in Allingham and Sandmo (1972) an individual determines how much income to report to the

tax authority out of exogenous true income, y . Evaded income is denoted by e. The only modification is that

we give the agent the option to take a binary concealment action a  {0, 1} that will reduce the probability
adjusted top income shares. A multiplicative adjustment ensures that if reported income shares do not change over time, neither do
under-reporting-corrected income shares. We have emphasized the multiplicative figures elsewhere in the main text for this reason.
   46 In the Saez and Zucman (2016) methodology, the aggregate market value of pass-through businesses is taken from the official

Federal Reserve Financial Accounts. Aggregate wealth in these accounts is not estimated based on reported business income, so in
principle it is not affected by business income tax evasion (although it might be too high or too low for other reasons). If unreported
pass-through income is proportional to reported pass-through income (as our benchmark estimates assume), then the wealth distribu-
tion in the Saez and Zucman (2016) methodology is not affected by business income tax evasion.




                                                                  41
of detection of evasion at some fixed cost . The individual's optimization problem is:


                     max           (1 - p(a))u((1 -  )y +  e - a) + p(a)u((1 -  )y -  e - a),                                  (1)
                e[0,y ],a{0,1}
                                                    subject to (1 -  )y -  e - a > 0


where  is the tax rate,  > 0 is the penalty rate (following Yitzhaki, 1974), u() is standard risk-averse utility

over final consumption with u > 0, u < 0, and p(a) is the probability of detection with p(1) < p(0). The

given constraint requires that final consumption is positive in both states.47 If we restrict the individual to

a = 0, this model obviously becomes the Allingham-Sandmo model.

    Because we view this as an intuition-building model, there are multiple interpretations of the action a.

For example, the action one has in mind could be shifting income offshore or adopting a complex business

structure with some income allocated to offshore or tax-exempt entities. With this interpretation, one can

think of p(a) as the probability of audit times the probability that the auditor discovers the taxpayers' eva-

sion conditional on a, p(a) = Pr(audit)  Pr(auditor detects evasion|a). Prior literature implicitly assumed

the second term in this expression is one, even when adopting an endogenous detection probability (Kleven

et al., 2011). We could also interpret a as the adoption of a gray area avoidance/evasion position that is un-

certain to be successful if the position is legally challenged. In this case, the model looks exactly the same,

but we would impose p(a) = Pr(audit) Pr(taxpayer loses legal challenge|a).

    For simplicity, we do not directly model third-party information, though it has been shown to be im-

portant and straightforward to incorporate into the Allingham-Sandmo framework (Kleven et al., 2011).

Intuitively, when information in a taxpayer's income is acquired by the tax authority from a third party,

evasion on this income becomes easily detectable, and not reporting such income would have a very high

probability of detection. One can essentially think of third-party information as imposing an upper bound

on evasion, which would be a straightforward extension of the model here--note that we already require

that e < y . One can also think of the shifting of income away from what would be covered by third-party in-

formation (for example shifting assets offshore to avoid third-party reporting on capital income by domestic

financial institutions, before FATCA) as a concealment action.

    Finally, we introduce some notation to facilitate exposition of the results. First, we denote the fraction

of true income evaded--the analogue to the tax gap in the model--by g = e/y . To distinguish the chosen

g in the optimization problem from Equation (1) from the g chosen under a = 1 or a = 0, we let ga (y , p)

denote the level of g the taxpayer would choose if we maximize the objective restricting to a = 0 or a = 1,
 47 We could add the constraint that (1 -  )y -  e - a > 0 as well, but given that consumption is always weakly larger in the state

where evasion is not detected, this constraint will never bind.




                                                                42
given true income y and probability of detection p. Second, Allingham and Sandmo showed that the effect

of changes in income on evasion depend on absolute and relative risk aversion, which we denote by A(c) 

-u (c)/u (c) and R(c)  -cu (c)/u (c), respectively.


Concealment at High Incomes. We begin by developing some intuition for how the tax gap should vary

by income, and how this depends on whether the individual takes the concealment action. The following

Lemma summarizes everything we know about this from Allingham and Sandmo's analysis of their original

model, which recall is nested under a = 0.

Lemma 1. The Allingham-Sandmo Tax Gap.

L1.1. If the individual is risk averse, g0 is decreasing over p, g0 /p < 0.

L1.2. If absolute risk aversion is decreasing, A < 0, evasion e is increasing in true income y .

L1.3. If relative risk aversion is constant R = 0, g0 is constant over income, g0 /y = 0.

L1.4. If relative risk aversion is decreasing R < 0, g0 is decreasing over income, g0 /y < 0.

L1.5. If relative risk aversion is increasing, R > 0, g0 is increasing over income, g0 /y > 0.

Proof. See Allingham and Sandmo (1972).

    Our goal is to build a model that captures the intuition that, as income grows very large, the fixed cost

of adoption  becomes a trivial share of income, so the taxpayer will opt for the lower detection probability

given the trivial cost. The following assumption ensures that as the cost becomes a trivial share of income,

the benefits of adoption do not also become trivial:

Assumption 1. As y becomes arbitrarily large, g0 (y , p1 ) approaches a strictly positive constant.

    Assumption 1 is stated as an assumption about optimal behavior, but it actually imposes restrictions on

the primitives of the model, especially risk preferences. It first requires that the limit of g0 as y tends to

infinity exists, which rules out some extremely strange risk preferences and behaviors (e.g. oscillations).

Additionally, from Lemma 1, we know that Assumption 1 is satisfied under constant and increasing relative

risk aversion, as these imply that g0 is constant or increasing with income.48 The main situation in which

this assumption could fail is if relative risk aversion is decreasing at large incomes. However, decreasing

relative risk aversion alone does not ensure violation of the assumption: g0 could decrease but approach

some strictly positive constant as y becomes large. Assumption 1 is unambiguously violated under constant
  48 This statement ignores the corner solution in which the individual never evades under p = p , for any y , so g = 0 everywhere.
                                                                                                    1
With respect to the results below, we note that in this case the individual would obviously never adopt a = 1. Henceforth we continue
to ignore this corner solution.



                                                                 43
absolute risk aversion, however: in this case e is constant over y and g = e/y will become trivial as y grows

large.

   In any case, our empirical results above suggest that this assumption is realistic, at least for a sizable

fraction of very high-income individuals, because concealment using the types of technologies we have in

mind for a = 1 is widespread at the top of the distribution. Assumption 1 thus allows us to construct a

theoretical argument that mirrors our intuition and empirical observation.

Lemma 2. Under Assumption 1, as y becomes arbitrarily large, g1 (y , p1 ) - g0 (y , p1 ) converges to zero.

   The proof of Lemma 2 and all subsequent results are in Appendix B. We solve the optimization prob-

lem (1) by first determining the optimal level of evasion under a = 0 and a = 1, and then comparing welfare

under the two of them to decide whether to adopt. Lemma 2 shows that holding the probability of detection

fixed at p1 , the fixed cost becomes irrelevant for behavior as y becomes large. This result helps us compare

a = 1 and a = 0 for large y to determine which action the individual chooses. This comparison leads to our

first main result.

Proposition 1. High-Income Concealment. Under Assumption 1, there is a cutoff in the model y
                                                                                           ^ such that holding

                    ^ = a = 1 is optimal.
all else fixed, y > y

   The full proof of Proposition 1 is involved, so we sketch the intuition here. Adoption involves a trade-

off between a lower probability of detection and the fixed cost. The fixed cost becomes trivial as a share

of income y at large incomes. Lemma 2 states that because of this, behavior if the individual adopts the

concealment technology is essentially unaffected by the fixed cost. At large incomes therefore, adoption

incurs a trivial cost, but, by Assumption 1, the benefits of a lower probability of detection are non-trivial.

The individual therefore adopts at sufficiently high income. Moreover, this logic applies even in the case

where marginal utility u becomes trivial for large y ; covering this case is the main reason the proof is more

involved than one might naively expect.

   We note that Proposition 1 is not a unique cutoff rule, wherein individuals adopt if and only if true income

exceeds some threshold. A wide parameter search of simulations of the model suggest that under constant

relative risk aversion, optimal concealment does in fact follow a unique cutoff rule over y . However, we

have not explicitly characterized the conditions under which such a single cutoff rule result obtains. In any

case, it may be unrealistic to expect that concealment actions are always exclusively concentrated at the

very top of the income distribution. For example, the use of cash to conceal transactions, potentially even

from auditors, is generally believed to be widespread for self-employment income throughout the income

distribution - see e.g. Slemrod et al. (2017). The result in Proposition 1 does however provide an explanation



                                                          44
why in many cases, the adoption of complex and dubious sheltering strategies is concentrated at the very

top.


Audits and Concealment. We now show that changing audit probabilities can induce the adoption of

concealment. We do not condition this analysis on income for simplicity, but we discuss the results in

relation to large empirical changes in audit probabilities for high-income taxpayers specifically.49

Proposition 2. Incentivizing Concealment. Suppose a policy increases the probability of detection only if a = 0.

This policy will increase concealment.

    Proposition 2 implies that if there is a concealment action that shields evasion against a particular type

of enforcement, increasing that type of enforcement incentivizes adoption of that concealment strategy. Our

results suggest that broad 1040 audits like NRP random audits in the U.S. tax system do not detect a number

of different types of evasion, such as offshore evasion. Increasing conventional audits can therefore incen-

tivize adoption of more sophisticated types of evasion. It also implies that increasing more sophisticated

types of audits will incentivize even more sophisticated types of concealment, if available. Additionally,the

proposition implies that frequent audits can incentivize the adoption of gray-area avoidance strategies that

would require protracted litigation to challenge. Altogether, the fact that audits overall are relatively com-

mon at the top of the income distribution (see Section 2.2) suggests that a variety of more sophisticated

concealment and dubious avoidance activities should be more prevalent at the top, all else equal.


Implications for Tax Gap Estimation So far, we have given two reasons why the adoption of concealment

strategies are especially common at the top of the income distribution. We next formalize the implications

of this possibility for the estimation of the tax gap.

    For simplicity, we assume that income is the only source of heterogeneity in our model; the basic point

we make here does not rest on this assumption. Let pD|a denote the probability that a random audit detects

evasion for a  {0, 1}. Consistent with the model above, we suppose detection is less likely when a = 1:

pD|a=1 < pD|a=0 . If concealment is optimal at income y , so a(y ) = 1, then evasion is detected in a random

audit with probability pD|a=1 , in which case the level of evasion the individual chooses under a = 1 is added

                                                                                ^ (y ) = a(y )pD|a=1 g (p1 , , y ) +
to the tax gap. The estimated tax gap conditional on true income y is therefore g

(1 - a(y ))pD|a=0 g (p0 , 0, y ). Writing true evasion as g = a(y )g (p1 , , y ) + (1 - a(y ))g (p0 , 0, y ), we have that
the bias in the estimated tax gap is



                         ^ (y ) - g (y ) = a(y )(pD1 - 1)g (p1 , , y ) + (1 - a(y ))(pD0 - 1)g (p0 , 0, y ).
                         g                                                                                            (2)
  49 Note   that empirical audit probabilities are based on reported income not true income.


                                                                   45
      The estimated tax gap is underestimated whenever random audits do not detect all evasion. More im-

portantly, because pD1 < pD0 , the bias is larger when a(y ) = 1. As our results above suggest that this is

particularly likely at large values of y , equation (2) suggests that this bias is particularly large at the top of

the distribution. Because g (p1 , , y ) > g (p0 , 0, y ), it is even possible that the measured tax gap is decreasing

in income while the true tax gap is increasing in income.


5.2     Implications for Tax Administration

In this section, we consider the problem of sophisticated tax evasion from the perspective of the tax author-

ity. Our goal is to understand how the tax authority responds to the adoption of concealment strategies by

certain taxpayers, which we model as an increase of the cost of collecting revenue from those taxpayers by

audit. We especially consider how the nature of the tax authorities resource constraints shape the response

to such adoption.


5.2.1    Empirical Motivation

We begin with a simple empirical fact to motivate our simple model. This fact comes from taxpayers' con-

testing auditors' assessments, which we observe in the operational audit data. The tax assessment recom-

mended by an auditor is their professional determination of the tax due given the taxpayers circumstances

and the applicable tax laws, regulations, and revenue procedures. If the audited taxpayer (or their advi-

sor) has a different interpretation of tax law, they can formally contest the assessment.50 If the IRS and the

taxpayer subsequently fail to reach an agreement, the case must be finally resolved in court. In complex cir-

cumstances, the resulting litigation can take several years. Public data on such disagreements can be found

in IRS (2020), Table 18.

      Figure 9 depicts the share of assessed tax with which taxpayers disagree with their initial assessment

(before negotiation), and the share of audited taxpayers who disagreed with their assessments. We observe

that the share of tax dollars assessed that is subject to disagreement hovers around 25% through the bottom

90% of the income distribution, and then increase substantially in the top 10%, up to more than 60% in the

very top bin. Individuals in the bottom bin, which includes those taxpayers with negative income, disagree

at comparable rates to the very top bin, reflecting that audited individuals with negative reported income

are typically high-wealth individuals. The share of taxpayers who disagree follows a similar pattern, but

the overall share is significantly lower. That the dollar share is much larger than the taxpayer share implies

that, perhaps unsurprisingly, the very largest assessments are typically the subject of disagreements.
  50 The same is true of random audits. In both the NRP and our treatment of operational audits above, we use the initial assessment

of the auditor, before any disagreement. The two measures considered in Figure 3 are therefore comparable in this respect.



                                                                46
    We interpret this evidence as jointly informative about 1) the sophistication of avoidance/evasion strate-

gies through the distribution, and 2) the extent to which taxpayers fight their assessments and attempt to

negotiate. Legal experts and practitioners are well aware that audits of sophisticated high-wealth indi-

viduals can become quite complex and contentious. However the economic importance of these types of

frictions for tax compliance and administration is not well-understood.51 The magnitude of the differences

in Figure 9 suggest that this is an important question. Perhaps the most salient implication of this fact for

tax administration is that the high frequency of disputes and litigation makes recovering revenue from the

top of the distribution via audit more costly. In the model below, we consider the implications of this notion

for the allocation of audits through the distribution.

                              F IGURE 9: C ONTESTED AMOUNTS FOR OPERATIONAL AUDITS




Note: The top series of this figure plots the share of the total initial audit tax assessment that is contested by the taxpayer,
across the income distribution. We rank taxpayers according to reported income in the tax year for which the taxpayer is
under audit. The bottom series plots the share of audited taxpayers that contest their assessment amount. The data are
pooled for fiscal years 2007-2018. The contested rate is very stable until the 90th percentile where it begins to increase
and then rises sharply within the top 0.01% (up to 60%). The assessment share is significantly larger than the share of
contesting taxpayers signifying that those with higher assessed values are more likely to contest. The large contested
shares in the bottom of the distribution are mostly from taxpayers claiming large losses that are disallowed upon audit.


  51 See   Blumenthal et al. (1998) for a model of audits as negotiations that may be relevant here.




                                                                     47
5.2.2   Model

   Setup. There are two types of taxpayers, denoted by   {h, l}, which we basically think of as high-

and low-income taxpayers. We first consider a revenue maximization problem with an exogenous resource

constraint B . The tax authority decides how many of each type to audit which we denote by N . Expected

revenue raised by each type as a function of the number audited is R (N ). There is a constant marginal

cost of auditing each type, c . The objective is to maximize expected revenue net of costs.

   The key difference between this model and the one we contrast it to later on is that we assume the total

cost of audits cannot exceed some exogenous resource constraint B .




                                   max     Rh (Nh ) + Rl (Nl ) - ch Nh - cl Nl ,                           (3)
                                  Nh ,Nl
                                              subject to ch Nh + cl Nl  B                                  (4)


   Note that because of the presence of the resource constraint, this model is isomorphic to one in which the

tax authority maximizes gross recovered revenue Rh (Nh ) + Rl (Nl ) subject to the same resource constraint.

The resource constraint requires that the last two terms in the objective function in equation (3) add up to a

constant, so these terms become irrelevant for optimization.

   This problem differs from an "optimal tax systems" approach to this question (Slemrod and Yitzhaki,

2002; Keen and Slemrod, 2017), in two important ways. Most importantly, the tax authority is given an

exogenous resource constraint rather than simply maximizing net revenue, which we relax later. Addition-

ally, for simplicity, we do not account for distortions induced by changes in audit policy that can cause

the optimal policy to deviate from revenue maximization, such as compliance costs. Accounting for such

distortions would not change the main result of interest here.

   The first-order condition for an interior optimum of this problem is

                                               Rh (Nh )  R (Nl )
                                                        = l      .                                         (5)
                                                 ch         cl

Proposition 3. Comparative Statics of the Resource-Constrained Model. In the optimization problem described

by equation (3),

        Nh
   ·    ch   <0

        Nl
   ·    ch   > 0 if and only if -Nh Rh /Rh > 1.

   That increasing ch decreases Nh is unsurprising. More interesting is that in this model, the change in ch

                                                         48
has an effect on audits of low-income individuals. Because the tax authority is allocating finite resources

to these two types of audits, the change in ch has two effects on Nl , which are exactly analogous to an

income and substitution effect in consumer choice theory. First, holding Nh fixed, increasing ch leaves fewer

resources available for audits of type l, which tends to decrease Nl : the income effect. Second, increasing ch

induces the tax authority to substitute toward auditing more type l taxpayers.

    Which one of these effects dominates depends on the curvature of the revenue function for type h,

-Nh Rh /Rh , which determines whether total expenditure on h type audits goes up or down.

    We next show that if we relax the exogeneity of the resource constraint, the spillover effect of an increase

in ch on audits of type l taxpayers disappears. Ignoring the resource constraints, the objective in (3) has

simple first-order conditions that equate marginal revenue and marginal cost:


                                                            Rl = cl

                                                          Rh = ch .                                                              (6)


Proposition 4. Comparative Statics Without the Resource Constraint. Consider the optimization problem

described by equation (3) but ignore the resource constraint. In this model

        Nh
    ·   ch   <0

        Nl
    ·   ch   = 0.

    Proposition 4 states that without an exogenous resource constraint, the spillover effects from an increase

in ch onto low-income types no longer occurs in this model.52

    Contrasting Proposition 3 and 4 helps us understand how increased concealment effort by high-income

taxpayers might affect low-income taxpayers, which we view as interesting given recent debates about the

allocation of resources to various types of audits. The resource-constrained version of the model is closer to

how tax administration works in the real world, where the IRS is given a budget by Congress and allocates

these resources toward various types of enforcement. In this model, because the tax authority is devoting

limited resources to all types of audits, increased concealment effort by high-income taxpayers can actually

cause the tax authority to substitute toward auditing more low-income taxpayers, or it can deplete resources

and cause fewer audits of low-income taxpayers. The unconstrained version of the model is closer in spirit

to a model of optimal policy--subject to the caveats described e.g. by Slemrod and Yitzhaki (2002). The

results for this version of the model model imply that increased concealment has no impact on socially

optimal audit policy toward low-income individuals.
  52 Key for this result to obtain is that R does not depend on N and vice versa. This seems realistic, but it could be violated, for
                                            h                      l
example, if auditing one type could lead to the discovery of information that is useful for auditing the other type.


                                                                 49
6    Conclusion

We find that substantial evasion at the top of the income distribution goes undetected in random audits.

Investigating taxpayers who voluntarily declared hidden wealth or started reporting foreign bank accounts

in 2009­2012 and who had been randomly audited just before, we find that in the vast majority of cases, the

audits had failed to uncover offshore tax evasion. Focusing on taxpayers who earn business income through

partnerships and S-corporations, we find that due to the resource constraints inherent to the conduct of

random audits, a large fraction of this business income is not examined in the context of these audits, biasing

detected evasion downward at the top.

    Theoretically, we show that modelling the choice to conceal tax evasion from auditors can explain why

random audits do not detect all evasion especially at the top. Empirically, we provide corrected estimates

of the size and distribution of tax evasion in the United States. In our benchmark scenario, we find that

under-reported income rises from about 7% of true income in the bottom 50% of the income distribution

to 21% in the top 1%. Out of this 21%, about 6 percentage points correspond to sophisticated evasion that

is seldom detected in random audits. Accounting for tax evasion increases the top 1% income share in the

United States.

    It is important to note that random audit programs were not designed to estimate the tax gap for very

high-income, high-wealth individuals. To experts who are familiar with these audits, our results may be

unsurprising. However, we nevertheless view these results as important in light of an increased academic

and policy interest in top income shares and tax evasion at the top. Countries around the world use random

audits to estimate the tax gap (see, e.g., OECD, 2017, chapter 14). Our findings suggest that due to the

limitations of random audits, more work is needed to estimate the extent of tax evasion at the top of the

income distribution globally.

    We stress that our estimates are likely to be conservative with regard to the overall amount of evasion at

the top. From public reporting and anecdotal evidence, it seems likely that there are other specific forms of

tax evasion that have the same properties as those we examine in this paper--sophistication and concentra-

tion among high income/wealth individuals. Such forms of evasion could include the abuse of syndicated

conservation easements, micro-captive insurance schemes, private inurement in tax-exempt organizations,

and the use of offshore trusts to evade tax. Many of these strategies involve pass-through businesses or

other entities controlled by the taxpayer. The potential existence of many more such schemes underscores

the main point of our theoretical results, that we should expect sophisticated evasion to be concentrated at

the top of the income and wealth distribution. More research is needed to improve estimates of noncompli-

ance at the very top in the United States.



                                                      50
   We identify several other potentially fruitful avenues for future work. First, it would be valuable to

consider the importance of sophisticated evasion and gray area avoidance strategies for optimal tax admin-

istration policies involving high-income, high-wealth taxpayers. Second, more research is needed to fully

understand the gray area between avoidance and evasion, a line which can be blurry at the top of the in-

come distribution and for large corporations. Future work could consider the implications of this notion

for taxpayer behavior. Third, future research could consider strategic interaction between the tax authority

and high-income individuals. We stopped short of such strategic, game-theoretic questions in our analy-

sis, focusing separately on decisions by the individual taxpayer and by the tax authority. However, such

strategic interactions may be empirically relevant and merit exploration in the future. Finally, future work

could consider the implications of the theoretical ideas pursued here for white collar, financial crime more

broadly, beyond sophisticated tax evasion.




                                                    51
References

Allingham, M. G. and Sandmo, A. (1972). Income tax evasion: A theoretical analysis. Journal of public

  economics, 1(3-4):323­338.

Alstadaeter, A., Johannesen, N., and Zucman, G. (2018). Who owns the wealth in tax havens? Macro

  evidence and implications for global inequality. Journal of Public Economics, 162:89 ­ 100.

Alstadsaeter, A., Johannesen, N., and Zucman, G. (2019). Tax Evasion and Inequality. American Economic

  Review, 109(6):2073­2103.

Andreoni, J., Erard, B., and Feinstein, J. (1998). Tax Compliance. Journal of Economic Literature, 36(2):818­860.

Auten, G. and Langetieg, P. (2020). The distribution of underreported income: What we can learn from the

  NRP? Presentation at the national tax association spring symposium on 14 may 2020.

Auten, G. and Splinter, D. (2019). Income inequality in the united states: Using tax data to measure long-

  term trends. Working paper.

Blumenthal, M., Christian, C., and Slemrod, J. (1998). The determinants of income tax compliance: Evidence

  from a controlled experiment in minnesota. NBER working paper no. 6575.

Brown, R. E. and Mazur, M. J. (2003). Irsâs comprehensive approach to compliance measurement. National

  Tax Journal, 56(3).

Carrillo, P., Pomeranz, D., and Singhal, M. (2017). Dodging the taxman: Firm misreporting and limits to tax

  enforcement. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 9(2):144­64.

Cooper, M., McClelland, J., Pearce, J., Prisinzano, R., Sullivan, J., Yagan, D., Zidar, O., and Zwick, E. (2016).

  Business in the United States: Who Owns it, and How Much Tax Do They Pay? Tax Policy and the Economy,

  30(1):91­128.

Customs, H. R. . (2020). Measuring tax gaps 2020 edition: Tax gap estimates for 2018 to 2019. Hrmc offficial

  statistics release, 9 july 2020.

De Simone, L., Lester, R., and Markle, K. (2020). Transparency and tax evasion: Evidence from the foreign

  account tax compliance act (fatca). Journal of Accounting Research, 58(1):105­153.

DeBacker, J., Heim, B., Tran, A., and Yuskavage, A. (2020). Tax noncompliance and measures of income

  inequality. Tax Notes, February 17, 2020.



                                                       52
Feinstein, J. S. (1991). An Econometric Analysis of Income Tax Evasion and Its Detection. The RAND Journal

  of Economics, 22(1):14­35.

GAO (1995). Tax administration: Irs' partnership compliance activities could be improved. Letter report,

  06/16/95, gao/ggd-95-151.

Guttentag, J. and Avi-Yonah, R. S. (2005). Closing the international tax gap.

IRS (2016). Federal Tax Compliance Research: Tax Gap Estimates for Tax Years 2008-2010. Publication 1415

  (rev. 5-2016), Washington, DC.

IRS (2019). Federal Tax Compliance Research: Tax Gap Estimates for Tax Years 2011-2013. Publication 1415

  (rev. 9-2019), Washington, DC.

IRS (2020). Internal revenue service data book 2019. Publication 55-b (rev. 06-2020), Washington, DC.

Johannesen, N., Langetieg, P., Reck, D., Risch, M., and Slemrod, J. (2020). Taxing hidden wealth: The con-

  sequences of us enforcement initiatives on evasive foreign accounts. American Economic Journal: Economic

  Policy, 12(3):312­46.

Johns, A. and Slemrod, J. (2010). The Distribution of Income Tax Noncompliance. National Tax Journal,

  63(3):397­418.

Kambas, W. J., Farkas-DiNardo, E., and Gershel, D. H. (2021). The focus of the IRS global high-wealth group.

  Tax Notes Federal, 170:1397­1410.

Keen, M. and Slemrod, J. (2017). Optimal tax administration. Journal of Public Economics, 152:133­142.

Kleven, H. J., Knudsen, M. B., Kreiner, C. T., Pedersen, S., and Saez, E. (2011). Unwilling or Unable to Cheat?

  Evidence From a Tax Audit Experiment in Denmark. Econometrica, 79(3):pp. 651­692.

Kleven, H. J., Kreiner, C. T., and Saez, E. (2016). Why can modern governments tax so much? an agency

  model of firms as fiscal intermediaries. Economica, 83(330):219­246.

Luttmer, E. F. and Singhal, M. (2014). Tax morale. Journal of economic perspectives, 28(4):149­68.

OECD (2017). Tax Administration 2017.

Piketty, T. and Saez, E. (2003). Income inequality in the united states, 1913­1998. The Quarterly journal of

  economics, 118(1):1­41.




                                                      53
Piketty, T., Saez, E., and Zucman, G. (2018). Distributional national accounts: methods and estimates for the

  united states. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133(2):553­609.

Saez, E. and Zucman, G. (2016). Wealth Inequality in the United States since 1913: Evidence from Capitalized

  Income Tax Data. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131(2):519­578.

Saez, E. and Zucman, G. (2020). Trends in US Income and Wealth Inequality: Revising after the Revisionists.

  NBER working paper no. 27921.

Sarin, N. and Summers, L. H. (2020). Understanding the revenue potential of tax compliance investment.

  NBER working paper no. 27571.

Slemrod, J., Collins, B., Hoopes, J. L., Reck, D., and Sebastiani, M. (2017). Does credit-card information

  reporting improve small-business tax compliance? Journal of Public Economics, 149:1­19.

Slemrod, J. and Yitzhaki, S. (2002). Tax avoidance, evasion, and administration. In Handbook of public eco-

  nomics, volume 3, pages 1423­1470. Elsevier.

Smith, M., Zidar, O., and Zwick, E. (2019). Top wealth in the united states: New estimates and implications

  for taxing the rich. Unpublished.

TIGTA (2015). Improvements are needed in resource allocation and management controls for audits of

  high-income taxpayers. Treasury inspector general for tax administration publication 2015-30-078.

TIGTA (2020). High-income nonfilers owing billions of dollars are not being worked by the internal revenue

  service. Treasury inspector general for tax administration publication 2020-30-015.

United States Senate (2008). Tax Haven Banks and U.S. Tax compliance. Staff report of the permanent

  subcommittee on investigations, Washington, DC.

United States Senate (2014). Offshore Tax Evasion: The Effort to Collect Unpaid Taxes on Billions in Hidden

  Offshore Accounts. Technical report, Washington, DC.

Yitzhaki, S. (1974). A note on `income tax evasion: A theoretical analysis'. Journal of Public Economics,

  3(2):201­202.

Zucman, G. (2013). The Missing Wealth of Nations: Are Europe and the U.S. net Debtors or net Creditors?

  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(3):1321­1364.

Zucman, G. (2014). Taxing Across Borders: Tracking Personal Wealth and Corporate Profits. Journal of

  Economic Perspectives, 28(4):121­148.

                                                      54
A   Additional Results




                         55
           TABLE A1: TAX E VASION D ETECTED IN NRP R ANDOM A UDITS W ITHOUT DCE C ORRECTION : D ECOMPOSITION BY I NCOME T YPE

                                                             Full Population                                                              Top 1%
                                        Total        Total under-       Total under-    Total under-             Total       Total under-       Total under-     Total under-
                                     income of          reported          reported         reported           income of         reported          reported          reported
                                     this type/        income of         income of        income of           this type/       income of         income of         income of
                                        Total          this type/        this type/      this type/              Total         this type/        this type/       this type/
                                    income (%)            Total             Total            Total           income (%)           Total             Total             Total
                                                    under-reported      income (%)        income of                         under-reported      income (%)         income of
                                                      income (%)                        this type (%)                         income (%)                         this type (%)

      Capital Gains                      5.8              7.1               0.28              4.8               21.3              18.8               0.43             2.0
      Dividends                          3.9              2.8               0.11              2.9                8.6               3.9               0.09             1.0
      Interest                           1.9              0.7               0.03              1.5                 3.0              2.0               0.05             1.6
56




      Line 21 Other Income                0.2            11.9               0.47             253.6                2.6              8.5               0.19             7.5
      Partnerships and S Corp             5.6             6.5               0.26              4.6                21.7             18.9               0.43             2.0
      Rental                              0.7             8.9               0.35              48.3                1.6              5.4               0.12             7.9
      Schedule C                          5.3            49.3               1.95              36.8                4.2             35.0               0.79             18.7
      Wages                              72.4             3.5               0.14              0.2                38.2              2.9               0.07             0.2
      Other                              4.1              9.3               0.37              0.1                -1.1              4.6               0.10             -0.1
      Total                             100.0            100.0              3.96                                100.0             100.0              2.27

     Note: This table describes the composition of detected under-reported income in the 2006­2013 NRP data, before any correction for undetected noncompliance (in
     particular before any DCE correction). The NRP shares of each type of income in total income are similar to income shares we observe in SOI data, but the NRP
     shares are built using corrected income here. Consequently the largest differences with SOI income shares are observed for types of income with significant detected
     evasion. Note that "Form 1040 Other Income" in Figure 1 is referred to as "Line 21 Other Income" here, as this item appears on Line 21 of the Form 1040, while the
     residual "Other" category in the penultimate row refers to all other components of income. We note that the estimated rates of under-reporting by type of income in
     the fourth column are well in excess of 100% for Line 21 income. This can occur because Line 21 income can be negative; large negative values are common at the
     bottom of the income distribution because of net operating loss carryforwards or carrybacks from pass-through businesses. Large corrections to line 21 are typically
     disallowed loss carryforwards or carrybacks.
             TABLE A2: TAX E VASION D ETECTED IN NRP R ANDOM A UDITS W ITH DCE C ORRECTIONS : D ECOMPOSITION BY I NCOME T YPE

                                                             Full Population                                                               Top 1%
                                        Total        Total under-       Total under-     Total under-            Total        Total under-       Total under-     Total under-
                                     income of          reported          reported          reported          income of          reported          reported          reported
                                     this type/        income of         income of         income of          this type/        income of         income of         income of
                                        Total          this type/        this type/       this type/             Total          this type/        this type/       this type/
                                    income (%)            Total             Total             Total          income (%)            Total             Total             Total
                                                    under-reported      income (%)         income of                         under-reported      income (%)         income of
                                                      income (%)                         this type (%)                         income (%)                         this type (%)

      Capital Gains                      5.7               5.3              0.75             13.0                20.0               8.4              1.47              7.3
      Dividends                          3.7               1.8              0.25              6.9                 7.6               1.5               0.27             3.5
      Interest                           1.8               0.7               0.10             5.3                  2.7              0.7               0.12             4.5
57




      Line 21 Other Income                1.7             13.8               1.93            115.2                 5.3             22.3               3.91             74.2
      Partnerships and S Corp             6.0              9.3               1.30            21.5                 21.4             17.5               3.07             14.3
      Rental                              1.7             10.0               1.40             80.5                 2.2              5.7               0.99             45.3
      Schedule C                          9.4             45.4               6.37             67.9                 8.8             33.5               5.87             66.8
      Wages                              65.2              4.1               0.58             0.9                 31.8              2.4               0.43             1.3
      Other                              4.7               9.6               1.35             0.3                  0.1              8.0               1.40             11.9
      Total                             100.0             100.0             14.02                                100.0             100.0             17.53

     Note: This table describes the composition of detected under-reported income in the 2006­2013 NRP data, before any correction for undetected noncompliance (in
     particular before any DCE correction). The NRP shares of each type of income in total income are similar to income shares we observe in SOI data, but the NRP shares
     are built using DCE-adjusted income here. Consequently the largest differences with SOI income shares are observed for types of income with significant detected
     evasion. Note that "Form 1040 Other Income" in Figure 1 is referred to as "Line 21 Other Income" here, as this item appears on Line 21 of the Form 1040, while the
     residual "Other" category in the penultimate row refers to all other components of income. We note that the estimated rates of under-reporting by type of income
     in the fourth column exceeds 100% for Line 21 income. This can occur because Line 21 income can be negative; large negative values are common at the bottom of
     the income distribution because of net operating loss carryforwards or carrybacks from pass-through businesses. Large corrections to line 21 are typically disallowed
     loss carryforwards or carrybacks.
 TABLE A3: E STIMATED TAX DUE AND INCOME EVADED , IN BILLION DOLLARS , NRP AND O FFSHORE

                                     NRP income           NRP tax       Offshore income         Offshore tax
                                    under-reported        evaded            evaded                  due
            Bottom 99%                  977.9              82.9                6.6                   1.0
         Top 1% (inclusive)             144.0              14.3               53.7                  11.6
        Top 0.1% (inclusive)             42.1               4.0               39.9                  8.7
             Top 0.01%                   7.7                0.3               22.5                  5.3
                All                    1,121.9             97.2               60.3                  12.6

Note: This table reports estimates of the total income under-reported and taxes evaded, for NRP results with no DCE
correction and for offshore estimates. All the figures are presented in billion dollars.




             TABLE A4: I NCOME SHARES IN 2006-2013 NRP D ATA AND IN 2001 NRP DATA

                   2006­2013 2006­2013 2006­2013      2006­2013       2001       2001
                  Before exam After exam After exam Our benchmark Before exam After exam
                               No DCE With DCE                                With DCE
         P0-10        -2.6        -2.1       -2.1        -2.1          0.1        0.3
         P10-20        1.0        1.0        0.9          0.9          1.6        1.6
         P20-30        2.1        2.1        1.9          1.9          2.7        2.7
         P30-40        3.2        3.4        3.0          3.0          3.9        3.9
         P40-50        4.7        4.8        4.4          4.3          5.2        5.2
         P50-60        6.4        6.5        6.0          6.0          6.8        6.7
         P60-70        8.6        8.7        8.2          8.1          8.9        8.8
         P70-80       11.7       11.6       11.2         11.1         11.7       11.5
         P80-90       16.6       16.4       16.1         15.9         16.0       15.6
         P90-95       12.0       11.8       12.0         11.9         11.0       10.9
         P95-99       16.1       16.0       17.5         17.3         14.4       14.9
         P99-99.5      4.3        4.2        4.7          4.7          3.7        3.8
         Top 0.5%     16.0       15.6       16.2         17.1         14.1       14.0

Note: This table reports the distribution of income in the 2006­2013 NRP data studied in this paper and in the 2001 NRP
data as reported in Johns and Slemrod (2010, Table 5). Tax units are ranked by their estimated true income (equal to
reported income plus estimated under-reported income). Income is Adjusted Gross Income (AGI) in Johns and Slemrod
(2010) and market income in our series (defined as total income reported on form 1040 minus Social Security benefits,
unemployment insurance benefits, alimony, and state refunds). Series in columns 3, 4, and 6 all use the same DCE
methodology.




                                                          58
                     TABLE A5: I NCOME AND TAXES O WED : B EFORE VS . A FTER A CCOUNTING FOR TAX E VASION (B ILLIONS OF $2012)

                                                        Income                                                                     Tax
                            Reported     Corrected      DCE-corrected      Our benchmark            Reported     Corrected      DCE-corrected       Our benchmark

           P0-P90             4,131         4,370            4,610                4,611                366           424              481                  480
           P90-P95             956           984             1,119                1,120                128           140              164                  165
           P95-P99            1,285         1,328            1,627                1632                 233           249              305                  308
           P99-P99.5           340           350              436                  442                  81            85               99                  101
59




           P99.5-P99.9         535           545              670                  697                 135           139              167                  177
           P99.9-P100          749           750              838                  908                 184           185              194                  211
           Total              7,997         8,327            9,300                9,411               1,127         1,222            1,409                1,442

     Note: This table reports aggregate income and taxes by income group before vs. after correction for tax evasion, as estimated in the NRP (cols. 1­3 and 5­7) and in our
     benchmark that factors in sophisticated evasion (cols. 4 and 8). Numbers are in billions of 2012 dollars and correspond to annual averages over the period 2006-2013.
     The table shows that the standard federal income tax gap (i.e., DCE-corrected taxes owed minus taxes paid) is $1,409 - $1,127 = $282 billion per year over 2006-2013.
     In our benchmark estimates, the tax gap is $1,442 - $1,127 = $315 billion per year over that period, with virtually all the difference with the standard estimate coming
     from the top 0.5%. Our correction for sophisticated evasion increases the aggregate tax gap by a factor of 1.1 on aggregate, but by a factor of more than 2 for the top
     0.1%. This correction should be seen as conservative, given that it only factors in two forms of sophisticated evasion (offshore and pass-through businesses).
             TABLE A6: C HANGE IN I NCOME AND TAXES O WED : B EFORE VS . A FTER A CCOUNTING FOR TAX E VASION (B ILLIONS OF $2012)

                                                     Income                                                                         Tax
                     After exam      DCE-corrected      Sophisticated     Our benchmark           After exam      DCE-corrected      Sophisticated     Our benchmark
                     - reported       - after exam      - after exam      - DCE-corrected         - reported       - after exam      - after exam      - DCE-corrected

      P0-P90              238              241                 8                  1                    58               56                 0                   0
      P90-P95              28              135                 6                  1                    12                24                 2                   1
      P95-P99              43              299                 25                 5                    16                55                10                   4
60




      P99-P99.5            10               86                 16                 6                     4                14                 6                   3
      P99.5-P99.9          10              125                 40                 27                    4                29                16                   9
      P99.9-P100            2               87                 84                 70                    0                 9                23                  17
      Total               330              974                180                110                   94               188                57                  33

     Note: This table reports the change in aggregate income and taxes by income group (i) when correcting reported incomes and taxes in the NRP without DCE
     adjustment (cols. 1 and 5), (ii) when adding the DCE adjustment to exam-corrected NRP data (cols. 2 an 6) (ii) when adding sophisticated evasion to exam-corrected
     NRP data before DCE adjustment (cols. 3 and 7), and (iii) in our benchmark scenario that adds sophisticated evasion to the DCE-adjusted NRP after having removed
     57% of DCE-adjusted pass-through business income evasion (cols. 4 and 8). Numbers are in billions of 2012 dollars and correspond to annual averages over the
     period 2006-2013. See also notes to Table A5.
TABLE A7: S HARES OF TAXES PAID AND U NPAID , 2006-2013, IN % OF T OTAL TAXES PAID OR U NPAID

                                          Taxes paid        Taxes unpaid           Taxes unpaid
                                                           NRP with DCE           Our benchmark

                     P0-10                     0.2                 0.4                    0.4
                     P10-20                    0.3                 0.3                    0.2
                     P20-30                    0.6                 0.7                    0.6
                     P30-40                    1.0                 1.3                    1.2
                     P40-50                    1.8                 2.0                    1.8
                     P50-60                    3.1                 3.1                    2.7
                     P60-70                    5.0                 4.5                    4.0
                     P70-80                    7.8                 7.1                    6.3
                     P80-90                   12.5                11.3                   10.2
                     P90-95                   11.4                11.7                   10.6
                     P95-99                   20.7                27.5                   25.8
                     P99-99.5                  7.2                 8.7                    8.7
                     P99.5-99.9               12.0                13.6                   15.1
                     P99.9-P99.95              3.7                3.1                    3.8
                     P99.95-P99.99             5.7                3.2                    4.6
                     P99.99-100               7.0                 1.6                    4.0
                     Top 1%                   35.5                30.2                   36.2

Note: This table reports the distribution of federal individual income taxes paid and unpaid taxes (for different measures
of unpaid taxes) on average over 2006­2013. Tax units are ranked by their reported income in the first column and their
estimated true income in the second and third column. The first column shows the distribution of paid taxes. The
second column shows the distribution of unpaid taxes using the DCE-adjusted NRP random audits. The last column
shows the distribution of unpaid taxes in our benchmark scenario (described in Section 4.1).




                                                           61
  F IGURE A1: TAX E VADED (% OF TAX O WED ) IN R ANDOM A UDITS W ITHOUT DCE C ORRECTION




F IGURE A2: TAX E VADED (%   OF   TAX O WED )   IN   R ANDOM A UDITS W ITHOUT DCE C ORRECTION , E X -
CLUDING TAX C REDITS




                                                      62
     F IGURE A3: T HE I NFLUENCE OF R E -R ANKING AND DCE ON E STIMATED R ATES OF E VASION

                                        (a) Income Under-Reporting




                                                 (b) Tax Evaded




Note: This figure illustrates the impact of reranking and DCE adjustment on the profile of income under-reporting
and the tax gap through the income distribution. We begin with "Exam corrections by reported income," which ranks
taxpayers by originally reported income and calculates income and under-reporting gaps using exam corrections only
(i.e. no DCE). We then continue to use exam corrections only but re-rank individuals by exam-corrected income in
"exam corrections by exam-corrected income," which matches Figure 1. We find that this re-ranking substantially
decreases estimated rates of evasion in the bottom 50% of the distribution. Third we implement DCE corrections to
estimate rates of evasion, but for illustrative purposes we continue to rank individuals by their exam-corrected income,
in "DCE corrections by exam-corrected income." Finally, we re-rank by DCE corrected income in "DCE corrections by
DCE-corrected income." From comparing the third to fourth step we find that re-ranking substantially increases the
rate of evasion in the top 5% of the distribution, and this re-ranking drives the increasing profile of evasion from DCE
corrections in Figure 2.
                                                          63
F IGURE A4: TAX E VADED (% OF TAX O WED ) IN R ANDOM A UDITS W ITH VS . W ITHOUT DCE C ORREC -
TION




                                                      F IGURE A5

                                 Probability of filing an FBAR for the first time in 2009-11
             6%                            (Haven accounts only, U.S. filers only)

                                                                          Ranked by capital income
             5%


             4%                                                  Ranked by positive income


             3%


             2%


             1%                                                                        Ranked by AGI


             0%
                     P0-50     P50-90      P90-95     P95-99     P99-99.5 P99.5-99.9    P99.9-    Top 0.01%
                                                                                        P99.99
                                             Position in the income distribution

Note: This figure plots the fraction of the population within each part of the income distribution that are present in the
 first-time FBAR filer sample. We observe that the probability of being in the sample is much higher at the very top of
the income distribution, with a nearly trivial fraction of the bottom 99 percent of the income distribution disclosing an
offshore account. We observe that the overall profile is very similar for the three different income concepts, though it is
                                steepest for capital income, followed by positive income.



                                                            64
              F IGURE A6: D ECOMPOSING S ENSITIVITY A NALYSIS FOR O FFSHORE W EALTH

                                               (a) Upper Bound




                                               (b) Lower Bound




Note: This figure plots taxes evaded over taxes due by rank in the income distribution with and without accounting
for offshore wealth. Taxpayers are ranked by their estimated true AGI. In either figure, we begin with our preferred
scenario for offshore wealth and then progressively add assumptions for the alternative scenarios described in Table 1.
                                                          65
                         F IGURE A7: F RACTION OF INDIVIDUALS AUDITED BY YEAR




Note: This figure plots audit rates over time in the three income groups. We observe that audit rates are highest at the
very top, and they increase and then decline through the period of observation period.

     F IGURE A8: T OTAL ASSESSED TAXES : O PERATIONAL AUDITS VERSUS NRP RANDOM AUDITS




                                                          66
                                     F IGURE A9




F IGURE A10: TAX G AP : T HE E FFECT OF A CCOUNTING FOR U NREPORTED O FFSHORE I NCOME




                                         67
F IGURE A11: TAX G AP : T HE E FFECT   OF   A CCOUNTING   FOR   U NREPORTED O FFSHORE I NCOME (S ENSI -
TIVITY A NALYSIS )




F IGURE A12:   U NDER -R EPORTED I NCOME : T HE E FFECT    OF   A CCOUNTING   FOR   PASS -T HROUGH B USI -
NESS L OSSES




                                                   68
F IGURE A13: U NDER -R EPORTED I NCOME : T HE E FFECT   OF   A CCOUNTING   FOR    C IRCULAR PARTNER -
SHIPS




F IGURE A14: U NDER -R EPORTED I NCOME : T HE E FFECT   OF   A CCOUNTING   FOR   PASS -T HROUGH B USI -
NESS I NCOME ,S ENSITIVITY A NALYSIS




                                               69
F IGURE A15: U NDER -R EPORTED I NCOME : T HE E FFECT OF A CCOUNTING FOR PASS -T HROUGH I NVEST-
MENT I NCOME , S ENSITIVITY A NALYSIS




            F IGURE A16: U NPAID TAXES (% OF TAXES O WED ): B ENCHMARK E STIMATES




                                              70
           F IGURE A17: U NREPORTED I NCOME (% OF T RUE I NCOME ): S ENSITIVITY A NALYSIS




Note: This figure plots the results of the different scenarios described in Section 4.1.




                                                             71
B     Proofs

Lemma 2. Under Assumption 1, as y becomes arbitrarily large, g1 (y , p1 ) - g0 (y , p1 ) converges to zero.

Proof. We can re-express the optimization problem with (g , a) as the choice variables rather than (e, a). We

denote the fixed cost  as a share of income by ~ = k /y . We can then express consumption in the detected

and undetected state by cD = (1 -  -  g - a
                                          ~ )y , and cN = (1 -  +  g - a
                                                                       ~ )y . respectively. The first

order condition with respect to g of the optimization problem in equation 1 is

                                                   u (cD )   1-p
                                                           =     .                                                     (7)
                                                   u (cN )    p

We wish to compare g1 (y , p1 ) and g0 (y , p1 ) at large y . As both of these are evaluated at p = p1 , the right-

hand side of (7) is constant for this comparison. Comparing the first order conditions under a = 1 and

a = 0, we have:
                          u ((1 -  -  g1 (y , p1 ) -  ~ )y )   u ((1 -  -  g0 (y , p1 ))y )
                                                             =                              .                          (8)
                          u ((1 -  +  g1 (y , p1 ) - ~ )y )    u ((1 -  +  g0 (y , p1 ))y )

As y becomes large, ~ = /y becomes arbitrarily small. As u                   < 0, the LHS and RHS of equation (8)

are invertible in e. Finally, by Assumption 1, for arbitrarily large y , g0 (y , p1 ) on the RHS converges to a

strictly positive constant. Altogether, it follows that for sufficiently large y , the ~ term on the LHS can be

made arbitrarily small. The LHS can thus be made arbitrarily close to the RHS, so that g1 (y , p1 ) becomes

arbitrarily close to g0 (y , p1 ). Equation 8 gives strong intuition about the validity of the lemma. We provide

below a formalized proof of the convergence in the - sense.

We change the arguments of g from how they are defined above, as p1 = p is constant across g1 and g0 and

the only element that makes the two different is the presence of ~ . We define the forms that we use here as

follows (note that g (y , ~ (y )) = g1 (y , p1 ) and g (y , 0) = g0 (y , p1 ) in comparison with the MRS equation).


               g (y , ~ (y )) = argmaxg[0,1] (1 - p)u((1 -  +  g - ~ )y ) + pu((1 -  -  g - ~ )y )                     (9)


                     g (y , 0) = argmaxg[0,1] (1 - p)u((1 -  +  g )y ) + pu((1 -  -  g )y )                           (10)


As  is a constant, we know that : limy-> ~ (y ) = 0.

Then, by the definition of limits, we know that for any  > 0, there exists a c  R such that :


                                             y>c           |~ (y ) - 0| <                                             (11)




                                                          72
Set > 0, by continuity of g on real positive numbers, there exists some c  R,


                            y>c            |~ (y ) - 0| <           |g (y , ~ (y )) - g (y , 0)| <               (12)


Then, g (y , ~ ) converges to g (y , 0) as y becomes arbitrarily large. Assumption 1 ensures that, as y becomes

arbitrarily large, g (y , 0) will be arbitrarily close to its non-zero limit.




    Proposition 1. High-Income Concealment. Under Assumption 1, there is a cutoff in the model y
                                                                                               ^ such that

                            ^ = a = 1 is optimal.
holding all else fixed, y > y

Proof. We want to show that for a sufficiently large y , the difference in expected utility between a = 1 and

a = 0 given optimal g1 and g0 must be positive. We express expected utility as a function of a and ga as


              U (p, , y ) = (1 - p)u((1 -  +  g (p, , y ) - ~ )y ) + pu((1 -  -  g (p, y , ) - ~ )y ),           (13)


where g (p, , y ) denotes the optimal level of evasion as a fraction of income, e/y , given the primitives. The

difference between utility under adoption and non-adoption, given optimal evasion, is simply


                                           a U = U (p1 , , y ) - U (p0 , 0, y ).                                 (14)


The key to making use of Lemma 2 is to benchmark these expected utilities to expected utility under  = 0

and p = p1 - in which case behavior is given by g (p1 , y , 0) = g0 (p1 , y ), and expected utility by U (p1 , 0, y ).

Adding and subtracting this from both sides of the above expression, we obtain:


                          a U = [U (p1 , , y ) - U (p1 , 0, y )] + {U (p1 , 0, y ) - U (p0 , 0, y )}             (15)


Equation (15) decomposes a U into the difference due to the incursion of the cost - the first term in square

brackets - and the difference due to the lower probability of detection - the second term, in curly brackets.

The remaining structure of the proof shows that under Assumption 1, the latter dominates the former for

large y .

    Using the second fundamental theorem of calculus, we can rewrite the term in curly brackets above as

                                                                         p0
                                  U (p1 , 0, y ) - U (p0 , 0, y ) = -         Up (p, 0, y )dp,                   (16)
                                                                        p1



                                                             73
where Up (p, 0, y ) is the partial derivative of U with respect to p evaluated at (p, 0, y ). Using the envelope

theorem to characterize Up (p, 0, y ), we have

                                                         p0
              U (p1 , 0, y ) - U (p0 , 0, y ) =               [u((1 -  +  g (p, 0, y ))y ) - u((1 -  -  g (p, 0, y ))y )]dp.                    (17)
                                                       p1


Note that provided g (p, 0, y ) = 0 for p  [p1 , p0 ], this expression is strictly positive, because p1 < p0 and

u > 0. In words, provided the individual actually does evade some tax, decreasing the detection probability

strictly increases expected utility.

     To simplify expressions, as in the proof of Lemma 2, we define the argument of the utility function in

the detected and undetected state given behavior g (p, , y ) by cD (p, , y ) and cN (p, , y ) respectively. Using

equation (17) and the definition of U , we can rewrite equation (15) as


              a U =(1 - p1 )[u(cN (p1 , , y )) - u(cN (p1 , 0, y ))] + p1 [u(cD (p1 , , y )) - u(cD (p1 , 0, y ))]
                              p0
                        +          [u(cN (p, 0, y )) - u(cD (p, 0, y ))]dp.                                                                     (18)
                             p1


Next, we use the second fundamental theorem of calculus again to express all the differences in utilities

in the above equation as integrals of marginal utility over the appropriate range of final consumption. To

understand these integrals, it helps to note that both cN (p, , y ) and cN (p, , y ) are decreasing in .53 We

write all integrals so that the lower limit of integration is less than the upper limit.

                                         cN (p1 ,0,y )                     cD (p1 ,0,y )                p0    cN (p,0,y )
             a U = -(1 - p1 )                            u (c)dc - p1                      u (c)dc +                        u (c)dcdp.          (19)
                                        cN (p1 ,,y )                      cD (p1 ,,y )                 p1    cD (p,0,y )


     We now use diminishing marginal utility to find a simpler function f (y ) such that a U > f (y ) always,

and then construct an argument that f (y ) > 0 for sufficiently large values of y . For integrals with a positive

sign in front (the third term), we construct f so that the integral is evaluated as a constant at the smallest u

over the specified range, which by u < 0 corresponds to u at the upper limit of integration. For integrals

with a negative sign in front (the first two terms), we should use the lower limit of integration. We thereby
 53 Differentiating   the first-order condition in equation 7, we have u (cN ) c
                                                                               
                                                                                N = u (c ) cD . This implies that the sign of
                                                                                        D                                                  
                                                                                                                                           cD
                                                                                                                                                and
cD                                                                                                                          cN

     . These two cannot both be positive, because this would imply that evasion is both increasing in  (from                
                                                                                                                                 > 0) and decreasing
        cD
(from   
             > 0). Hence they are both negative.




                                                                          74
obtain


                              a U > - (1 - p1 )[cN (p1 , 0, y ) - cN (p1 , , y )]u (cN (p1 , , y ))

                                        - p1 [cD (p1 , 0, y ) - cD (p1 , , y )]u (cD (p1 , , y ))
                                                 p0
                                        +             [cN (p, 0, y ) - cD (p, 0, y )]u (cN (p, 0, y ))dp.                           (20)
                                              p1


We modify f (y ) slightly by noting that from the first-order condition in equation 7,

                                                                                         1 - p1
                                            u (cD (p1 , , y ) = u (cN (p1 , , y )               .
                                                                                          p1

We also note that we can shrink the expression further by evaluating the last term with a constant marginal

utility u (cN (p1 , 0, y )), as cN is decreasing in p and u < 0. Substituting this into equation (20) and simpli-

fying, we obtain


       a U > - (1 - p1 )u (cN (p1 , , y )) cN (p1 , 0, y ) - cN (p1 , , y ) + -1 [cD (p1 , 0, y ) - cD (p1 , , y )])
                                            p0
                + u (cN (p1 , 0, y ))            [cN (p, 0, y ) - cD (p, 0, y )]dp.                                                 (21)
                                         p1


We note that by construction cN (p, 0, y ) - cD (p, 0, y ) =  (1 +  )g (p, 0, y )y . As this expression is decreasing

in p by Lemma 1, we shrink the function by evaluating it at the upper limit of integration. In so doing we

arrive at an f (y ) that is simple enough to analyze for large y .:


  a U > f (y )  - (1 - p1 )u (cN (p1 , , y )) cN (p1 , 0, y ) - cN (p1 , , y ) + -1 [cD (p1 , 0, y ) - cD (p1 , , y )])

                     + u (cN (p1 , 0, y ))(p0 - p1 ) (1 +  )g (p0 , 0, y )y .                                                       (22)


As u > 0 we find that54


            f (y ) > 0  - (1 - p1 ) cN (p1 , 0, y ) - cN (p1 , , y ) + -1 [cD (p1 , 0, y ) - cD (p1 , , y )])
                                   u (cN (p1 , 0, y )
                               +                      (p0 - p1 ) (1 +  )g (p0 , 0, y )y > 0                                         (23)
                                   u (cN (p1 , , y ))

    We now examine the behavior of the expression in equation (23) at large y . We know from Lemma 2

that cN (p1 , 0, y ) - cN (p1 , , y ) and cD (p1 , 0, y ) - cD (p1 , , y ) both become arbitrarily small as y becomes
  54 If u converges to a strictly positive constant for arbitrarily large y , the proof from this point is more straightforward than what

we present here. The result essentially follows directly from Assumption 1 and Lemma 2, which guarantee that the term in the top
row shrinks while the term in the bottom row grows large. We construct the proof the way that we do to handle the case where u
approaches zero for large y , which is widely considered to be relevant.




                                                                        75
large. The term in the top row can therefore be made arbitrarily small. From Lemma 2, we also know
       u (cN (p1 ,0,y ))
that   u (cN (p1 ,,y )
                           converges to unity as y becomes large. Assumption 1 ensures that the second part of the

term in the bottom row,  (1 +  )g (p, 0, y )y grows arbitrarily large for large y . It follows that f (y ) > 0 for

sufficiently large y , and thus that a U > 0 for sufficiently large y .

   Proposition 2. Incentivizing Concealment. Suppose a policy increases the probability of detection only if a = 0.

This policy will increase concealment.

Proof. This result follows immediately from the envelope theorem. Differentiating a U with respect to p0

and applying the envelope theorem, we obtain

                                        a U
                                            = u(cN (p0 , 0, y )) - u(cD (p0 , 0, y )) > 0.                    (24)
                                       p0




   Proposition 3. Comparative Statics of the Resource-Constrained Model. In the optimization problem

described by equation (3),

        Nh
   ·    ch     <0

        Nl
   ·    ch    > 0 if and only if -Nh Rh /Rh < 1.


Proof. We solve the resource constraint for Nl in equation(3) and substitute this into the right-hand side of 5.
                                                                                      Nh
We differentiate the resulting expression with respect to ch and solve for            ch     to obtain:


                                             Nh  R (Nh ) - Nh Rl (Nl )
                                                = h                    <0                                     (25)
                                             ch   ch R (Nh ) - R (Nh )

The first result then follows from R > 0 and R < 0 for each type  = 0, 1.

   Proceeding similarly for Nl , we obtain

                                                      -(Rh Nh + Rh )cl
                                                                       .                                      (26)
                                                       c2       2
                                                        l Rh + ch Rl


This expression is positive whenever Nh Rh + Rh > 0  -Nh Rh /Rh > 1.

   Proposition 4. Comparative Statics Without the Resource Constraint. Consider the optimization problem

described by equation (3) but ignore the resource constraint. In this model

        Nh
   ·    ch     <0



                                                               76
       Nl
   ·   ch   = 0.

Proof. These follow directly from differentiating the FOC in equation (6).




                                                     77
