                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              EDUCATION AND INNOVATION

                                         Barbara Biasi
                                        David J. Deming
                                          Petra Moser

                                      Working Paper 28544
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28544


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2021




This chapter was prepared for NBER Growth Conference "Beyond 140 Characters: The Role of
Innovation and Entrepreneurship in Economic Growth." We are grateful for valuable comments
from Eleanor Dillon, as well conference participants and our editors Aaron Chatterji, Josh Lerner,
Scott Stern, and Michael J. Andrews. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Barbara Biasi, David J. Deming, and Petra Moser. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Education and Innovation
Barbara Biasi, David J. Deming, and Petra Moser
NBER Working Paper No. 28544
March 2021
JEL No. I20,I23,L26,O30

                                          ABSTRACT

This chapter summarizes existing evidence on the link between education and innovation and
presents open questions for future research. After a brief review of theoretical frameworks on the
link between education, innovation, and economic growth, we explore three alternative policies to
encourage innovation through education: expanding access to basic skills, improving the quality
of education, and investing in universities. We also review the literature on the role of innovation
for education. We conclude by outlining possible avenues for future research.


Barbara Biasi                                    Petra Moser
Yale School of Management                        Department of Economics
165 Whitney Avenue                               NYU Stern
New Haven, CT 06520                              44 West 4th Street
and NBER                                         New York, NY 10012
barbara.biasi@yale.edu                           and NBER
                                                 pmoser@stern.nyu.edu
David J. Deming
Harvard Kennedy School
Malcolm Wiener Center for Social Policy
79 JFK St
Cambridge, MA 02138
and Harvard Kennedy School
and also NBER
david_deming@harvard.edu
Introduction
A vast body of research shows that educational investments yield long-run benefits for students
(e.g. Chetty et al 2014, Jackson, Johnson and Persico 2016, Deming and Walters 2017). Less is
known, however, about the role of education in encouraging entrepreneurship and innovation.
       In this chapter, we review the existing literature and attempt to understand the linkages
between education and innovation. We first provide a brief review of relevant theoretical
frameworks. We then explore the possible impacts of three different types of educational
interventions that might have an impact on downstream innovation. We also outline possible
avenues for future research.
       We draw three main conclusions. First, increasing investment in basic skills would help
ensure that all potential future innovators are able to reach the knowledge frontier and take
advantage of their natural talents. Second, since research universities play such an important role
in knowledge creation and innovation, democratized access to them as well as increasing public
investment in them would likely yield big benefits in terms of innovation. Third, while
technology alone is not a panacea, there is much potential for technology to lower the cost of
providing extremely effective personalized education. Software can be used to replace the
essential role that a tutor plays in diagnosing specific deficits and meeting learners where they
are. Educational innovations such as computer-assisted learning (CAL) can provide personalized
support and feedback at a fraction of the price of a tutor, helping more future innovators succeed
in the early years of school and widening the talent pipeline.


Education and Innovation: Theory
The importance of human capital and education for innovation and growth is theoretically
grounded in models of endogenous growth, such as Romer (1986, 1990, 1994). Two ingredients
of this class of models are critical. First, human capital is factor-augmenting in the production of
knowledge (or ideas). Second, ideas are non-rival, implying that they can be used by others who
have not developed them, creating positive externalities that fuel growth. The combination of
these two ingredients suggests that investments in education, which "create" human capital, not
only benefits their original recipients, but also encourage growth for the entire economy. A
corollary is that, since private individuals do not internalize the social benefits of education,




                                                                                                    2
private investments in education are likely to be too low from a social perspective, which calls
for public investments in education.


Defining Human Capital
The concept of human capital is at the core of this class of models. But what exactly is "human
capital"? Early research (e.g. Romer 1990) measured differences in human capital by years of
education. Subsequent work has tried to better characterize the types of investments that produce
valuable knowledge and contribute to innovation and growth. Focusing on the production of
knowledge, Scotchmer (1991) argued the production of innovation is cumulative, and that that
new knowledge builds on existing knowledge. Baumol (2005) emphasized the importance of
scientific knowledge for innovation and growth. More recently, macroeconomic models such as
Lucas (2015), Lucas and Moll (2014), and Akcigit et al. (2018) have argued that social learning
and interactions play a key role in encouraging growth, while Bell et al. (2019) have stressed the
importance of mentorship for producing innovators.
       How can education produce the type of knowledge that generates innovation and growth?
Altonji et al. (2012) show substantial differences in the labor market returns to different college
majors, which suggests that the content of education matters. In an attempt to create a mapping
between higher education, research, and innovation, Biasi and Ma (2020) link the content of
college and university courses with that of academic publications and patents, and show large
differences among and within schools in the extent to which course content is "keeping the pace"
with the knowledge frontier. Deming and Noray (2018) find that the economic return to
technology-intensive jobs and college majors declines with work experience, and they connect
this decline to obsolescence of older-vintage skills learned in school. Taken together, this
literature suggests that educational institutions foster innovation by teaching skills that keep
workers near the technology frontier.


Growth Accounting
Empirical support for endogenous growth theory comes from exercises of growth accounting,
which have shown that differences in human capital can explain differences in rates of growth.
Mankiw, Romer and Weill (1992), Benhabib and Spiegel (1994), Bils and Klenow (2000) as
well as Manuelli and Seshadri (2014) use cross-country evidence to establish a link between



                                                                                                      3
human capital and growth. Hendricks and Schoellmann (2018) investigate wage gains and wage
convergence for immigrants to the United States and find that differences in human capital
levels in the sending country explain 60 percent of the observed difference in wage gains. Jones
(2014) argues that standard growth accounting models estimate a lower bound for the importance
of human capital for growth and demonstrates that an an alternative method of aggregating
human capital in models of endogenous growth can explain all of the observed cross-country
income differences.
       In an attempt to better capture human capital, Hanushek and Woessmann (2008) examine
the relationship between growth and alternative measures of workers' cognitive skills. They find
that countries which increase cognitive skills grow more quickly. Hanushek et al (2017) further
show that cross-state variation within the US in "knowledge capital" can explain 20-30 percent
of state variation in per capita GDP. Relatedly, Schoellmann (2012) use wage returns to
schooling to measure differences in the quality of education across countries and finds that
foreign workers from countries with better education experience larger wage gains upon moving
to the United States.
   Yet, despite the strong evidence that links human capital with economic growth, there is as
yet, little direct evidence of a causal effect of human capital on innovation, with a few notable
exceptions, such as Bianchi and Giorcelli (2019, discussed below).



Investing in Basic Skills

Are inventors born or made? Providing an answer to this question requires understanding the
production function for innovation. Suzanne Scotchmer (1991) modeled innovation as a
cumulative process, whereby existing knowledge acts as an input in the production of new
content. One of the prerequisites for the production of high-quality innovative content is
therefore the ability to reach the knowledge frontier. As technology progresses, however, this
frontier shifts outwards (Jones 2009), increasing the "burden of knowledge" on potential
inventors.
       What does it take to reach the knowledge frontier? Like innovation, education is a
cumulative process, and access to higher-level knowledge relies on access to basic education and
skills in the very first years of life. Einstein could hardly have been able to invent the general



                                                                                                     4
relativity theory, had he not had access to primary and secondary education. Education alone
probably cannot make someone a great innovator. However, a good education is necessary to get
potential innovators to the knowledge frontier in the first place. A high-quality education builds
cognitive and non-cognitive skills, which increase the productivity of future innovators.


Schooling and Cognitive Abilities
Recent research has emphasized the importance of innate traits of successful inventors and
entrepreneurs. Aghion et al. (2017), for example, argue that inventors tend to have higher IQ,
which has been interpreted as a signal of high ability and talent. Emphasis on these "innate"
traits might suggest that luck is a key factor for becoming a successful inventor.
           A closer look at the empirical evidence, however, reveals that education can play an
equally important role in determining whether innate traits lead towards innovation. Time spent
in school, for example, has a causal positive effect on children's cognitive abilities. Ritchie and
Tucker-Drob (2018) use a regression-discontinuity design on school entry-age cutoffs to show
that an additional year of schooling increases IQ by 1 to 5 points. Moreover, they find that
effects persist across the life span. Similarly, Cornelissen and Dustmann (2019) use differences
in school-entry rules across regions in England to show that schooling improves literacy and
numeracy skills of children aged 5 to 7, as well as non-cognitive skills for children aged 11.
           The benefits of additional schooling, however, are not confined to the early years. Cascio
and Lewis (2006) explore the effects of an additional year of high school on a person's score in
the Armed Forces Qualifying Test, and find large effects especially on racial minorities. These
findings suggest that late investments in schooling can help close racial and ethnic gaps in
cognitive skills. Using data from Sweden and exploiting conditionally random variation in in
test-taking dates, Carlsson et al. (2015) estimate that ten additional days of high school raise
intelligence scores by one percent of a standard deviation. Adding to this evidence, Card and
Giuliano (2016 a, b) show that underrepresented minorities benefit from increased access to
gifted and talented programs. Gaining access to these programs in fourth grade leads to a 0.7
standard deviation increase in math test scores for Black students, from 0.8 to 1.5 standard
deviations.1



1
    See Card and Giuliano (2016a), Table 3.


                                                                                                      5
           Given the relationship between cognitive skill and innovation, gifted and talented
programs such as the one studied in Card and Giuliano (2016a, b) could directly create more
innovators from underrepresented backgrounds. Comparing their estimates to the relationship
between achievement scores and patenting found in Bell et al (2019) suggests that universal
gifted and talented screening might increase the share of inventors (defined as someone who ever
held a patent) from 0.1 to 0.7 per thousand for Black students.2


Schooling and Non-Cognitive Abilities
Cognitive abilities, however, are not the only innate trait associated with innovation and
entrepreneurship. Levine and Rubinstein (2017) find that entrepreneurs have specific personality
traits, which make them "smart and illicit." Compared with the unincorporated self-employed,
the incorporated self-employed (as a proxy for entrepreneurs) tend to score higher on cognitive
tests, show greater self-esteem, and are more likely to have engaged in illicit activities as
teenagers. Education can keep "smart and illicit" individuals, especially those coming from less
advantaged backgrounds, from falling through the cracks.
           Despite these advances, the predictive power of individual traits is fairly low, and there
are enormous potential returns to democratizing access to education and to supporting everyone
to reach the knowledge frontier.


Improving the Type and Quality of Education
Beyond simply expanding access to education, improving the type and quality of education
might have large effects on innovation, entrepreneurship, and growth. As mentioned earlier,
expanding the scale of targeted gifted and talented programs in K-12 schools could greatly widen
the pipeline of future innovators (Card and Giuliano 2016a, 2016b). Additionally, certain types
of education programs seem to be particularly beneficial for innovation. Bianchi and Giorcelli
(2019), for example, show that increased and "democratized" access to STEM education,
through the opening of vocational and technical programs in 1960 Italy, led to increases in
patenting. Similarly, Toivanen and Vaananen (2016) find large, positive causal effects of
expanding access to Engineering MSc in Finland on patenting.



2
    Bell et al. (2019), Figure IV (B).


                                                                                                        6
        Yet, in spite of a possible "democratizing" role of higher education for invention, Bell et
al. (2019) show that US inventors (measured through patentees) come from a small set of top US
schools, which admit very few low-income students. These findings casts doubts on the idea that
the current US education system is effective in providing access to the type of innovation that is
needed for broad-based and "democratic" invention.


Universities as a Source of Entrepreneurship and Innovation
If education is important for producing future innovators, what is the role of universities in this
process? To answer this question, we first review the existing evidence on linkages between
universities, entrepreneurship, and innovation.
        Today, universities such as Stanford and MIT in the United States or the Technion in
Israel serve as catalysts for entrepreneurship and innovation. But can entrepreneurship be taught?
Many university professor believe that yes, entrepreneurship is a skill that can be trained through
exposure and experience. Israel's Technion was one of the first universities to offer a course in
entrepreneurship, when Nobel Laureate Dan Shechtman, world-renowned for his work in
chemistry and material science, set up a course on technological entrepreneurship.3 Shechtman
has been running this course successfully for more than 30 years, and the Technion now pushes
to deepen its commitment to teaching entrepreneurship. Ezri Tarazi, a professor of industrial
design who is in charge of Technion's program, argues that argues that entrepreneurship can in
fact be taught and "Talent can be developed."
        Focusing on a major technology based university, the Massachusettts Institute of
Technology (MIT), Hsu, Roberts, and Eesley (2007) examine trends in entrepreneurship among
MIT alumni since the 1930s to investigate who enters entrepreneurship and how this has changed
over time. One of their most striking findings is that rates of compamy formation by MIT alumn
have increased dramatically since the 1930s, suggesting that MIT may have become "better" at
encouraging entrepreneurship. Notably, they find that rates of entrepreneurship are generally
higher among MIT alumns who are foreign-citizens (which may present an effect of positive

3
 "Technion fosters entrepreneurship within ivory towers as Startup Nation calls" Times of Israel, 25 December
2019. Available at https://www.timesofisrael.com/technion-fosters-entrepreneurship-within-ivory-towers-as-startup-
nation-calls/




                                                                                                                 7
selection) and that women alumnae lag behind their male colleagues in the rate at which they
become entrepreneurs. Both of these findings suggest that expanding access to university
education can encourage entrepreneurship and innovation, especially if they are combined with
programs targeting underrepresented minorities and female entrepreneurs.
       The origins of MIT and other "technology-based" universities like Cornell and Iowa State
can be traced back to the "land-grant universities, established by the Morrill Acts of 1862 and
1890. Funded initially by granting federally-controlled land to colleges, the mission of these
colleges was purposefully practical (in stark contrast to the liberal arts curriculum), focusing on
practical agriculture, science, military science, and engineering.
       Research on the land grant college system suggests that it played a particularly important
role in encouraging local entrepreneurship and innovation. Kantor and Whalley (2020) show that
agricultural extension centers that were connected to the US land grant system created important
productivity spillovers to the local economy. A working paper by Maloney and Caicedo (2020)
shows that the land grant universities, which trained engineers, encouraged county-level
economic growth. In addition, research by Andrews (2019), Hausman (2013), Valero and Van
Reenen (2019) has shown that the establishment of universities increased local invention.
Andrews (2019) examines the effects of land grant colleges on agricultural patenting and
productivity by exploiting cases in which the location (county) in a state that received a land
grant college was chosen through an "as good as random" process, and compares outcomes for
these 29 universities with runner-up counties that were not chosen. Andrews find that
agricultural innovation (both in terms of patents and new crop varieties) increased in these
counties relative to the control.
       Rosenberg (2009) argued that reliance on local funding has created strong incentives to
focus on applied research that has helped create local clusters of innovation.
Land grant colleges in particular were good at securing social returns from publicly funded
research, and perhaps even superior to the current, US system focused on patenting, licensing,
and technology transfer (Mowery et al 2004).
       The available evidence suggests that funding plays a major role in determining the rate
and direction of technical change. Hvide and Jones (2018), for example, show that a change in
funding rules in Norwary created dramatic effects on both entrepreneurship and patenting. Until
2003, Norwegian professors benefitted from the "professor's privilege," granting full rights to



                                                                                                      8
new business ventures and intellectual property. In that year, however, Norway switched to a
system of shared rights, similar to the system established by the Bay-Dole Act of 1980, which
grants just one third of these rights to the professor, with two-thirds going to the university (e.g.,
Lach and Schankerman 2008). Using comprehensive data on Norwegian workers, firms, and
patents, Hvide and Jones document a 50 percent decline in entrepreneurship and innovation in
response to this change. Earlier research, using alumni presentation on Congressional
appropriations committees as an instrument for research funding, Payne and Siow (2003) had
shown that an increase of $1 million in federal research funding (in year 1996 $) results in 10
additional articles and 0.2 additinional patents.
       Analyses of university patenting have shown that the relationship between universities
and innovations that surround them is in flux and may be weakening over time (Henderson,
Jaffe, and Trajtenberg 2006), Yet, the available evidence may underestimate the real benefits of
universities for entrepreneurship and innovation if universities develop methods rather than
creating specific start-ups and firms. Cohen et al (2002) find that actual products from academic
research are less important than research techniques and tools (Cohen et al., 2002). Wright
(2012) further shows that the way of doing agricultural research that was developed in the land
grant system helped to encourage agricultural innovation that formed the foundation of the Green
Revolution. More recently, examining drug development over the 1988-2005 period, Sampat and
Lichtenberg (2011) find that public sector labs account directly for about 10 percent of drugs, but
may enable two-thirds of marketed drugs. Taken together, these findings suggests that spillovers
from universities to the private sectors are difficult to quantify and easy to underestimate.
       Another channel by which education can encourage innovation is by improving a
person's access to mentors and potential collaborators and mentors. Jones, Wuchty and Uzzi
(2007, 2008), Jones (2009), Deming (2017), Bell, Jaravel and Petkova (2018) all show that
innovation often happens in teams. Universities and other types of educational may provide the
settings in which these teams are formed.
       Spillovers in teams and among highly skilled individuals more general appear to be
particularly important in STEM. Azoulay et al (2010), for example, document that the death of a
superstar in science reduces the productivity of their collaborators. Bell et al. (2019) use tax data
linked with patent records to show that mentors matter greatly for invention. Moser, Voena, and
Waldinger (2014) show that the arrival of prominent German Jewish émigré chemists promoted



                                                                                                     9
lead to a substantial increase in patenting in the fields of the émigrés. Moser and San (2020)
further show that restrictions on immigration in the 1920s, which reduced the number of Eastern
and Southern European-born scientists who were active in the United States caused a persistent
decline in invention by US-born inventors. Taken together, this literature suggests that
educational institutions are an important source of innovation.


Effects of Innovation on Education
Our discussion to this point has focused on the potential benefits that improvements in access
and in the quality of education can have for innovation, entrepreneurship and, ultimately, growth.
Innovation, however, can also directly affect education, for example by reducing costs,
improving quality and efficiency.
       In recent years, the education sector has adopted new technologies at a much slower rate
compared with other sectors (Chatterji 2018). In 2019, only 2.5 percent of the federal
Department of Education's budget was earmarked for research and innovation; this share has
been declining from 8.2 in 2016 and 3.8 in 2012 (Figure 1). Since 1995, the education sector has
been experiencing slow productivity growth (Cutler 2011). A possible reason for this is that the
private benefits from technology adoption are smaller in education than in other sectors, due to
the structure of the market (Chatterji and Jones 2012). Alternatively, management challenges,
which are typical of large organizations in the education sector, may have hindered the adoption
of new technologies due to a bias in favor of the "status quo" and distorted incentives.
       A first strand of research has used experiments to evaluate the effect the adoption of new
technologies in the classroom on student achievement. In the United States, technology adoption
has proceeded at a reasonable pace. The ratio of students to computers for 15 years old is close to
one (Bulman and Fairlie 2016), and nearly all students have access to internet (Golsbee and
Guryan 2006, Fairlie et al. 2010). Barrow et al. (2009) argue that technology adoption in schools
could be beneficial because it allows for better personalization of the learning experience.




                                                                                                   10
                    FIGURE 1 ­ DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION'S TOTAL BUDGET
                           AND SHARE EARMARKED FOR INNOVATION




Note: The solid line shows the total budget of the federal Department of Education. The dashed line
shows the share of the budget earmarked for Innovation and Improvement and for the activities of the
Institute of Education Sciences. Budget data from
https://www2.ed.gov/about/overview/budget/tables.html?src=rt, accessed May 17th, 2020.

        Chatterji (2018) explains "However, despite the ubiquity of technology in the classroom
and various proposed mechanisms of action, rigorous evaluations of the impact of technology on
student performance are rare and results are mixed (Bulman and Fairlie 2016). Goolsbee and
Guryan (2006) find that while E-Rate increased investments in education technology between
1996-2000 in California public schools, it produced no statistical impact on student performance.
This finding is consistent with other studies from the United States and around the world, which
find little or no impact of technology on student outcomes (e.g., Angrist and Lavy 2002; Rouse
and Krueger 2004). However, some studies have found a positive impact of technology on
student performance (Ragosta 1982; Banerjee et al. 2007; Machin et al. 2007; Barrow, Markman




                                                                                                       11
and Rouse 2009; Cheung and Slavin 2013). As discussed in Barrow et al. (2009), these benefits
must be weighed against the costs of program adoption and ongoing implementation."
       There is little evidence that the mere existence of technology in the classroom produces
benefits. Teachers and students might not use technology even when it is available (e.g., Cuban
et al. 2001), or use it in suboptimal ways (Wenglinsky 1998). For example, recent high-profile
technology interventions, such as a $1 billion tablet initiative in the Los Angeles Unified School
District, have been roundly criticized by journalists and education policy experts due to
implementation challenges. In the Los Angeles Unified school district, for example, many
students were unable to access the required curriculum due to serious technical issues.
       However, one promising way that technology has been applied to enhance learning is
through computer assisted learning (CAL) software. CAL software automatically adapts content
and difficulty level based on diagnostic assessment and students' previous responses. This
essentially creates a personalized learning environment for each student that exactly meets his or
her needs. Several recent studies have found large benefits of personalized learning through
CAL. Muralidharan et al (2019) find that middle-school students in India who randomly receive
access to CAL software score 0.37 standard deviations higher in math and 0.23 standard
deviations higher in Hindi over only a 4.5 month period. Importantly, they find larger gains
students with lower baseline achievement. CAL essentially replicates the successes of many
other interventions that use personalized tutoring and mentoring to teach students "at the right
level". We know this approach works, but it is expensive. Thus one way that innovation might
increase productivity in education is by lowering the cost of personalization.


Discussion
The research that we have reviewed in this chapter indicates that improvents in access and in the
quality of education have immense potential in encouraging entrepreneurship and innovation.
Education provides the tools that creative individual need to succeed as inventors and
entrepreneurs. Some of these tools can be measured quantitatively, through improvements in IQ
scores, which have been linked to innovation. But many others are intangible, including tools
taught in entrepreneurship programs across the world.
       These programs encourage innovation at two important margins. First, they help people
who would have been innovators anyway to become more successful, either in terms of


                                                                                                   12
increased invention or by creating new businesses that are more profitable. Second, they allow
creative individuals who would otherwise not have become inventors or entrepreneurs to reach
their potential, widening the talent pipeline. Based on the research in this survey, we conclude
that this second mechanism is particularly important in encouraging innovation through
education.
       Many big questions remain, however. For example, to better guide education policy we
need better estimates of the marginal returns to investments in skills for different types of people
(such as men vs. women, majority students vs underrepresented minorities). Moreover, there is a
great need for additional research on the stage of life at which investments in education are most
effective in encouraging creativity and innovation (e.g., early childhood education vs.
universities). There is also no real consensus on the type of education that is most successful in
encouraging innovation (e.g., training in math and science vs. soft skills).
       Different answers to these questions imply radically different policies, ranging from
focused investments in the "best and brightest" to concerted efforts at expanding and maintaining
a broad pipeline of innovation. Putting aside considerations of inequality for the moment, the
approach we take to "access" helps determine the level and the quality of innovation. These
considerations heighten the urgency of the issue for education policy.
       Technology will become a more important source of educational innovation in the near
future, for two reasons. First, advances in machine learning and artificial intelligence tools will
lower the cost of personalized instruction, particularly in subjects like math where learning gaps
can be more easily identified and addressed. As these techniques improve, they will become
more widespread. Second, growing cost pressures in the education sector will make
technological improvements more urgent and necessary. Education is a "people" business, so as
people become relatively more expensive, technology becomes a more appealing substitute for
some aspects of in-person instruction.




Bibliography
Aghion, Philippe, Ufuk Akcigit, Ari Hyytinen, and Otto Toivanenet. "The Social Origins of
  Inventors." NBER Working Paper No. w24110, National Bureau of Economic Research,
  Cambridge, MA, 2017.



                                                                                                      13
Akcigit, Ufuk, Santiago Caicedo, Ernest Miguelez, Stefanie Stantcheva, and Valerio
   Sterziet. "Dancing with the Stars: Innovation through Interactions." NBER Working Paper
   No. w24466, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA, 2018.
Altonji, Joseph G., Erica Blom, and Costas Meghir. "Heterogeneity in Human Capital
   Investments: High School Curriculum, College Major, and Careers." Annual Review of
   Economics 4, no. 1 (2012): 185-223.
Andrews, Michael J. "Local Effects of Land Grant Colleges on Agricultural Innovation and
   Output." NBER Working Paper No. w26235, National Bureau of Economic Research,
   Cambridge, MA, 2019.
Angrist, Joshua, and Victor Lavy. "New Evidence on Classroom Computers and Pupil
   Learning." The Economic Journal 112, no. 482 (2002): 735-65.
Azoulay, Pierre, Joshua S. Graff Zivin, and Jialan Wang. "Superstar Extinction." The Quarterly
   Journal of Economics 125, no. 2 (2010): 549-89.
Banerjee, Abhijit V., Shawn Cole, Esther Duflo, and Leigh Linden. "Remedying Education:
   Evidence from Two Randomized Experiments in India." The Quarterly Journal of
   Economics 122, no. 3 (2007): 1235-64.
Barrow, Lisa, Lisa Markman, and Cecilia Elena Rouse. "Technology's Edge: The Educational
   Benefits of Computer-Aided Instruction." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 1,
   no. 1 (2009): 52-74.
Baumol, William J. "Education for Innovation: Entrepreneurial Breakthroughs Versus Corporate
   Incremental Improvements." Innovation Policy and the Economy 5 (2005): 33-56.
Bell, Alex, Raj Chetty, Xavier Jaravel, Neviana Petkova, and John Van Reenenet. "Who
   Becomes an Inventor in America? The Importance of Exposure to Innovation." The Quarterly
   Journal of Economics 134, no. 2 (2019): 647-713.
Benhabib, Jess, and Mark M. Spiegel. "The Role of Human Capital in Economic Development
   Evidence from Aggregate Cross-Country Data." Journal of Monetary Economics 34, no. 2
   (1994): 143-73.
Bianchi, Nicola, and Michela Giorcelli. "Scientific Education and Innovation: From Technical
   Diplomas to University STEM Degrees." NBER Working Paper No. w25928, National
   Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA, 2019.
Biasi, Barbara, and Song Ma. "The Education-Innovation Gap." (working paper, Yale, 2020).
Bils, Mark, and Peter J. Klenow. "Does Schooling Cause Growth?" American Economic
   Review 90, no. 5 (2000): 1160-83.
Bulman, George, and Robert W. Fairlie. "Technology and Education: Computers, Software, and
   the Internet." Handbook of the Economics of Education 5 (2016): 239-80.
Card, David, and Laura Giuliano. "Can Tracking Raise the Test Scores of High-Ability Minority
   Students?" American Economic Review 106, no. 10 (2016a): 2783-816.
Card, David, and Laura Giuliano. "Universal Screening Increases the Rrepresentation of Low-
   Income and Minority Students in Gifted Education." Proceedings of the National Academy of
   Sciences 113, no. 48 (2016b): 13678-83.
Carlsson, Magnus, Gordon B. Dahl, Björn Öckert, and Dan-Olof Roothet. "The Effect of
   Schooling on Cognitive Skills." The Review of Economics and Statistics 97, no. 3 (2015):
   533-47.
Cascio, Elizabeth U., and Ethan G. Lewis. "Schooling and the Armed Forces Qualifying Test
   Evidence from School-Entry Laws." Journal of Human Resources 41, no. 2 (2006): 294-318.




                                                                                            14
Chatterji, Aaron K. "Innovation and American K-12 Education." Innovation Policy and the
   Economy 18, no. 1 (2018): 27-51.
Chatterji, Aaron, and Benjamin Jones. "Harnessing Technology to Improve K-12 Education."
   Discussion Paper 2012-05, The Hamilton Project, The Brookings Institution, NW
   Washington, DC, 2012.
Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline, and Emmanuel Saez. "Where is the Land of
   Opportunity? The Geography of Intergenerational Mobility in the United States." The
   Quarterly Journal of Economics 129, no. 4 (2014): 1553-623.
Cheung, Alan CK, and Robert E. Slavin. "The effectiveness of educational technology
   applications for enhancing mathematics achievement in K-12 classrooms: A meta-
   analysis." Educational Research Review 9 (2013): 88-113.
Cohen, Wesley M., Richard R. Nelson, and John P. Walsh (2002). "Links and Impacts: The
   Influence of Public Research on Industrial R&D." Management Science 48, no. 1 (2002):1-
   23.
Cornelissen, Thomas, and Christian Dustmann. "Early School Exposure, Test Scores, and
   Noncognitive Outcomes." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 11, no. 2 (2019):
   35-63.
Cuban, Larry, Heather Kirkpatrick, and Craig Peck. "High Access and Low Use of Technologies
   in High School Classrooms: Explaining an Apparent Paradox." American Educational
   Research Journal 38, no. 4 (2001): 813-34.
Cutler, David M. "Where are the Health Care Entrepreneurs? The Failure of Organizational
   Innovation in Health Care." Innovation Policy and the Economy 11, no. 1 (2011): 1-28.
Deming, David J. "The Growing Importance of Social Skills in the Labor Market." The
   Quarterly Journal of Economics 132, no. 4 (2017): 1593-640.
Deming, David J., and Christopher R. Walters. "The Impact of Price Caps and Spending Cuts on
   US Postsecondary Attainment." NBER Working Paper No. w23736, National Bureau of
   Economic Research, Cambridge, MA, 2017.
Deming, David J., and Kadeem L. Noray. "Stem Careers and the Changing Skill Requirements
   of Work." NBER Working Paper No. w25065, National Bureau of Economic Research,
   Cambridge, MA, 2018.
Fairlie, Robert W., Daniel O. Beltran, and Kuntal K. Das. "Home computers and educational
outcomes: Evidence from the NLSY97 and CPS." Economic Inquiry 48, no. 3 (2010): 771-792.
Goolsbee, Austan, and Jonathan Guryan. "The Impact of Internet Subsidies in Public
   Schools." The Review of Economics and Statistics 88, no. 2 (2006): 336-47.
Hanushek, Eric A., and Ludger Woessmann. "The Role of Cognitive Skills in Economic
   Development." Journal of Economic Literature 46, no. 3 (2008): 607-68.
Hanushek, Eric A., Jens Ruhose, and Ludger Woessmann. "Knowledge Capital and Aggregate
   Income Differences: Development Accounting for US States." American Economic Journal:
   Macroeconomics 9, no. 4 (2017): 184-224.
Henderson, Rebecca, Adam B. Jaffe, and Manuel Trajtenberg. "Universities as a Source of
   Commercial Technology: A Detailed Analysis of University Patenting, 1965-1988." Review
   of Economics and Statistics 80, no. 1 (2006): 119-27.
Hendricks, Lutz, and Todd Schoellman. "Human Capital and Development Accounting: New
   Evidence from Wage Gains at Migration." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 133, no. 2
   (2018): 665-700.




                                                                                          15
Hsu, David H., Edward B. Roberts and Charles E. Eesley. "Entrepreneurs from Technology-
   Based Universities: Evidence from MIT." Research Policy 36, no. 2 (2007): 768-88.
Hvide, Hans K., and Benjamin F. Jones. "University Innovation and the Professor's
   Privilege." American Economic Review 108, no. 7 (2018): 1860-98.
Jackson, C. Kirabo, Rucker C. Johnson, and Claudia Persico. "The Effects of School Spending
   on Educational and Economic Outcomes: Evidence from School Finance Reforms." The
   Quarterly Journal of Economics 131, no. 1 (2016): 157-218.
Jaravel, Xavier, Neviana Petkova, and Alex Bell. "Team-Specific Capital and
   Innovation." American Economic Review 108, no. 4-5 (2018): 1034-73.
Jones, Benjamin F. "The Burden of Knowledge and the `Death of the Renaissance Man': Is
   Innovation Getting Harder?" The Review of Economic Studies 76, no. 1 (2009): 283-317.
Jones, Benjamin F. "The Human Capital Stock: A Generalized Approach."American Economic
   Review 104, no. 11 (2014): 3752-77.
Jones, Benjamin F., Stefan Wuchty, and Brian Uzzi. "Multi-University Research Teams: Shifting
   Impact, Geography, and Stratification in Science." Science 322, no. 5905 (2008): 1259-62.
Lach, Saul, and Mark Schankerman. "Incentives and Invention in Universities." The RAND
   Journal of Economics 39, no. 2 (2008): 403-33.
Levine, Ross, and Yona Rubinstein. "Smart and Illicit: Who Becomes an Entrepreneur and Do
   They Earn More?" The Quarterly Journal of Economics 132, no. 2 (2017): 963-1018.
Lucas Jr, Robert E. "Human Capital and Growth." American Economic Review 105, no. 5
   (2015): 85-8.
Lucas Jr, Robert E., and Benjamin Moll. "Knowledge Growth and the Allocation of
   Time." Journal of Political Economy 122, no. 1 (2014): 1-51.
Machin, Stephen, Sandra McNally, and Olmo Silva. "New Technology in Schools: Is There a
   Payoff?" The Economic Journal 117, no. 522 (2007): 1145-67.
Maloney, William F., and Felipe Valencia Caicedo. "Engineering Growth." CEPR Discussion
   Paper No. DP15144, Centre for Economic Policy Research, London, UK, 2020.
Mankiw, N. Gregory, David Romer, and David N. Weil. "A Contribution to the Empirics of
   Economic Growth." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 107, no. 2 (1992): 407-37.
Manuelli, Rodolfo E., and Ananth Seshadri. "Human Capital and the Wealth of
   Nations." American Economic Review 104, no. 9 (2014): 2736-62.
Moser, Petra, Alessandra Voena, and Fabian Waldinger. "German Jewish Émigrés and US
   Invention." American Economic Review 104, no. 10 (2014): 3222-55.
Moser, Petra, and Shmuel San. "Immigration, Science, and Invention. Evidence from the Quota
   Acts" (working paper, NYU, 2020).
Mowery, David C., Richard R. Nelson, Bhaven N. Sampat, and Arvids A. Ziedonis. Ivory Tower
   and Industrial Innovation: University-Industry Technology Transfer Before and After the
   Bayh-Dole Act. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2004.
Muralidharan, Karthik, Abhijeet Singh, and Alejandro J. Ganimian. "Disrupting Education?
   Experimental Evidence on Technology-Aided Instruction in India." American Economic
   Review 109, no. 4 (2019): 1426-60.
Payne, Abigail, and Aloysius Siow. "Does Federal Research Funding Increase University
   Research Output?" The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy 3, no. 1 (2003): 1-24.
Ragosta, Marjorie. "Computer-Assisted Instruction and Compensatory Education: A
   Longitudinal Analysis." Machine-Mediated Learning 1, no. 1 (1983): 97-127.




                                                                                          16
Ritchie, Stuart J., and Elliot M. Tucker-Drob. "How Much Does Education Improve
   Intelligence? A Meta-Analysis." Psychological Science 29, no. 8 (2018): 1358-69.
Romer, Paul M. "Endogenous Technological Change." Journal of Political Economy 98, no. 5,
   part 2 (1990): S71-S102.
Romer, Paul M. "Increasing Returns and Long-Run Growth." Journal of Political Economy 94,
   no. 5 (1986): 1002-37.
Romer, Paul M. "The Origins of Endogenous Growth." Journal of Economic Perspectives 8, no.
   .1 (1994): 3-22.
Rouse, Cecilia Elena, and Alan B. Krueger. "Putting Computerized Instruction to the Test: A
   Randomized Evaluation of a `Scientifically Based' Reading Program." Economics of
   Education Review 23, no. 4 (2004): 323-38.
Sampat, Bhaven N., and Frank R. Lichtenberg. "What are the Respective Roles of the Public and
   Private Sectors in Pharmaceutical Innovation?" Health Affairs 30, no. 2 (2011): 332-39.
Schoellman, Todd. "Education Quality and Development Accounting." The Review of Economic
   Studies 79, no. 1 (2012): 388-417.
Scotchmer, Suzanne. "Standing on the Shoulders of Giants: Cumulative Research and the Patent
   Law." Journal of Economic Perspectives 5, no. 1 (1991): 29-41.
Toivanen, Otto, and Lotta Vaananen. "Education and Invention." Review of Economics and
   Statistics 98, no. 2 (2016): 382-96.
Valero, Anna, and John Van Reenen. "The Economic Impact of Universities: Evidence from
   Across the Globe." Economics of Education Review 68 (2019): 53-67.
Wenglinsky, Harold. "Does It Compute? The Relationship Between Educational Technology and
   Student Achievement in Mathematics." ETS Policy Information Center Report, Educational
   Testing Service, Princeton, NJ, 1998.
Wright, Brian D. "Grand missions Missions of Agricultural Innovation." Research Policy 41, no.
   10 (2012): 1716-28.
Wuchty, Stefan, Benjamin F. Jones, and Brian Uzzi. "The Increasing Dominance of Teams in
   Production of Knowledge." Science 316, no. 5827 (2007): 1036-39.




                                                                                           17
